ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  1
 THE ANNUAL MEETING of the Society for American Archaeology provides a forum for the dissemination of knowledge and
 discussion. The views expressed at the sessions are solely those of the speakers and the Society does not endorse, approve, or
 censor them. Descriptions of events and titles are those of the organizers, not the Society.
                                                     SYMPOSIUM ABSTRACTS
 [1] Forum · PRESIDENT'S FORUM: CLIMATE CHANGE AND ARCHAEOLOGY
 Archaeologists know that climate change has affected human history in the past and that increased climate variability and sea
 level rise is affecting people and archaeological sites now. In this forum, climate scientists and archaeologists examine climate
 change from several perspectives. Speakers will survey models from climate science; past climate change effects on human
 societies; archaeological remains as proxy climate records; climate change and plant domestication; archaeological heritage
 management in times of climate change.
 [2] Symposium · FORAGERS IN MIDDLE ATLANTIC PREHISTORY
 The Middle Atlantic has one of the most fertile and complicated archaeological records of human foraging societies in the United
 States and is arguably in a position to contribute more globally to studies of foraging culture. Yet archaeologists in the region
 tend to reference external forager models that do not fit the circumstances of a region so ecologically and culturally diverse. This
 may be due to a dearth of what has historically been recognized as prerequisite: a strong ethnographic record, well-preserved
 features, and perishables, as well as the complex ecological zonation of the Middle Atlantic region. Nonetheless, there is a
 sustained history of research into foraging lifeways throughout the region that ranges from detailed synchronic site analysis to
 broad-scale environmental reconstructions and settlement pattern and landscape studies. This session proposes a regionally-
 informed frame of reference for studying foragers in prehistory. It emphasizes the unique, problem-focused approach of Middle
 Atlantic archaeologists to the study of foragers and highlights the wide range of evidence and approaches that regional
 archaeologists draw upon to address their questions.
 [3] General Session · CONTACT, COLONIAL AND CONTEMPORARY CARIBBEAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [4] Symposium · COMPUTATIONAL APPROACHES IN THE PRACTICE OF ARCHAEOLOGY
 (SPONSORED BY DIGITAL DATA INTEREST GROUP)
 Computational techniques including visibility and least-cost path analyses and agent-based modelling have rapidly grown in
 archaeological research. While fruitful, this research focuses on a narrow range of themes, overlooking variability in the practice
 of archaeology. Archaeologists are aware of variation in archaeological investigations in patterns that are seen on local and
 national scales, yet we have only a partial understanding of how and why these patterns evolved through time. This situation has
 obscured the impact of such variability on our understanding of the past. While current efforts including the building of cyber-
 infrastructures acknowledge variability in sources of geographically-referenced information, they underestimate the social context
 of archaeology and the intersection of knowledge, space, and power, a key factor in the practice of archaeology. Who are the
 archaeologists and archaeological teams that carried out field investigations, what were their aims, and which methods and tools
 and technologies did they employ? Where and when did field studies take place and what weight was attached to these places of
 interest? To begin addressing these questions, this session calls for computational research broadly defined, on social
 dimensions of the practice of archaeology in any local, national, and regional context, covering any period of time.
 [5] Forum · ARCHAEOLOGIES OF INCLUSION: TOWARDS A POLITICS OF ENGAGEMENT
 (SPONSORED BY QUEER ARCHAEOLOGY INTEREST GROUP)
 Racism, classism, homophobia, and similar "isms" continue to operate in archaeology, excluding not only people but the ideas,
 methods, and interpretations that comprise our discipline. This process reifies/even lauds the image (and practices) of an
 archaeology that is primarily white, heterosexual, upper-class, and male. Despite repeated calls from individuals, communities,
 and broader publics, archaeology continues to struggle to achieve what Anna Agbe-Davies (2010) calls "inclusive archaeology"—
 an archaeology that enables engagement with a diverse set of people and theoretical and social issues. Why have these calls not
 been embraced by archaeologists/archaeology more broadly? How are these ‘isms’ perpetuated systematically? Why do these
 calls for inclusion feel even more urgent in today’s political and social climate? If we are to remain relevant as a discipline, then it
 falls upon us to embrace the radical dismantling of these oppressive systems to empower more voices in archaeology. This forum
 seeks to bring these conversations to the forefront and explore the ways to break down these structures, both past and present,
 as well as engage with broader publics. Participants will discuss successful inclusive efforts, barriers to inclusion, and posit ways
 to move archaeology toward a more engaged, inclusive community.
 [6] Poster Session · SOUTHEAST
 [7] Poster Session · ARCHEOLOGY OF THE SOUTHEAST I
 [8] Poster Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE SOUTHEAST II
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                2
 [9] Poster Session · METHODOLOGIES FOR INTEGRATING EASTERN ARCHAIC FAUNAL DATABASES USING THE
 DIGITAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORD (TDAR)
 As part of multi-scalar research on the use of aquatic animal resources by Archaic period hunter-gatherers in the interior Eastern
 Woodlands, zooarchaeologists from multiple institutions are exploring the integration of Archaic faunal datasets that have been
 collected and analyzed over the last half century. As a first step in this research these zooarchaeologists, who have formed the
 Eastern Archaic Faunal Working Group (EAFWG), have uploaded their faunal databases into the Digital Archaeological Record
 (tDAR), a digital repository for archaeological information maintained by Digital Antiquity. Initially these zooarchaeologists have
 been concentrating on uploading their datasets and making them usable in tDAR. This group also has been exploring database
 comparability with respect to taphonomy and context, and developing proxies for environmental and demographic change.
 Meanwhile, the computer scientists at tDAR have further streamlined the integration tools available through tDAR. The posters in
 this session present the capabilities of tDAR for database integration, the researchers various experiences in working with tDAR,
 and with the problems of database comparability as well as possible methodologies for modeling Archaic demographic change.
 Although there has been a definite learning curve, this work suggests that faunal database integration can be used to address
 important archaeological questions.
 [10] Poster Session · HERITAGE VALUES IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
 (SPONSORED BY SAA POSTER SUBMISSION TASK FORCE)
 Heritage values have an important role to play in contemporary society in areas as diverse as economic development; indigenous
 claims and rights; political agendas and ideologies; armed conflict; poverty reduction; sustainable development and the law; and
 legal and legislative systems. However, incorporating heritage values into contemporary society requires applying legal, ethical,
 cultural, and scientific perspectives to meet cultural heritage concerns. It is critical that this is done in a manner that is
 accountable, sustainable, inclusive, and does not compromise the quality of life for future generations. This allows heritage values
 to compete with other agendas while at the same time allowing different ways of viewing the world, including the past, to coexist.
 This thematic poster session consists of posters that draw upon heritage values on a worldwide scale in terms of defining heritage
 policies and issues and articulating the need for effective, sustainable, and responsive cultural heritage and economic policies
 that can help to effectively develop best practices; be responsive to crisis or conflict situations on a global scale; ensure adequate
 funding at both the local, national, and international levels; and create new models, tools, and partnerships to help protect,
 manage, and enjoy our collective cultural patrimony.
 [11] Symposium · PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT AND EDUCATION: DEVELOPING HERITAGE STEWARDSHIP
 The biggest ally and advocate for the preservation and protection of archaeological materials is an informed public. Educating
 young students about the importance of ancient cultures, maintaining a lifelong dialog between archaeologists and the general
 public, and involving people in their own histories are essential for developing a sense of heritage stewardship. Presenting
 accurate archaeological information through various hands-on experiences, easily accessible digital data, and continuous
 learning opportunities bring archaeology into the everyday lives of all learners where they can develop respect and passion for
 the discipline. Participants in this session will share effective approaches for educating and engaging non-specialists about the
 field of archaeology in order to foster a shared responsibility for preserving the world’s collective heritage. Topics include
 discussions of K-12 curricula and service learning programs, approaches to teaching and developing undergraduate and
 graduate heritage studies, examining adult and senior enrichment programs as venues for archaeological education, and inspiring
 public awareness and action to protect heritage through the involvement of local residents, the use of curated materials, and the
 dissemination of digital data.
 [12] Symposium · A NEW ARCHAEOLOGICAL FRONTIER: URBAN SETTLEMENTS AND LANDSCAPES IN KURDISTAN,
 NORTHERN IRAQ
 The past four years have seen a renaissance in the archaeology of Mesopotamia. Although fieldwork has been suspended in
 Syria, and most of Iraq continues to be unsafe, the autonomous Kurdistan Region of Iraq has become a welcome home for new
 research into some of the most important questions of early social complexity. This session brings together new scholarship that
 bears on questions of early urbanism, imperial power, settlement patterns, and landscape evolution.
 [13] Symposium · TOWARDS A GLOBAL UNDERSTANDING OF OCHRE USE: METHODS, DEFINITIONS, AND
 APPLICATIONS
 (SPONSORED BY THE SOCIETY FOR ARCHAEOLOGICAL SCIENCES)
 The term "ochre" is one of the most poorly defined categories of material culture. Broadly speaking, archaeologists tend to
 identify any iron-containing rock, mineral, or soil capable of producing a colored streak as ochre. This is at best an incomplete
 definition and at worst is so imprecise that it may hinder meaningful research. Ochre has been reported in many examples of
 early human symbolic behavior. The use of ochre, however, is a widespread phenomenon represented in cultural heritage from
 all inhabited continents and spanning hundreds of thousands of years through present day. Some of the best known roles of
 ochre include rock art pigments, cosmetics and skin protectants, animal hide preservatives, and grave goods.
 The dramatic growth of the archaeological sciences in the last 20 years has resulted in unprecedented opportunities for studying
 ochre in a quantitative manner. However, effectively applying these increasingly accessible techniques requires standardization
 of terminology and better sharing of methodological advances across disciplinary and national borders. This session will
 represent a first step towards achieving these goals by fostering communication among researchers with a keen interest in this
 unique form of material culture and by providing an opportunity to discuss an anthropological definition of ochre.
 [14] Symposium · NEW DATA FOR OLD PROBLEMS: RECENT APPROACHES TO ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH AT
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                     3
 CARIBBEAN LOWLANDS
 The region historically and geographically considered as Caribbean Lowlands encompasses a great diversity of terrestrial and
 aquatic environments and diverse socio-political processes as well, from the early agricultural societies until the occupation of
 Spanish colonial settlements. This symposium proposes to discuss the theoretical and methodological contributions made by
 lithic analysis, zooarchaeology, paleoethnobotany, archeometry, and historic archaeological studies, referring specifically to
 aspects such as paleoenvironmental reconstruction, subsistence economies, and human managing aquatic environments, among
 others. In this context, we aim to unite a group of presentations that project specific investigations, in search of comparative
 patterns of the use fauna, flora, and environment from the formative around 6000 yeas B.C. to eighteenth century. The ultimate
 goal of the symposium is to realize a balance that permits to identify strengths, weaknesses, and perspectives, in the archaeology
 of the Caribbean Lowlands. With this goal, we are trying to establish bases to build regional inventories of the sites where traces
 of human-environment interaction have been found, and to promote comparative studies.
 [15] Symposium · MESOAMERICAN PAINTING: SOCIAL MEMORY ON VIRTUAL DISPLAY
 Painting traditions in Mesoamerica provide an essential resource for understanding precolumbian culture and the interplay
 between audience and content. Murals on public display convey political and religious messages designed to inform the
 community and visitors from afar. Other forms of mural paintings are more private, conveying esoteric messages for elites. Similar
 content can be found in the ritual codices, especially the Maya codices and the Borgia Group manuscripts. These painted
 screenfolds suggest an interchange of elite knowledge about religion, natural history, and prognostications for daily life. Local
 rulers may have been the guardians of Mixtec codices recording information about history, religious rituals, royal lineages, and
 political events dating from precolumbian times through the sixteenth century. Colonial period codices of Central Mexico,
 recognized as a blend of Postconquest and precolumbian traditions, are a rich repository of information on historical events and
 religious beliefs designed for a restricted audience of priests and elites. As a broad tradition, Mesoamerican paintings can be
 seen as an important key to understanding how the message conveyed relates to the intended audience, and how the paintings
 themselves record the social memory of individual communities.
 [16] Symposium · CROSSING FRONTIERS OF DISCIPLINES AND COUNTRIES. A SYMPOSIUM HONORING EILEEN
 JOHNSON
 We propose to honor the career of Eileen Johnson, because we believe her to be a “complete scientist” who goes beyond
 pragmatic training and theoretical issues to include public awareness and issues of ethics. During the course of her career, she
 has integrated some disparate disciplines including archaeology, zoology, taphonomy, geology, and museum science. Her 45-
 year career has primarily been devoted to interdisciplinary research on human-environment interactions on the U.S. Great Plains,
 emphasizing human subsistence, vertebrate taphonomy, and the reconstruction of Quaternary paleoenvironments. She has also
 applied these perspectives across the country and across the Americas. She has spent her professional career at the Museum of
 Texas Tech University, where she built a regional interdisciplinary Quaternary research program based around the Lubbock Lake
 archaeological site. In the museum, she also worked as a research scientist, curator, professor, and even director. In addition to
 her meticulous research, she has been closely involved with the care of the anthropology collection at the museum, working with
 students and peers, and eager to share what she learns with the public. The aim of this symposium is to highlight the many
 contributions Eileen has made to Great Plains archaeology and to interdisciplinary research.
 [17] Symposium · CHACO AND HOPEWELL: RETHINKING "INTERACTION SPHERES" THROUGH MULTISCALAR
 NETWORK ANALYSES
 Chaco and Hopewell are two of the most well studied archaeological regions in North America. Although Chaco is often
 compared to Cahokia, comparison to Hopewell brings out important ways in which extensive regional connectivities were formed
 through the intersection of religious, political, and economic networks. Both societies show evidence of periodic, eventful
 monumental construction; spatial connectivity through roads/causeways; long-distance procurement of materials; production and
 deposition of large quantities of inalienable objects; spatially distinctive collective burials; and the replication of architectural units
 and spatial communities across large areas. Although they differ in many ways, the term “interaction sphere” has been applied to
 both regions but this term is amorphous and sidesteps the ways in which materials and practices were embedded within multiple
 kinds of networks and their historical relationships. Current relational approaches in archaeology, including formal network
 analyses, offer alternative ways of looking at social and spatial connectivities, especially when combined with theoretical
 approaches that foreground how religious ritual, ideology, territoriality, social diversity, and inequality intersect. The participants in
 this session address these connections to provide multiscalar interpretations of the Chaco and Hopewell worlds, their origins, and
 their transformations.
 [18] Symposium · MEDIATING SPIRIT WORLDS IN NATIVE NORTH AMERICA
 (SPONSORED BY ARCHAEOLOGY DIVISION, AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION )
 This session considers archaeological materialities from a variety of timescales in order to explore indigenous ontologies in North
 America. We are interested in how physical and spiritual worlds were embodied and constituted with material culture in particular
 historical moments and over longer periods of time. The focus is on the discursive relationship between lived and historicized
 ontologies. We seek to draw out the diversity of spiritual existences in the history of Native North America by interrogating how
 people, objects, and landscapes were inscribed with meaning, memory, and belief. We include studies from across the continent
 ranging in temporal focus from deeper eras of prehistory to colonial times. Some case studies explore how spiritual practices
 endured or transformed in the face of drastic historical ruptures such as cultural invasion and violent or otherwise forced religious
 proselytization. Others take a long-view perspective, asking how ontologies developed and transformed across wide expanses of
 time. The juxtaposition of timescales offers new insights on the nature of cultural continuity and change in Native North America,
 while the geographical breadth of the session allows comparison of diverse indigenous ontologies and the ways in which they
 framed, historicized, and related persons, spirits, animals, plants, and things.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                4
 [19] Symposium · ARCHAEOETHNOBOTANY AND HOUSEHOLD CONTEXTS
 This session is broadly focused on archaeoethnobotanical remains associated with household contexts, including both
 microbotanical and macrobotanical datasets. The session also includes ethnographic work as a means of adding perspective to
 ethnobotanical research. Presenters discuss the actions and behaviors that led to the deposition of particular remains, and/or
 what these remains indicate about the state of the ancient environment and past subsistence strategies. Secondarily, as this
 session is not focused on a particular geographic region, it is meant to facilitate an exchange of methods and interpretive
 frameworks between scholars working on datasets from different geographical regions.
 [20] General Session · REGIONAL ARCHAEOLOGY IN MESOAMERICA
 [21] Symposium · AFTER ANZICK: RECONCILING NEW GENOMIC DATA AND MODELS WITH THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL
 EVIDENCE FOR PEOPLING OF THE AMERICAS
 The past two years have witnessed the publication of a series of ancient genomes that illuminate the peopling of the Americas:
 the Anzick infant, the Malt’a boy, and Kennewick Man. Along with similar data from later Holocene skeletal samples and extant
 Native American populations, these genomes show that a single small but diverse founder group, ancestral to all Native
 populations south of the Arctic, left Siberia after 23,000 cal B.P. and crossed Beringia about 15,000 cal B.P. Is it possible to
 reconcile the new genomic data with putative evidence of pre-Clovis or non-Clovis archaeological cultures south of the ice sheets
 before 14,500 cal B.P.? Can archaeological and genomic data be unified into a consilient model of the peopling process?
 [22] Symposium · PARTING THE RED SEA: LATE PLEISTOCENE LITHIC VARIABILITY AND HUMAN DISPERSALS IN THE
 HORN OF AFRICA AND ARABIA
 (SPONSORED BY SOCIETY OF AFRICANIST ARCHAEOLOGISTS)
 The last two decades have witnessed the discovery of numerous archaeological sites in the Horn of Africa
 (Djibouti/Eritrea/Ethiopia/Somalia) and Arabia ranging in age from OIS 5-3, ~125-29,000 ka. Many are stratified cave, shelter, and
 open-air sites encompassing an impressive array of MSA-LSA/MP-UP flaked and groundstone artifacts, fauna, and more rarely
 fossilized remains of Homo sapiens. Against a backdrop of extreme fluctuations in paleoenvironments ranging from lofty glaciated
 peaks to scorching deserts, the sites reveal a high degree of spatio-temporal lithic technological diversity. Some sites on both
 sides of the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden show clear signs of lithic technological connections, while others in Arabia show more
 affinity with the Eurasian Middle Paleolithic than to any Arabian or African tradition. Sites in the Horn indicate considerable intra-
 regional variability, including possible western Ethiopian connections with Sudan. Explanations for this lithic diversity are many,
 but include genetic evidence for hominin dispersals through and across Africa into Arabia, and back again. This symposium
 brings archaeologists working in the Horn and Arabia together for the first time to discuss how these new data provide important
 new insights into the Late Pleistocene evolution and global dispersal of Homo sapiens and “modern human behavior.”
 [23] Symposium · CERAMICS, IDENTITY AND REGIONAL INTERACTION IN THE LOWER AMAZON
 The lower Amazon region has a diverse and complex precolonial history, with a number of cultures being identified by
 archaeological research mainly through study of different ceramic complexes. Some of them are among the oldest ceramics in
 the Americas, while others have emerged just before the European conquest. Some styles developed out of large and complex
 chiefdoms, such as Marajó and Santarém, while others are related to small, local settlements. Given these scenarios, recent
 research has been struggling to both understand the enormous diversity of ceramic styles and to differentiate local from regional
 and/or pan-Amazonian traits; ephemerous from persistent styles; and hybrid and flexible repertoires as both the result of and a
 vector for different types of interaction spheres (such as exchange networks, ethnic and political alignments, war alliances,
 competition for managed territories, migrations, etc.). This session will explore both technological and symbolic aspects of
 ceramic production, use, and discard to advance understanding of the role of ceramics in identity building and regional interaction
 dynamics.
 [24] Symposium · THE BIOARCHAEOLOGY OF FRONTIER AND BORDERLANDS
 This session aims to explore how people in the past might have maintained, created, or manipulated their identity, while living in a
 place of liminality, stuck in between worlds. The zones of “in-betweeness,” of demarcation between two or more spheres of
 influence, is a very dynamic and potentially violent place. This session will look at how different groups stuck in these zones were
 affected, how they interacted with the different worlds, how they lived their lives on the “edge.” The cases presented will address
 questions of how living on the frontier might have affected the health and disease of these groups, how conflict and violence
 might have been expressed, how social inequalities might have been manifested. How did these groups maintain their identity?
 What overall effect did the “frontier” have on the existence of those who called it home? The cases can address situations where
 the people involved might not have lived permanently in the borderland zone, but had extensively interacted with it, or were
 deeply marked by it. A frontier can be both physical and ideological, an end and a beginning; it means different things to different
 people and it can affect groups living on opposite sides differently.
 [25] Symposium · ON THE MOVE: ARCHAEOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO CHILDREN AND CHILDHOOD
 (SPONSORED BY SOCIETY FOR THE STUDY OF CHILDHOOD IN THE PAST)
 The archaeology of children and childhood has been a dynamic field of investigation since the late 1980s. Its practitioners
 recognize that the study of childhood is, in fact, the study of society as a whole. It is also an inherently interdisciplinary
 undertaking, as archaeologists are required to integrate into their analyses a diverse array of archaeological evidence—including
 material culture, funerary practices, human skeletal remains, built environments, and landscapes—informed, but not restricted,
 by the insights of a range of disciplines, including history, sociology, anthropology, and ethnography. This session explores
 children and childhood in the context of an array of social, institutional, bodily, and geographical transformations, such as
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 5
 migration, political change, physical growth, progression through the lifecycle, and entry into working and institutional life. It will
 examine the ways in which social, political, and economic transformations impact on children, and how childhood experience, in
 turn, informs and is central to those broad processes. The session is organised into three interconnected strands which address,
 in turn, bioarchaeological approaches to children's identities and experiences; funerary evidence and biocultural approaches to
 childhood experiences; and the material culture of children's work, play, and learning environments.
 [26] Symposium · NUTS AND BOLTS OF THE REAL "BUSINESS" OF ANCIENT MAYA EXCHANGE (PART 1)
 Studies of ancient Maya political economy are now moving past decades of debate over broad and vague concepts of the
 “existence” of broadly defined markets, disembedded palace economies, unspecified modes of exchange, and state control
 versus autonomy or heterarchy. The evidence now emerging from excavations, technical analyses, epigraphy, and ethnohistorical
 analogy allows us to reexamine the building blocks underlying Maya political economies, including specific production activities,
 mechanisms of distribution (gifting, tribute, marketplace exchange, official bureaucracies), goods of low, middle, and high value,
 the social identities of producers, merchants, and officials, and variation in the location and function of economic features within
 sites or regions. Papers in this session illustrate ways in which the nuts and bolts of Maya economies contributed to an articulated
 and complex economy that bound together particular individuals and social groups across geopolitical units of varying scales. The
 session’s papers emphasize sound empirical data and clear links to grounded research questions of the sort needed to
 reconstruct a nuanced model for dynamic precolumbian Maya economies.
 [27] General Session · COMMUNITIES NEIGHBORHOODS AND ARCHITECTURE IN MESOAMERICA
 [28] Symposium · 2016 FRYXELL AWARD SYMPOSIUM: PAPERS IN HONOR OF ELIZABETH J. REITZ
 (SPONSORED BY FRYXELL AWARD)
 Elizabeth J. Reitz is the recipient of the 2016 Fryxell Award for Interdisciplinary Research in Archaeology. The Fryxell Award is
 presented to a scientist in recognition for excellence in interdisciplinary research that significantly has contributed to American
 Archaeology. The 2016 Fryxell Award specifically recognizes a scholar who has made significant contributions in the application
 of the zoological sciences in archaeology. Dr. Reitz has a distinguished career as a zooarchaeologist. Her zooarchaeological
 research embodies interdisciplinary scholarship, bridging studies of human-environmental relationships in the past with topics of
 global concern in the modern world. Her pioneering work focuses on developing analytical methods that make zooarchaeological
 data compatible, accessible, and relevant across disciplines. Her research spans the terminal Pleistocene to postcolumbia era,
 from the United States to the Caribbean and South America, and has been featured in numerous books, monographs, journals,
 and zooarchaeological reports. This symposium, sponsored by the Fryxell Award for Interdisciplinary Research, highlights Dr.
 Reitz’s contribution to American Archaeology through her zooarchaeological research paradigm.
 [29] Symposium · COMMUNITY MATTERS: ACTIVE INVOLVEMENT WITH TRIBAL COMMUNITIES, THE MANY ROLES OF
 TRIBAL HERITAGE MANAGEMENT
 (SPONSORED BY INDIGENOUS POPULATIONS INTEREST GROUP AND COMMITTEE ON NATIVE AMERICAN
 RELATIONS)
 Throughout the United States, individuals working in tribal historic preservation maintain a variety of roles, allowing them to
 undertake countless projects aimed toward preserving cultural resources for their tribe. A wide range of projects encourage active
 involvement from the tribal community, whether it is through in-person interviews or tribal field schools, and community input is
 crucial to understanding what tribes deem significant and necessary to preserve. Each project varies between tribes and is
 specific to the needs and wants of each tribal community. This forum will bring together those working in tribal historic
 preservation across the country to discuss the various roles they perform and the different projects their tribe finds important.
 Sharing these endeavors will demonstrate the broad spectrum of cultural values that exist between tribes so that tribal
 expectations and involvement in heritage management is better understood.
 [30] Symposium · NAGPRA APPLIED: STORIES FROM THE FIELD ON ITS 25TH ANNIVERSARY
 (SPONSORED BY THE COMMITTEE ON REPATRIATION)
 November 16, 2015, marked the 25th anniversary of the passage of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act
 (NAGPRA). The Society for American Archaeology’s (SAA) involvement with NAGPRA precedes the law’s passage. It helped
 build a coalition of scientific, museum, and Native American groups that supported NAGPRA’s enactment and was one of the key
 organizations involved in drafting this groundbreaking legislation. For more than two decades, tribes, museums, and
 archaeologists have worked together to implement NAGPRA and repatriation is integral to the professional lives of a number of
 SAA members. This session will look back on SAA’s pivotal role in NAGPRA’s passage and continued involvement in its
 implementation. SAA members who work in range of settings—academia, government agencies, museums, the private sector,
 tribal governments—will describe their experiences working with this law, assess its impact after 25 years, and contemplate its
 future.
 [31] Symposium · SOCIAL COMPLEXITY IN THE CENTRAL ANDEAN REGION: CURRENT RESEARCH ON THE INITIAL
 PERIOD AND EARLY HORIZON - PART 1
 The Initial Period is often considered an outgrowth of trends that first appear in the late Preceramic Period. However,
 archaeological research shows that the Initial Period was in fact a time of significant cultural dynamism, which included the first
 appearance of pottery, expansion of agricultural systems, and a proliferation of monumental public architecture. Meanwhile, Early
 Horizon studies have traditionally focused on the Chavin phenomenon, obscuring broader trends in cultural trajectories. This
 session is aimed at exploring the archaeology of the second and first millennia B.C., with a particular focus on recent research
 undertaken throughout coastal and highland Peru over the last 10 years. Topics that will be addressed in this session include
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                         6
 chronology, the emergence of pottery technology, domestic and village life, ritual and debates centered on sociopolitical
 organization.
 [32] Symposium · AFTER THE VOLCANO ERUPTED: PAPERS IN HONOR OF DR. PAYSON SHEETS (PART 1)
 The UNESCO World Heritage site of Cerén, El Salvador, has fueled the archaeological imagination for decades with its superb
 preservation of earthen architecture, agricultural fields, and in situ artifacts buried beneath multiple meters of volcanic ash.
 Payson Sheets has tirelessly led investigations of this Classic Period Maya community enhancing our understanding of ancient
 commoners, household archaeology, social and political organization, diet and subsistence, among other topics. The
 contributions of Sheets' work have wide-ranging methodological and theoretical impacts throughout archaeology. Honoring the
 work of Sheets, participants contribute presentations of their original research in areas influenced by Payson’s work and highlight
 the extensive contributions of his research across the discipline. In Part 1 of this two-part symposium, participants emphasize
 Payson’s contributions to archaeology through his extensive decades of archaeological exploration in El Salvador.
 [33] Forum · "DESTRUCTION" AND THE RHETORIC OF ARCHITECTURAL EXCAVATION
 Recent advances in 3D metric survey have revolutionized recording during excavation. SFM and laser scanning are now used to
 document simple and complex features with unprecedented levels of precision. The main impact of this has been the acceleration
 of field operations. The revolution in recording is allowing us to do the same things we have always done, but faster and in a
 slightly different order. Not much of a revolution!
 The fundamentals of stratigraphic excavation were established a century ago. Reflecting contemporary practice, valuable portable
 objects were removed, and less convenient architectural elements left behind. The widespread custom of not removing features
 like walls and floors, even after their thorough documentation, persists. The implicit logic preservation in situ is that architecture is
 more significant and rich in un-captured information than soil deposits or cuts. New methodologies and current ethics and theory
 invite a critical re-examination of this de facto policy of architectural preservation in situ. Is it still justifiable to assign such absolute
 preference to the conservation of walls and floors and, if so, on what grounds? Is material preservation the only option? We bring
 together academic and CRM archaeologists, digital humanists, site managers, and designers to explore these themes.
 [34] Symposium · HOPEWELL CEREMONIAL LANDSCAPES SEEN THROUGH THE LENS OF LARGE-SCALE
 GEOPHYSICAL SURVEYS: BIG DATA, BIG OPPORTUNITIES, BIG CHALLENGES
 This symposium presents results from recent large-scale geomagnetic surveys of Hopewellian mound and earthwork complexes
 in Ohio, including several at Hopewell Culture National Historical Park, currently under consideration for inscription on the World
 Heritage List. Until now, these sites were best-known only from nineteenth century maps. Landscape-scale geophysical surveys
 are becoming increasingly cost-effective due to recent advances in instrumentation. The availability of multi-sensor arrays and
 real-time positioning systems permits us to widen our field of view and place individual features, sites, and monuments in
 landscape context. The recent surveys add rich texture and detail to earlier maps, and reveal many heretofore hidden features of
 these Hopewell ceremonial landscapes. These new datasets are fertile grounds for novel interpretations, and they harbor
 opportunities for greater public appreciation of, and engagement with this Native American contribution to World Heritage. At the
 same time, the large scale of these datasets presents new challenges for data processing, analysis, and management. This
 symposium will explore these issues with a view toward advancing archaeological theory and practice in step with advances in
 archaeo-geophysical instrumentation. Further, this symposium features an international team of participants, promising new
 perspectives and broader contexts for our understanding of Hopewell ceremonial landscapes.
 [35] Symposium · STRATEGIC APPROACHES TO DIGITAL PUBLIC ARCHAEOLOGY
 (SPONSORED BY PUBLIC ARCHAEOLOGY INTEREST GROUP)
 Archaeologists have rallied around digital public archaeology and, while scholarship is growing in this area, a more critical
 approach is vital. The pervasiveness of digital technologies is clear: approximately 87 percent of American adults use the Internet,
 64 percent own a smartphone, and 58 percent have a Facebook account (Pew Research Center). Such technologies are an
 important tool for archaeologists and the discipline’s presence online is already enormous. However, an abundant presence does
 not equate success. We must do more than join the digital bandwagon; we need to take the ideas and goals that have been a
 part of public archaeology and embed them in digital platforms. Strategic use of digital technologies will have the greatest impact
 in supporting our larger interests. To produce measurable results, digital public archaeology projects require goals, strategy,
 intentionality, and assessment. We must apply the same academic rigor to public archaeology as we do in archaeological
 research so we understand what success in these projects actually looks like. Unfortunately, few resources exist to support these
 efforts. This session seeks to address that gap by sharing research and case studies on digital public archaeology projects and
 strategy from project inception through evaluation.
 [36] Poster Session · MID-ATLANTIC
 [37] Poster Session · TEACHING, HERITAGE, OUTREACH
 [38] Poster Session · BIOARCHAEOLOGY, TAPHONOMY
 [39] Poster Session · METHOD AND THEORY
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              7
 [40] Poster Session · TEACHING ARCHAEOLOGY: HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE COMMITTEE ON CURRICULUM AND THE
 TEACHING ARCHAEOLOGY INTEREST GROUP
 (SPONSORED BY CURRICULUM COMMITTEE AND THE TEACHING ARCHAEOLOGY INTEREST GROUP)
 Archaeology is a subject that easily sparks interest among college students. However, it is often difficult to construct activities
 which teach methodological and theoretical concepts of archaeology within the four walls of a classroom. Archaeologists rarely
 get a chance to discuss effective classroom activities. This poster session seeks to provide a forum to do exactly that. The SAA
 Committee on Curriculum is working to provide a digital space for innovative classroom activities to be provided to educators.
 This session will serve as a platform to show the kinds of activities that will be made available on this new SAA webpage and
 foster awareness of the effort so that more activities will be submitted. Activity hand outs and all other materials will be made
 available during the session, along with recommendations for how many and for which students these activities are most
 appropriate.
 [41] Poster Session · PEOPLE, POTTERY, AND PETROGRAPHY: RECENT RESEARCH IN CERAMIC PETROGRAPHY
 Ceramic petrography has grown from an approach adapted from material scientists to a common method of analysis in
 archaeology. The combination of both qualitative and quantitative data in petrographic analysis allows it to be applied in a variety
 of studies, ranging from ceramic manufacturing techniques to the interpretation of social phenomenon, such as exchange,
 population dispersals, and emulation. The posters in this session are a selection of recent research centered on ceramic
 petrography from both small-scale and complex societies in the Americas, as well as the western Mediterranean. The wide
 geographic focus of this session highlights the potential for petrographic research to address complex social questions. In this
 session, ceramic petrography is used to investigate transitions in social formations within groups and the interactions between
 different groups, examine the physical properties of coarse crystalline rocks and other manufacturing techniques, and highlight
 additional sourcing techniques and tools currently used by researchers.
 [42] Poster Session · SPECIALIZED ANALYSES OF CULTURAL MATERIALS AND FEATURES FROM PRE-CONTACT
 NATIVE AMERICAN SITES IN NEW ENGLAND
 (SPONSORED BY THE PUBLIC ARCHAEOLOGY LABORATORY, INC. (PAL))
 New data from protein residue, phytolith, and radiocarbon analyses have contributed to our understanding of pre-contact Native
 American subsistence procurement practices and settlement patterning in southern New England. Posters in this session
 illustrate recent cultural resource management (CRM) investigations conducted by The Public Archaeology Laboratory, Inc.
 (PAL).
 [43] Symposium · PUEBLO ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE GREATER TAOS REGION: WE'VE GOT A LOT TO LEARN
 Archaeological research in the Greater Taos region has a long and illustrious history. The Northern Rio Grande and Chama
 valleys of New Mexico have seen extensive research for more than 140 years and much has been learned. Despite this long
 record of research, numerous gaps remain in archaeologists’ understanding of important events and processes in the region. For
 example, how early was the region settled by Puebloan people? Was the huge expansion in regional population in the late 1200s
 a result of migration or local demography? In this symposium, we explore these gaps and offer suggestions into how they might
 be filled. Our main goal in this symposium is to provide a roadmap for archaeological inquiry in the Northern Rio Grande and
 Chama valleys for the next 10 years.
 [44] General Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE OLMEC
 [45] Symposium · EVERYBODY ELSE: THE PREDECESSORS AND CONTEMPORARIES OF THE MOCHE ON THE NORTH
 COAST OF PERU
 Many research programs have added to the knowledge of Moche-ness, but relatively few have contributed to our understanding
 of what came before and alongside the Moche phenomenon in the north coast region of Peru. Papers in this session will focus on
 the predecessors and contemporaries of the Moche throughout the region. Rather than focus on specific theories or
 methodologies, papers will focus on a broad range of topics such as mobility, foodways, style and identity, and spatial analysis of
 settlement and artifact distributions.
 [46] General Session · CERAMICS IN MESOAMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [47] Symposium · GESTURES ACROSS A CONTINENT: HANDS, COMMUNICATION AND MEANING IN THE ANCIENT
 AMERICAS
 Gestures constitute a fundamental part of human behaviour and are rich evidence of a culture’s ideology, identity, beliefs, and
 practices. Although gestures are visually and materially evident in the archaeological record, an approach to gesture that
 considers different traces of bodily actions and which compares gestures across cultural regions in the Americas has been
 notably absent. This session addresses this concern by exploring the symbolism and significance of gestures in ancient and
 contemporary indigenous cultures of North, South, and Central America for the purposes of better understanding the role of
 hands in communication and meaning in both space and time. By emphasising cross-cultural and comparative perspectives, this
 session will be pivotal in facilitating a dialogue about gestures between research fields and disciplines, including archaeology,
 anthropology, art history, and linguistics. Topics will include representations of hands in art; embodied gestures and material
 culture; interpersonal behaviours (including gestures accompanying speech and Sign Languages); and the performance of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               8
 gestures in ritual practices. As a whole, this session highlights the importance of gestures for comprehending the symbolism and
 significance of communication and meaning in the ancient New World and contributes to wider discussions of bodily
 communication in societies, both past and present.
 [48] Forum · THE FUTURE OF AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY: ENGAGE THE VOTING PUBLIC OR KISS YOUR RESEARCH
 GOODBYE!
 Recently, we have seen attacks on publicly-funding archaeology in the U.S. These attacks occurred at the state level, where
 governors and state legislatures tried to defund or outright eliminate state archaeological programs and institutions. At the federal
 level, we have seen archaeology showcased as a waste of public tax dollars, attempts to defund archaeological research, and
 legislation to move federal projects forward without consideration of impacts on archaeological resources. We expect these trends
 to continue in the future. In most cases, a vigilant network of historic preservation and archaeological organizations has thwarted
 these attacks. The public, however, largely remains an untapped ally. As a discipline, we have not built a strong public support
 network. We have not demonstrated the value of archaeology to the public, beyond a scattering of educational and informational
 programs. In addition, when asked to participate in a national effort to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the National Historic
 Preservation Act, we found that archaeologists have great difficulty conveying to the public the value and benefit of 50 years of
 federally-mandated archaeological research. A panel of archaeologists whose work focuses on public engagement will provide
 brief presentations addressing these issues, followed by an open discussion.
 [49] Symposium · SHELL MIDDEN MICROARCHAEOLOGY UNRAVELED
 Shell middens are complex anthropic constructions crossing many chronologies and territories. They are one of the most
 important contexts to interpret the formation of the archaeological record and have been associated with different human activities
 around the world. Therefore, for such complex deposits, micro-scale analyses are of the utmost importance to better understand
 site formation, site function, human behavior, paleogeography, and paleoenvironment.
 The archaeological record goes beyond what is seen with the naked eye and is a more complex reality where the minutiae are
 important sources of information. This approach is increasingly interdisciplinary with contributions from biology, geology,
 chemistry, and even physics. One of the greatest obstacles has been the difficulty of integrating macro- and microscopic records,
 which has been alleviated by a new generation of archaeologists specializing in geoarchaeology (micromorphology,
 geochemistry), zooarchaeology (sclerochronology, isotopes), archaeobotany (charcoal, seed, fruit, pollen and phytoliths), residue
 analysis, and use-wear.
 Site formation and function are universal questions to all shell middens, regardless of their different chronologies and locations.
 We aim to bring together different methodological approaches to the study of the archaeological record in order to illuminate the
 singular source of information that shell middens are.
 [50] Symposium · RECENT RESEARCH AT THE CEREMONIAL CENTER OF TIBES, PONCE, PUERTO RICO
 This symposium presents the latest results of analyses realized by the Proyecto Arqueológico del Centro Ceremonial de Tibes,
 Puerto Rico. Tibes is the earliest known civic-ceremonial center in the Greater Antilles and has been interpreted as one of the
 earliest political and economic centers in the Caribbean and first site of institutionalized stratification in the region. The main
 purpose of our research is the study of the social and cultural factors that led to the development of this center. The symposium
 includes presentations on recent excavations and findings of paleoethnobotanical, faunal, lithic, osteological, bioarchaeological,
 and regional analyses.
 [51] Symposium · MULTI-DIRECTIONAL COLONIALISM: APPROACHES TO STUDYING GLOBAL INTERACTIONS
 Colonial settings are marked by cultural exchange in many directions, yet studies of colonialism usually highlight the relationship
 between motherland and territory with a specific focus on the colonized. In this session, we explore colonial environments as
 settings for a multiplicity of cross-cultural interactions by presenting research on a range of geographical locations and periods.
 We aim to discuss the multi-directional nature of these social exchanges, in order to move beyond the static interpretive frame of
 colonizer and colonized. Participants will consider questions such as how changes in colonial territories rippled back to the
 motherland; the role of proximate, non-colonized cultures living on the edges of imperial activities; the multi-directional nature of
 material culture change; and how peoples connected to colonial exchanges developed new notions of heritage and identity. By
 discussing these themes from disparate eras and locations, we hope to add a new facet to the rich ongoing scholarship on
 colonial studies, and also demonstrate new modes of approaching the study of culture contact on a global scale.
 [52] Symposium · "SKULL CULTS" AMONGST HUNTER-GATHERERS?
 While some aspects of ‘skull cults’ appear to be similar in hunter-gatherers and small-scale horticultural and agricultural
 communities, the details of how they function in skull rituals and are integrated with other elements of human behavior vary.
 Small-scale farmers have long been known to exhibit an interest in the human head. Manifested as either trophy taking or
 ancestor worship, or both, the range of practices involving the human head have typically been understood in a context of
 maintaining or enhancing fertility, whether of crops, animals, or human populations themselves. Although the evidence is sparse,
 many of the same practices are found amongst hunter-gatherers, for whom such interests might appear less immediately
 relevant. Balance with the natural world is more often maintained by appropriate behaviour towards prey animals, and most
 anthropological discussions have been more concerned with how hunter-gatherers limit their reproductive potential, rather than
 seek to enhance it. Why, then, do we see a widespread interest in acts involving the human head amongst hunter-gatherers,
 ranging from trophy taking to various kinds of post-mortem manipulation? The papers in this session seek to document the range
 of these practices both archaeologically and ethnographically, and to discuss the possible underlying rationales.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                9
 [53] Symposium · AFTER THE VOLCANO ERUPTED: PAPERS IN HONOR OF PAYSON SHEETS (PART 2)
 Payson Sheets has led research at the UNESCO World Heritage Maya site of Ceren, El Salvador, since its discovery in 1978, as
 well as a variety of projects throughout Meso- and Central America. The contributions of Sheets' work have wide-ranging
 methodological and theoretical impacts throughout archaeology. Symposium participants contribute presentations of their original
 research in areas influenced by Payson’s work and highlight the extensive contributions of his research across the discipline.
 These papers tie together important aspects of reconstructing the past, such as the application of remote sensing to archaeology,
 the impacts of ancient natural disasters on human populations, the daily lives of commoners, advances in household
 archaeology, and progress in stone tool manufacture, production, and meanings. Holistic interpretations of the importance and
 contributions of all members of ancient societies, particularly commoners, have characterized Payson’s influences on the field
 and will be reflected in the papers of this session. In Part 2 of this two-part symposium, participants emphasize Payson’s
 contributions to the development of archaeological method and theory in Mesoamerica and beyond.
 [54] Symposium · COMBATING INEQUALITY: ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE PRODUCTION OF CAPITAL IN THE 21ST
 CENTURY
 Americans are in the midst of an intense debate over inequality. As wealth and status become increasingly concentrated in the
 hands of a few, many are asking how this situation came to be. In a post Occupy Wall Street era, Thomas Piketty’s economic
 treatise Capital in the Twenty-First Century has topped the New York Times nonfiction Best Seller List. Moviegoers have flocked
 to economic documentaries, such as Robert Reich’s Inequality for All. And, television pundits refer frequently to the 1 percent and
 the 99 percent, a new shorthand for the haves and have-nots. Pierre Bourdieu has suggested that such inequity derives, in part,
 from the unequal distribution of capital, be it economic, cultural, or social. According to Bourdieu (1986: 83), capital is “a force
 inscribed in the objectivity of things so that everything is not equally possible or impossible.” Participants in this session examine
 whether archaeology can combat some aspects of contemporary inequality by producing forms of capital that benefit the
 communities for which we work. By doing so, participants explore concrete ways practicing archaeology can promote public
 welfare and foster social change.
 [55] Symposium · UNDERSTANDING THE NATURE AND TIMING OF HUMAN RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL
 CHANGE
 Archaeology is well suited for understanding how prehistoric societies responded to environmental change. Examples of such
 change can include processes directly and indirectly related to climate, such as temperature, precipitation, and rising lake or sea
 level, as well as others such as volcanism. Many environmental records are very highly resolved, with some approaching annual
 sequencing. However, archaeological chronologies have historically lacked comparable degrees of sensitivity. Recent advances
 in building and working with archaeological chronologies has increased the precision of these models, and are presently helping
 researchers understand the capacity for rapid and often significant cultural change in response to changing environmental
 conditions. One important result of these developments are new, enhanced understandings of prehistoric culture history and how
 local and regional sequences changed in response to different environmental conditions. Another result is the occasional
 opportunity to chart different responses across multiple regions to the same general environmental change. This session presents
 multidisciplinary datasets and methodologies from North and Central America that illustrate these processes of response and
 adaptation.
 [56] Symposium · SOCIAL COMPLEXITY IN THE CENTRAL ANDEAN REGION: CURRENT RESEARCH ON THE INITIAL
 PERIOD AND EARLY HORIZON PART 2
 The Initial Period is often considered an outgrowth of trends that first appear in the late Preceramic Period. However,
 archaeological research shows that the Initial Period was in fact a time of significant cultural dynamism, which included the first
 appearance of pottery, expansion of agricultural systems, and a proliferation of monumental public architecture. Meanwhile, Early
 Horizon studies have traditionally focused on the Chavin phenomenon, obscuring broader trends in cultural trajectories. This
 session is aimed at exploring the archaeology of the second and first millennia B.C., with a particular focus on recent research
 undertaken throughout coastal and highland Peru over the last 10 years. Topics that will be addressed in this session include
 chronology, the emergence of pottery technology, domestic and village life, ritual and debates centered on sociopolitical
 organization.
 [57] Symposium · CERAMICS OF THE INDIGENOUS PEOPLES OF SOUTH AMERICA: STUDIES OF PRODUCTION AND
 EXCHANGE USING INAA
 Indigenous ceramics from the continent of South America range from the common to the artistic with many types characterized by
 symbolic, religious imagery. In some areas, pottery was mass produced for the general population as well as the elite. Reliance
 on compositional data from instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) to study production and exchange practices of
 indigenous ceramics from the continent of South America has grown over the past two decades. In some instances, the data from
 other analytical methods have been integrated with data from INAA to extend the investigations toward more complex questions.
 In this symposium, several case studies will be presented, facilitating comparisons and contrasts between regions.
 [58] Symposium · EXHIBITING MESOAMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY IN THE EARLY 21ST CENTURY
 In the first decade and a half of the twenty-first century, Mesoamerican archaeology remains in the Museum spotlight—most
 conspicuously in a proliferation of highly-touted traveling exhibits, but also featured in permanent galleries. This popularity
 suggests that the museum-going public has not yet satisfied its great curiosity and interest in the history and culture of
 Mesoamerica. For archaeologists, this presents a uniquely valuable opportunity to communicate new discoveries and
 understandings directly with the public through a dynamic medium. Yet assembling high quality exhibits continues to be
 challenging for a host of reasons. In particular, many cash-strapped museums are unable to fund the development of large
 exhibits and are employing fewer and fewer curators. In fact, many of today’s “blockbuster” exhibits are put together by for-profit
 entities. This symposium assembles a group of researchers who will share their experiences curating recent traveling and
 permanent exhibits featuring Mesoamerican archaeology. Presenters will touch on a number of issues, including the business-
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               10
 side of mounting exhibitions, strategies in communicating research effectively, ethical considerations, the politics of
 representation, collaboration with native communities, how exhibits may create new knowledge and spur the development of new
 research trajectories, and the future of exhibiting Mesoamerica.
 [59] Symposium · NUTS AND BOLTS OF THE REAL “BUSINESS” OF ANCIENT MAYA EXCHANGE (PART 2)
 It is time for scholars to work together to model the basic framework of Maya economies across time and space. This session
 moves beyond simple descriptions of broadly characterized “exchange” between “centers” or “states” by tracking the specific
 activities and features that bound economies together at different levels of the social hierarchy. A more relativistic approach
 highlights local variation and sidesteps the pitfalls of artificial dichotomies, ideal types, or presence/absence queries regarding key
 economic institutions. Papers in this session draw on diverse interdisciplinary categories of evidence essential for reconstructing
 a more accurate model of a range of specific economic activities that were potentially articulated with one another into complex
 and dynamic systems. We focus on specific evidence for agents, facilities, transport mechanisms, webs of debt, constraints and
 freedoms, strategies for and challenges to stability, and commodities that were made and exchanged according to gradations of
 value. These factors, among others to be evaluated, were the nuts and bolts that held society and economy together through the
 longue durée of Maya society. Important variation on the local level revealed by symposium papers will provide the dimensions
 that are necessary in moving toward a new synthesis.
 [60] Symposium · HISTORICAL ECOLOGY, HETERARCHY AND MULTITEMPORAL DYNAMICS: PAPERS IN HONOR OF
 CAROLE CRUMLEY
 In an ongoing career, so far spanning more than four decades, Carole Crumley has consistently delivered original frameworks for
 understanding the dialectic of human-environmental relations and her work has embodied the holism of anthropology.
 Documenting long-term interactions between historical and environmental circumstance and the social, political, and economic
 elements of land use practice, her research in Burgundy fostered new ways of seeing landscapes, the imperative of
 interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary study, the significance of historic climate change, and the value of multitemporal and
 multiscalar approaches. In collaboration with her research partners, Crumley advanced the interdisciplinary theory and method of
 Historical Ecology. Her key concept of “heterarchy” is now applied to studies of societal and environmental resilience. Critiquing
 default presumptions of hierarchy allows scholars to better perceive social structural alternatives in the past that were
 successfully responsive to environmental constraints, and to imagine them for the future. Following her retirement from teaching
 at UNC-Chapel Hill, Crumley’s work continues as director of the 'Integrated History and Future of People on Earth' (IHOPE)
 initiative, a global network of researchers based at Sweden’s Uppsala University and uniting biophysical and social sciences.
 [61] Symposium · EXPLORING 12,000 YEARS OF OCCUPATION, LAND USE, AND CONFLICT: ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND
 HISTORICAL RESEARCH SPONSORED BY THE MASHANTUCKET AND EASTERN PEQUOT TRIBES
 The Mashantucket and Eastern Pequot Reservations in southeastern Connecticut have an extraordinarily rich culture history that
 together span over 12,000 years. Over the last 30 years, both tribes have generously supported a wide range of archaeological
 and historical research on Colonial and Native (Pequot) lifeways on and off the Reservations. This research has focused primarily
 on precontact occupations, documenting the richness and continuity of the Pequot presence on the reservations, the Pequot’s
 contact, conflict, and interactions with European colonists, and the Pequot’s continued survivance throughout the colonial era.
 These investigations have led to a better understanding of Native American experiences in southern New England and provided
 new opportunities for public education through scholarship, exhibits, and educational programs. This session highlights recent
 and ongoing research with papers focused on periods ranging from the Paleo-Indian to the Historic.
 [62] Symposium · THE ROLE OF HIGH ALTITUDE LANDSCAPES IN THE PEOPLING OF THE NEW WORLD
 Discussions of the “Peopling of the Americas” only rarely mention the high-altitude landscapes of the South American Andes,
 North American Rocky Mountains, or other mountainous regions of the western hemisphere. This needs to change, because
 recent research shows that First Americans used even exceptionally high altitudes as early as the terminal Pleistocene (i.e.,
 nearly as early as they penetrated every other region of the Americas). This symposium showcases some of the earliest sites of
 high-altitude North and South America, in the process revealing the wide-ranging economic and spiritual importance of high
 mountains for First Americans. The session also includes papers exploring bioarchaeological and genetic data that illuminate and
 explain early migration patterns and physical challenges that First Americans overcame to utilize the very high altitudes they so
 clearly valued from the earliest moments of their arrival in the New World.
 [63] Symposium · EXCAVATING THE MUSEUM: NEW RESEARCH ON OLD COLLECTIONS
 (SPONSORED BY FIBER PERISHABLES INTEREST GROUP)
 Most anthropology or natural history museums have hidden treasures in their collections, materials collected but not published or
 inadequately published. Many of these collections have never been completely analyzed or described or been used to address in-
 depth research questions. These overlooked artifacts, many of which date to the early years of our profession, warrant
 reexamination using current theoretical approaches and research methods. In this symposium, presenters working with older
 archaeological research collections of textiles, baskets, footwear, cordage, and other perishable artifacts, as well as more durable
 materials, discuss their new findings and interpretations of these long-forgotten resources.
 [64] Poster Session · FROM CROPS TO STONES IN SOUTHWESTERN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [65] Poster Session · SOUTHWESTERN ARCHAEOLOGY
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              11
 [66] Poster Session · SOUTHWESN ARCHAEOLOGY II
 [67] Poster Session · GENERAL SOUTHWEST II
 [68] Poster Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE VIRGIN BRANCH PUEBLOAN CULTURE
 Since 2006, archaeologists with the University of Nevada Las Vegas and the National Park Service have collaborated to explore
 the Virgin Branch prehistory of northwestern Arizona and southeastern Nevada. Posters in this session highlight recent findings
 from this ongoing project.
 [69] Symposium · FROM DIRT TO BEHAVIOR: PAPERS IN HONOR OF DAVID B. MADSEN
 The diverse contributions of David B. Madsen to archaeology and virtually all of its subfields are remarkable. In over 150
 publications he has greatly enhanced our understanding of prehistoric peoples and the environments in which they lived. Among
 others, he has investigated the peopling of North America, Quaternary paleoecology, Pleistocene extinctions, the evolution of
 desert environments in western North America and western China, forager and farmer adaptive strategies and migration, and
 prehistoric insect procurement and use. Incorporating ceramics, pollen, fauna, lithics, and/or dirt, his interdisciplinary and
 theoretically-driven approaches have shaped how we investigate and interpret prehistoric biotic communities, climate change,
 and archaeological records, especially the human behaviors that created them. This symposium presents a similarly diverse
 collection of papers in honor of the significant and ongoing contributions of David B. Madsen.
 [70] Symposium · BREAKING BOUNDARIES: EXPLORING COLONIALISM IN THE MODERN WORLD AND BEYOND
 Over the last three decades, the archaeology of colonialism has reached a period of maturity under the direction of a generation
 of established scholars. The resulting knowledge and discussions have impacted the theoretical, political, and methodological
 landscape of archaeological practices and have opened up new avenues for comparative work within the field. However, much of
 this work has remained focused on discrete contexts associated with the “modern” world or with a particular set of “settler
 colonialist” encounters. This session seeks to explore whether the impacts of “colonialism” as a lens for archaeological analysis
 holds utility beyond such contexts. Specifically, we invite speakers to explore the potential applicability of the framework within
 diverse geographical, temporal, and social contexts that fall outside the traditionally delineated boundaries of colonial relations.
 The goal is not to propose a unified and unproblematic method of analysis; rather, it is an attempt to recover an intra-disciplinary
 dialogue, among at times disparate sections of the archaeological endeavor, centered on a common conceptual framework. In so
 doing we hope to highlight both the potential and limitations of applying the lens of colonialism to the archaeological record, but
 more importantly, the common ground that creates archaeology with a “capital A.”
 [71] Symposium · ASSESSING OUTCOMES IN PUBLIC ARCHAEOLOGY: IMPERATIVES, PERILS, AND FRAMEWORKS
 (SPONSORED BY PUBLIC ARCHAEOLOGY INTEREST GROUP)
 Public archaeology is an important means of advocacy and ethical practice for many archaeologists. In planning and seeking
 funding for such work, scholars consider the specific sociopolitical circumstances of their research area, including how they can
 assess the outcomes of their projects. Because public outreach and community-engaged practice is so context-specific,
 evaluation of public archaeology has not been a major topic of discussion. How and when is it appropriate to “evaluate”? And how
 is evaluation entangled with theoretical and ethical concerns about the role of archaeologists in society?
 This session is dedicated to drawing together ideas and proposals surrounding evaluation in public archaeology. Topics in this
 session include: examples of outcome assessment within and between public projects, the ethical dimensions of assessment,
 theory and practice-driven discussions of how assessment functions within public archaeology projects and public outreach
 efforts, and proposed tools for assessing the broader impact of engaging non-archaeologists in archaeological work.
 [72] Symposium · HUMAN-ENVIRONMENTAL INTERACTIONS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN BASIN
 As a center of agricultural invention and a major route for the spread of early agriculture, the Mediterranean Basin has long been
 an area of research for those interested in the modification of the landscape by humans. Yet even before the arrival of agriculture,
 humans played an active role in transforming the Mediterranean Basin for millennia. Recent research challenges the notion of
 pristine, balanced, or stable social-ecological systems in the past by investigating: 1) recursive relationships between humans and
 ecosystems, 2) humans as actors in complex, non-equilibrium systems influenced by a variety of human and non-human drivers,
 and 3) long-term social and ecological change. Because the Mediterranean Basin represents a diverse range of cultures,
 adaptations, and interactions, it serves as a useful laboratory for a wide range of techniques and regionally centered research.
 This session showcases multiple perspectives used to tease apart the impacts and repercussions that occur within the dialectic
 relationship between humans and their surroundings. Our efforts will focus upon new computation methods, including agent-
 based simulation, geographical information systems (GIS), network analysis, climate modeling, and the integration of these
 techniques to address questions centered in the Mediterranean Basin.
 [73] Forum · MARS FORUM - ADAPTING TO THE FUTURE: THE CHANGING ROLE OF CULTURAL RESOURCE
 MANAGEMENT IN THE MILITARY
 (SPONSORED BY MILITARY ARCHAEOLOGY RESOURCES SUB GROUP)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                12
 The MARS sub group of the SAA was created in 2011 to support efforts to network and support archaeologists working in some
 aspect connected with the military. This ranged from professionals working for the U.S. Military at installations and training
 centers to professionals studying military archaeology and to those archaeologists working in disciplines or regions impacted by
 either combat or humanitarian operations. The goal of this 3rd official MARS forum is to discuss how cultural resource
 professionals are developing preservation strategies to integrate into a variety of military operational environments. A focus of the
 discussion is to address how military CRM personnel can share effective tools for management and expand their capability to
 educate and prepare soldiers for cultural heritage scenarios encountered outside their training environment.
 [74] Symposium · "LET'S TALK ABOUT [COLLAPSE], BABY": EXPLORATIONS IN THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF SOCIETAL
 COLLAPSE
 Societal collapse has long been a topic of archaeological discourse, and as a concept it continues to have contemporary
 relevance. We see it evidenced in discussions of climate change, in contemporary ‘failed state’ rhetoric, and in our fears about the
 future. But what does it mean to say a society has collapsed, and what are its material effects? What happens in the aftermath of
 collapse, and how is societal collapse similar across time and space?
 This session explores the archaeology of collapse and its aftermath by bringing together a range of geographical, theoretical, and
 methodological approaches in order to facilitate a new discussion about collapse. Examples include studying how collapse
 operates at both local and regional levels; using small sites to talk about more overarching patterns; combining multiple datasets,
 methods, and/or theoretical approaches; and scaling up from specific data in order to develop theoretical models of collapse. Our
 goal is to consider collapse both in terms of specific historical trajectories—what does collapse look like at specific points in time
 and space?—and as a concept—how might we think about collapse in more general terms?
 [75] Symposium · BIG ROLES FOR SMALLHOLDERS IN COMPLEX SOCIETIES
 Archaeology provides the unique opportunity to investigate historically silenced groups, such as the non-elite members of
 complex societies. With increasing emphasis on household assemblages in the past several decades, the artifactual remains of
 smallholders (or “peasants”) make up a growing portion of archaeological data from early complex societies. It remains unclear,
 however, what types of roles smallholders played. Building on a spate of archaeological research into smallholders in the 1970s
 and 80s that provides the empirical background on how smallholders practice agriculture, the goal of this session is to tie their
 range of social practices, including participation in market economies, self-sufficiency, and household division of labor, to long-
 standing research questions related to the formation of complex societies. How did the role of smallholders vary between
 emergent complex societies in terms of the creation and maintenance of inequality? Did they facilitate, resist, and respond to
 large-scale social change in a uniform manner that we can use to generate a general theory of smallholders? This session
 addresses these questions from Old and New World perspectives. In seeking a broader theoretical framework for understanding
 smallholders, this session aims to generate unifying ideas of interest to anthropologists of both the ancient and modern world.
 [76] General Session · CHILEAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [77] General Session · MAYA RITUAL
 [78] General Session · HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY IN THE SOUTHWEST
 [79] General Session · CROSSROADS: CONNECTIONS AND ARCHAEOLOGY OF ANATOLIA
 [80] General Session · EUROPEAN ZOOARCHAEOLOGY
 [81] General Session · ARCHAEOMETRY AND ARTIFACT ANALYSIS IN EUROPEAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [82] General Session · WESTERN US HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY
 [83] General Session · SHIPWRECKS AND MARITIME ARCHAEOLOGY
 [84] General Session · METHODS IN ZOOARCHAEOLOGY
 [85] General Session · MOBILITY, TECHNOLOGY, AND ENVIRONMENT IN PREHISTORIC NORTHEASTERN NORTH
 AMERICA
 [86] General Session · MORTUARY STUDIES IN THE MESOAMERICAN WORLD
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            13
 [87] General Session · CAUCASUS ARCHAEOLOGY
 [88] General Session · ANCIENT MAYA POLITICAL ORGANIZATION
 [89] Forum · ACROSS THE ATLANTIC: PROFESSIONALISM IN ARCHAEOLOGY OVER HERE AND OVER THERE
 This session aims to compare regulatory procedures and the role of professional standards and professional accreditation in the
 U.S.A. and the U.K. Both have a strong tradition of self-regulation across professional disciplines, and both have now well-
 established professional organizations in the form of the Register of Professional Archaeologists and the Chartered Institute for
 Archaeologists.
 What are the regulatory structures and procurement practices governing the way the historic environment/cultural heritage is
 investigated archaeologically, when occasioned by development on a commercial or quasi-commercial basis? What is the role of
 professional standards and professional accreditation/registers, and of the professional bodies that own them? And what would
 we like that role to be? How can we get there?
 By looking at the range of structures and systems across the States and the U.K. administrations of the U.K., can we identify
 what’s good, what’s bad, and what we’re planning to do to improve the situation? More importantly, how can we learn from each
 other? It is hoped that this discussion might help RPA and CIfA—both of which seek to recruit members from around the globe,
 explore how they could cooperate, and ensure that they don’t compete unhealthily.
 [90] Poster Session · NORTH AMERICA - NORTHEAST
 [91] Poster Session · CERAMICS OF THE INDIGENOUS CULTURES IN SOUTH AMERICA: STUDIES OF PRODUCTION
 AND EXCHANGE USING INAA
 Indigenous peoples of South America produced a diverse assortment of ceramics ranging from the common to the artistic with
 many types characterized by symbolic, religious imagery. In some areas, pottery was mass produced for the general population
 as well as the elite. Reliance on compositional data from instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) to study production and
 exchange practices of indigenous ceramics from the continent of South America has grown over the past two decades. In some
 instances, the data from other analytical methods have been integrated with data from INAA to extend the investigations toward
 more complex questions. In this poster symposium, several case studies will be presented facilitating comparisons and contrasts
 between regions.
 [92] Poster Session · TEXTILE TECHNOLOGIES OF PREHISPANIC MESOAMERICA AND THE ANDES
 The social, political, and economic role of cloth in Mesoamerica and the Andes has been well documented in ethnographic and
 ethnohistoric literature. While archaeologists working in these regions are aware of the significance cloth had within the
 communities they study, textile production receives relatively little attention compared to other technologies documented in the
 archaeological record. Researchers from the Andes are fortunate to have a large sample of prehispanic textiles to work from,
 whereas textiles in much of Mesoamerica leave little material trace, except for the artifacts used for creating them. Spindle whorls
 are especially well documented, but other weaving implements are occasionally found in elite funerary contexts.
 This session examines these technologies, with an emphasis on the textiles themselves from the Andean region and on spindle
 whorls and other weaving implements recovered from Mesoamerican contexts. When Andean textiles are studied, they are often
 examined through an art historical lens, with researchers focusing on patterns in overall structure and design. Our focus lies
 instead in documenting the technical attributes of textiles and the materials used to create them in order to develop a better
 understanding of the communities that produced them.
 [93] Poster Session · RECENT ADVANCES IN THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE THREE RIVERS REGION OF THE CENTRAL
 MAYA LOWLANDS
 The Three Rivers Region of the Central Maya Lowlands includes the northeastern portion of the Department of Peten,
 Guatemala, and the adjoining northwestern portion of Belize. It is defined as the area within the Rio Azul, Rio Bravo, and Booth’s
 River which converge to form the Rio Hondo. The area includes such well known sites as Rio Azul, Kinal, La Milpa, and Blue
 Creek. The region has been intensively investigated by a number of researchers since being defined more than two decades ago.
 This poster session attempts to bring together a cross-section of the most recent work.
 [94] Poster Session · ARCHAEOLOGICAL ANALYSIS USING BINFORD’S ENVIRONMENTAL AND ETHNOGRAPHIC
 FRAMES OF REFERENCE
 Binford (2001) constructed environmental and ethnographic data sets specifically for archaeologists to use as tools to leverage
 learning about the past. While researchers from several other fields ranging from cross-cultural analysis and epidemiology to
 macroecology have taken advantage of these data, relatively few archaeologists have pursued the kinds of learning strategies
 Binford imagined. The posters in this session showcase some of the archaeological work that is being done using Binford’s
 frames of reference and related analytical strategies. Examples span a wide range of geographic and temporal scales, explore
 ecological components of observed adaptations, and test expectations for what hunter-gatherers might be like against
 archaeological observation.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              14
 [95] Symposium · ‘CALIBRATING’ PALAEOCLIMATOLOGY-INFORMED RESEARCH IN OLD WORLD ARCHAEOLOGY:
 DATA, METHODS AND THEORIES
 After two decades of increasing and often deterministic palaeoclimatology-informed archaeological research, there is a need to
 scrutinize, calibrate, and improve our approaches to climate change in the past and present. Simple cause-and-effect
 correlations, often on the basis of coarsely resolved time series, are gradually being supplemented by multi-scalar models of non-
 linear dynamics, including concepts such as adaptive cycles or critical transitions. Furthermore, mathematical modeling of culture-
 environment/climate interaction is increasingly applied to single out parameters or to search for alternative explanations. Palaeo-
 climatic time series have become more precise, as have archaeological chronologies, and with the increase in temporal resolution
 previous interpretations of climate-culture interconnections on a continental or global scale are beginning to be challenged and to
 be replaced by more fine grained locally and regionally scaled research projects. This session will present case studies of such
 multi-scalar palaeoclimatology-informed archaeology from the Old World, and will discuss the data, methods, and theories as well
 as outline future directions for palaeo-climatic research in archaeology.
 [96] Symposium · RECONSTRUCTING RESOURCE AVAILABILITY, USE, AND MANAGEMENT AT NAACHTUN
 (GUATEMALA), A REGIONAL MAYA CENTER OF THE CLASSIC PERIOD
 One of the objectives of the Naachtun Archaeological Project is to conduct a multidisciplinary study of the resources used by the
 site’s ancient Maya inhabitants, as well as the evolution of its economy through time, in order to better understand the social and
 political history of this city. We propose to discuss two issues related to the availability and management of various resources,
 focusing on the supply strategies and the technical system associated to their use. How did the Maya of Naachtun manage the
 soils, water, and forests and positively construct their surrounding landscape to sustain a large population during roughly a
 millennium of prosperity? Do the variations observed in the availability and management of these resources reflect phases of
 environmental and/or economic stress? To what extent did human activities and climate changes impact the local environment
 and what were the consequent adaptive strategies? Combining paleoenvironmental and material culture studies, these questions
 are broached via a diachronic approach to evidence the temporal variability of human responses to environmental variations. This
 perspective would highlight the importance of resources management strategies in the socio-cultural cycles and population
 dynamics we observe within the history of Lowland Maya cities.
 [97] Symposium · THE RISE, SPREAD, AND DOMINION OF HUMAN INSTITUTIONS
 Populations organize into complex systems to resolve the myriad of problems they come across in their daily life. These include
 resolving basic subsistence concerns, maintaining a stable decision-making apparatus, defending against foreign aggressors,
 resolving existential issues associated with their place in the cosmos, etc. New Institutional Economics (North 1991, 2009)
 proposes that these organizational principles result in a number of social institutions that once formed have the structural
 autonomy to preserve themselves, perpetuate their agendas, and in some cases, expand aggressively. Under this approach,
 social scientists increasingly study present-day institutions to clarify the mechanisms by which they develop and evolve. To this
 aim, archaeology provides us with an unparalleled appreciation for institutional change because it allows us to reconstruct how
 and why specific institutions developed in different populations with various social conditions and through very long sequences of
 time. This symposium will take advantage of the comparative potential intrinsic to the study of prehistoric societies to clarify why
 specific institutions appeared at particular moments in the developmental history of some populations, what functional purpose
 they served, how they created ethos that cemented their place within the broader social zeitgeist, and why some expanded
 aggressively within and across populations.
 [98] General Session · SOUTHEASTERN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [99] Symposium · ANDEAN ONTOLOGIES: NEW PERSPECTIVES FROM ARCHAEOLOGY, ETHNOHISTORY AND
 BIOARCHAEOLOGY
 The goal of this symposium is to reflect and discuss the ways in which the Andean worldview contributes to the humanities and
 social sciences. The main objective is to analyze deeply imbedded Andean concepts such as pacha, runa, camaq, huaca, minka,
 ayni, ayllu, hannan, hurin, etc., through archaeological, ethnohistorical, and bioarchaeological lenses. By doing this, we intend to
 identify aspects of the indigenous view point, most likely hybrid perceptions, and thus offer emic interpretations of the Andean
 world. By no means do we hope to reproduce immutable and common definitions of these concepts but rather offer
 interpretations that complement pre-existing Western perceptions.
 [100] Symposium · THE ENVIRONMENTAL LEGACIES OF COLONIALISM IN THE NEOTROPICS
 (SPONSORED BY GEOARCHAEOLOGY INTEREST GROUP)
 The arrival and settlement of Europeans throughout the Americas led to unprecedented demographic and environmental
 transformations. The voluntary and forced migration of peoples from Europe, Africa, and Asia, and the simultaneous introduction
 of new forms of production, along with exotic biota and diseases, contributed to the emergence of novel social, economic, and
 ecological systems. Through analysis of soils, plants, animals, and other proxies, archaeologists are uniquely situated to
 investigate the localized manifestations of these processes. Yet, while environmental research on prehistoric sites in the
 Americas has burgeoned in recent years, the direct archaeological examination of the ecological effects of European colonial
 expansion is still a developing field. This session responds by considering environmental archaeological research on the period
 after Europeans began to settle throughout the Western Hemisphere, with an emphasis on understanding how this historical
 process has differently structured current socio-ecological landscapes in the Neotropics—a biogeographical region sharing many
 plant and animal groups. We also seek to identify the implications of these changes for contemporary communities and
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                15
 ecosystems, as the legacies of colonialism continue to shape modern social and environmental challenges.
 [101] Symposium · CONNECTIONS AND COMPLEXITY: SHIFTING PERSPECTIVES AND CURRENT RESEARCH IN
 WESTERN MESOAMERICA
 Fifty years ago, Ignacio Bernal famously stated that western Mesoamerica lacked “civilization.” Since the west had not received
 “Olmec” influence, Bernal reasoned, the region was a uniquely isolated area in which complex societies and “high culture” failed
 to develop and flourish. Since then, much archaeological research in west Mexico has attempted to demonstrate the fallacy of this
 reasoning. Ironically, however, many treatments have been based on the same outmoded neo-evolutionary frameworks and
 static typologies that underpin Bernal’s vision, thereby reinforcing the original perception and losing sight of the richness of the
 archaeological data itself. In contrast, this symposium highlights current archaeological research in western Mesoamerica to
 provoke and engage debate surrounding these and other issues. Through the presentation of original data and interpretations,
 contributions seek to advance understanding of both regional complexity and diversity, as well as the role of the west in broader,
 pan-Mesoamerican sociocultural processes. The symposium thus illustrates the ways in which research and areal data from
 western Mesoamerica can meaningfully contribute to the construction of theoretical models applicable in multiple contexts and
 capable of enhancing archaeological descriptions and explanations of the dynamic diversity characteristic of all Mesoamerican
 societies.
 [102] Symposium · CONTINUITY AND CHANGE IN THE PERUVIAN NORTH HIGHLANDS: CURRENT RESEARCH IN THE
 CAJAMARCA REGION
 The pioneering work of Henri and Paule Reichlen in 1947 highlighted the importance of the Cajamarca region in the Andean
 cultural landscape, from the Archaic and Formative periods to the Inca occupation. Since then, archaeologists and
 ethnohistorians have added considerably to our understanding of cultural development in Cajamarca and regional interactions
 between Cajamarca and neighboring areas. This symposium focuses on recent investigations and ongoing projects in an effort to
 bring together and flesh out the current state of the archaeology of the Cajamarca region, including both the Cajamarca Tradition
 and its antecedents. It also seeks to look at Cajamarca archaeology both within the northern highlands and in regions with which
 Cajamarca was in contact. Recent investigations and themes may include, but are not limited to, the development of new models
 of social organization and development in the northern highlands, issues of ethnicity and social identity, local and interregional
 interaction, cuisine and class, mortuary patterns, artistic expression and identity, and production and consumption within and
 between Cajamarca communities.
 [103] General Session · EUROPEAN BIOARCHARCHAEOLOGY
 [104] Symposium · WHAT WAS "FREMONT"? ADVANCES IN THE EXPLANATION AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL
 UNDERSTANDING OF THE FREMONT REGIONAL SYSTEM
 In the far northern southwest, many advances within Fremont archaeology have recently occurred. Focusing on Fremont as
 interconnected groups of people who were influenced by agriculture and may have shared ideas concerning how artifacts,
 structures, and their social world should be, this symposium presents a series of papers in which authors tackle both large scale
 and site specific problems to discuss what being “Fremont” meant and how this identity influenced the behavior of those who
 participated in the Fremont Regional System. These papers address questions concerning pan-Fremont traits and the origins of
 Fremont social life along with questions of community organization and activities, how both farming and foraging fit into Fremont
 life, the positioning of high status individuals within the Fremont social world, and how Fremont people situated themselves in
 relation to the larger southwestern interaction sphere.
 [105] Symposium · POWERFUL PLACES IN THE ANCIENT ANDES
 In the contemporary Andes, the world is animated by a circulating life force, sometimes called sami, which connects all living
 things. This force courses through rocks, springs, plants, animals, ancestors—such that the boundary between “living”/“dead,”
 “natural”/“cultural,” and “past”/“present” are, at best, fuzzy and malleable. The distribution of sami, however, is not equal. The life
 force can pool in certain places and drain out of others. The idea of an animate, interconnected world was documented for the
 Inca, and archaeological research suggests that this belief has deep roots in the Andes. Power among the ancient societies of
 the region was thus conceived in part through varied ritual strategies of mimesis, alterity, and communion that created,
 channeled, and redistributed vital forces, a process that effectively merged, or at times separated, social, ontological, and cosmic
 realms. The desire, in many cases, was to create a place charged with power. This session brings together a group of well-
 established and up-and-coming scholars to investigate how power-filled places were constructed, maintained, and occasionally
 destroyed in the Ancient Andes from 3000 B.C. to the end of the early Spanish colonial era in the eighteenth century A.D.
 [106] Symposium · GUAVA CAT ARCHAEOLOGY: PAPERS IN MEMORY OF PROF. POCHAN CHEN
 This symposium brings together students, classmates, collaborators, and teachers of Prof. Pochan Chen, of National Taiwan
 University, who died unexpectedly at the age of 41 in June of 2015. Prof. Chen worked extensively on issues related to culture
 contact and trade, primarily in China. His work spanned research on salt production and exchange, the construction of social
 identity in burial contexts, and regional processes related to economic activity and the formation of identity, including World
 Systems Theory, Trade Diasporas, Ethnogenesis, and Gender. In addition, he stimulated an entire generation of scholars in
 Taiwan interested in historical archaeology in contexts beyond mainland China, including Taiwan, the Philippines, and elsewhere.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  16
 [107] Symposium · ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE NIGHT
 As twilight settled in the ancient world, a host of activities ensued, some of which were significantly different from what people did
 during the daytime. Some artifacts, features, and buildings associated with these activities were particular to the dark, while other
 material culture was transformed in meaning as the sun set. Night offers refuge from the heat and demands of the day but can
 also bring with it nightmares, night raids, and other dark doings. Sleep, sex, socializing, stargazing, storytelling, ceremony, work,
 play—so much of our economic, social, and ritual lives take place at night—yet relatively little archaeological research focuses
 specifically on nightly quotidian practices. This symposium examines the archaeology, mythology, iconography, and epigraphy of
 nocturnal doings, and in the process will challenge our familiar reconstructions of ancient life. Topics include the liminal periods of
 dusk and dawn, the cultural diversity of sleep patterns, the practical and psychological effects of artificial light, and the origins of
 the ‘nightshift.’ Contributors explore the concept of the nighttime within a comparative anthropological framework in order to
 provide the broadest possible interpretation of individual case studies drawn from a wide range of ancient and prehistoric cultures
 from diverse areas of the globe.
 [108] Electronic Symposium · DYNAMIC WORLDS, SHIFTING PARADIGMS: RELATIONAL ONTOLOGIES IN
 ARCHAEOLOGY
 Relational ontology, as a theoretical movement, is characterized by differing perspectives, applications, and interpretations of
 archaeological materials, places, and persons as they constitute multiple social worlds. A current reading of theoretical
 archaeological literature reveals diverse relational perspectives applied to varying contexts and materials. This moving definition
 may seem difficult to nail down, and we ask: are differing definitions of relationality problematic, or is the concept—like social
 relationships themselves—contextually and culturally contingent? In this session, we interrogate and discuss the multiple natures
 of relational ontologies as ever-changing, fluid, and diverse ways of understanding how people, past and present, relate to the
 world with which they engage. The bulk of the session will focus on discourse rather than presentation. This session examines
 shifting understandings of relational theory through case studies from North and South America. We will explore cultural
 relativism, physical and conceptual boundaries of social relationships, humanity and personhood for other-than-human persons,
 and finally Indigenous thought and theory. As archaeologists who predominately study non-western and pre-industrial peoples,
 we ask participants to reconsider our role in creating historical narratives, because what is archaeology if not a rigorous means to
 re-tell the past.
 [109] Forum · EXPLORING THE UNNAMED ERA: PRE-MAMOM POTTERY IN THE MAYA LOWLANDS OF YUCATAN,
 PETEN AND BELIZE
 Pottery production and the dissemination of pots and potters’ ideas have been the basis for chronological comparison in the
 lowland Maya region since Edith Ricketson first seriated the Uaxactun pottery in the 1930s. R.E. Smith named the phases and
 published the Uaxactun ceramics monograph in 1955, providing a baseline for general ceramic sphere correlation. Today, we are
 so dependent on the Uaxactun ceramic sphere names that we still refer to early Middle Preclassic pottery as “Pre-Mamom”
 because these materials antedate the earliest ceramics described from Uaxactun, termed Mamom Phase. Although our process
 has relied on precedent thus far, the Uaxactun preclassic sequence does little to help us describe the diverse ceramic landscape
 of the first pottery producers in Yucatan, Peten, and Belize.
  This forum is designed to provide visual comparison of these small dispersed early Middle preclassic data sets, annotated by
 panel discussion on the characteristics of materials so far excavated. Participants will provide a range of images and possibly
 type collections for the group to discuss and compare. Besides considering each region topically, panel members will discuss the
 larger question of how accurately the Pre-Mamom to Mamom transition can be depicted using the current paradigm.
 [110] Poster Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF CALIFORNIA
 [111] Poster Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE MIDWEST II
 [112] Poster Session · NORTH AMERICA - MIDWEST
 [113] Poster Session · GREAT BASIN, BASIN PLATEAU
 [114] Poster Session · NORTH AMERICA - GREAT BASIN
 [115] Poster Session · NORTH AMERICA - PLAINS
 [116] Symposium · BURIED, BURNED, BUNDLED AND BROKEN: APPROACHES TO CO-OCCURRENCE OF MULTIPLE
 METHODS, TREATMENTS AND STYLES OF BURIALS WITHIN PAST SOCIETIES
 Bioarchaeology and mortuary archaeology have historically relied on complete inhumations as the source of data based on
 human remains. However, not all cemeteries have only inhumed burials—cremation, secondary burial, and other methods can
 co-occur at these sites. Despite this, the cremated or commingled remains have often deteriorated in museums, been relegated
 to appendices, or ignored due to their interpretive difficulty. Over the past two decades, the value of cremated, commingled, and
 fragmentary remains has been recognized, and recent publications have shown that cremated, disarticulated, and commingled
 remains can provide important information on past people and their behavior that isn’t always apparent with complete
 inhumations. These conversations often address a specific type of body treatment, and there is little discussion occurring
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                17
 between them. Increased conversation is needed about the presence of multiple burial treatments within single sites, and how
 different forms of body treatment compare. While each treatment is unique and requires specific contextual analysis, when
 multiple forms of body treatment co-occur at the same site, complete discussion is required. This session brings together
 archaeologists studying co-occurrence of multiple forms of burial in order to generate discussion, and promote the study of
 alternative types of treatments alongside complete inhumations.
 [117] Symposium · HUMAN SACRIFICE IN ANCIENT MESOAMERICA: NEW EVIDENCES AND THEORETICAL
 PERSPECTIVES
 The topic of sacrifice and human sacrifice in ancient Mesoamerica needs to be revisited in light of new evidence, theoretical
 models, and interdisciplinary and comparative approaches. The central question that scholars attempt to grapple with when it
 comes to bloodletting rituals, sacrifice of animals, or humans, is why? Why do humans collectively hurt themselves and/or kill
 innocent animals and other human beings? Past theoretical approaches have immortalized and universalized cosmological
 principles and applied these uniformly to multifarious cultures in diverse time periods and in different regions of Mesoamerica.
 These outdated models have neglected unique interpretations, independent articulation, and sometimes wholesale reworking of
 inherited or imported sacrificial ideologies. These same models do not track permutations in ritual practices and concomitant
 artistic representations of these practices. This symposium addresses ritual sacrifices from new perspectives that include
 economic, political, and military motivations as well as agricultural, calendrical, and astronomical influences. A consideration of
 sacrificial ritual practices at all levels of social stratum (shamanism on elite and commoner levels) offers a more holistic
 perspective. This symposium will be interdisciplinary and will include site-specific, as well as comparative, approaches and will be
 based on new iconographic, epigraphic, and archaeological evidences.
 [118] General Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE NORTHERN PERUVIAN COAST
 [119] Symposium · ARCHITECTURAL ENERGETICS
 Since Elliot Abrams' seminal 1994 book "How the Maya Built their World: Energetics and Ancient Architecture," many
 archaeological scholars have explored architectural energetics as a methodology and lens through which to understand cultural
 change, political economy, construction processes, and architectural features. The scholars presenting in this session apply
 architectural energetics in diverse regions and support many contextual arguments that highlight both the diversity of the ancient
 past and commonalities of construction. In light of these distinct contextual applications, we explore energetics investigations 20
 years on from Abrams' important synthesis. Further, we explore what insights these diverse studies offer for our understanding of
 how and why people engaged in constructing large architectural features through time and space.
 [120] Symposium · STUDENT CONTRIBUTIONS IN GEOARCHAEOLOGY
 (SPONSORED BY GEOARCHAEOLOGY INTEREST GROUP)
 One predictor of a discipline’s directions is student research. This organized session showcases papers led by current graduate
 and undergraduate students pursuing geoarchaeological research. Other than these two common threads, contributions span
 time and space, are single- and co-authored, and utilize a variety of methods to understand aspects of the landscape context of
 the archaeological record. The session’s goal is to offer student authors a forum to disseminate their recent work to a broad
 audience of peers and professionals.
 [121] General Session · ADVANCES IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL METHODS
 [122] Symposium · FOOD AND CULTURE IN THE ANDES
 Food is one of the most integral aspects of human existence. It is, on the one hand, a biological imperative fueled by nutritional
 need—we must, after all, eat to live. The food that we eat, however, is made up of much more than calories. It can have a "two-
 fold value": nutrition and signification (Barthes 1979: 25). While there has been a heavy emphasis on subsistence in archaeology,
 the social aspects of food have been largely ignored. The Andes, in particular, is an ideal area to investigate the social
 dimensions of food with a strong tradition of foundational research in agricultural production, environment, and objects associated
 with the consumption of food. The growing use of various methodological approaches (e.g., archaeobotanical, zooarchaeological,
 and bioarchaeological) has resulted in a more holistic and intimate picture of the constant articulation and negotiation of social
 relations through food.
 [123] General Session · PLAINS AND BASIN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [124] General Session · COOL ARCHAEOLOGY: ALASKA, BRITISH COLUMBIA AND THE NORTHWEST COAST
 [125] Symposium · ANTHROPIC ACTIVITY MARKERS: ARCHAEOLOGY AND ETHNOARCHAEOLOGY
 People tend to recurrently use specific areas of their living space, producing an accumulation of evidences (chemical and/or
 physical) that represent the result of the activity performed. The possibility to identify and connect these evidences to the activity
 that generated the record is pivotal to our understanding of past human behaviour. Ethnoarchaeology and experimental
 archaeology drive the inferential reasoning that creates the models connecting the distribution/concentration of proxies with
 specific activities. We define these models as ‘anthropic activity markers’ and propose a transdisciplinary approach to reduce
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               18
 problems of equifinality whereby the same pattern might be caused by several activities. In particular, the analysis of the spatial
 distribution of the fingerprints under study is considered fundamental for the definition of anthropic activity markers.
 This session aims to gather contributions from scholars in different fields, willing to challenge this issue from different points of
 view and at different scales (landscape and domestic or productive structures), going from a macro to a micro scale, from
 “space,” to “place.” We invite contributions that include different approaches, such as remote sensing, archaeological prospection,
 botanic analyses, chemical analyses, archaeozoology, microdebitage, and micromorphology. Archaeological and
 ethnoarchaeological contexts will be welcome to show the potentiality of the approach.
 [126] Symposium · BUILT ENVIRONMENTS OF ENSLAVED EXPERIENCE IN THE CARIBBEAN
 This symposium examines the varied living environments of the enslaved in the colonial Caribbean. Archaeological investigations
 of domestic architecture and artifacts illuminate the nature of household organization, fundamental changes in settlement
 patterns, and the manner in which power was invariably linked with the material arrangements of space among the enslaved at a
 variety of sites throughout the region, including plantations, fortifications, and urban contexts. While research in the region has
 provided a considerable amount of data at the household-level, much of this work is biased towards artifact analysis, resulting in
 unfamiliarity with the considerations that went into constructing and inhabiting households. Papers within this symposium will
 provide detailed reconstruction of the living environments of the enslaved and will take into account the cultural behaviors and
 social arrangements that shaped these spaces. It brings together case studies of Caribbean slave settlements as a means of
 exposing the diversity of people and practices in these settings.
 [127] Symposium · THE BOLONCHÉN REGIONAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL PROJECT: SIXTEEN YEARS OF INVESTIGATING
 MAYA SOCIETY IN THE EASTERN PUUC REGION FROM THE PRECLASSIC THROUGH THE HISTORICAL PERIOD
 The Puuc Region of the Northern Yucatán Peninsula has long been identified as a distinctive cultural sub-region of the greater
 Ancient Maya area along architectural, environmental, and demographic lines. Since 2000, the Bolonchén Regional
 Archaeological Project (BRAP) has investigated the formation of regionalism and the Ancient Maya community in the eastern
 Puuc centering on the sites of Kiuic, Huntichmul, Labná, and Yaxhom. Taking a holistic approach that includes extensive inter-site
 survey work, systematic excavations, archaeometric analyses, and experimental archaeology, BRAP is continuing to shed light
 on the unique local trajectory of the Bolonchén District. Sub-foci of the project include such wide-ranging topics as: the evolution
 of public architecture and spaces; the settlement and exploitation of the hinterlands between the larger site centers; the
 development and organization of an elite suburban complex; the identification of some of the earliest permanent settlements in
 the region; Ancient Maya foodways; site abandonment processes; and, the continued occupation of the region in recent centuries,
 among others. As a result of these ongoing studies, BRAP is contributing to a more detailed understanding of the development
 and functioning of Maya society in the region from the Middle preclassic, all the way up through the Historical Period.
 [128] Symposium · WHY SOCIAL ARCHAEOLOGY MATTERS
 We currently find ourselves on the cusp of significant change, as tensions related to race, ethnicity, religion, and gender are
 currently at the forefront of today's social struggles. Archaeology, specifically social archaeology, has the opportunity to inform
 and enrich current social movements. The goal of this session is to emphasize the contributions of archaeologists to
 understanding the social processes of the present. AAA president Leith Mullings (2015) recently outlined her vision of “why
 anthropology matters” by emphasizing anthropology’s relationship to recent social movements—we argue that archaeology has
 an important role to play in this conversation. Human agency is widely regarded as an important generative force of cultural
 change and archaeological research on gender, identity, class, power, religion, and ethnicity has exploded in the past two
 decades. In an effort to make archaeology relevant to the broader public, archaeologists have successfully emphasized the
 ecological implications for the study of archaeology, however, we have largely ignored the profound insights that archaeology can
 provide into understanding the role of human agency and social forces in generating wide-scale change. As a consequence, we
 may be missing opportunities to make archaeology relevant to events that are currently playing out in the modern world.
 [129] Symposium · THE RISE AND DECLINE OF TEOTIHUACAN: URBANISM, DAILY LIFE, AND REGIONAL RELATIONS
 THROUGH TIME
 This session assembles current research on urbanism and daily life in the city of Teotihuacan and neighboring communities in the
 Basin of Mexico during the Classic and Epiclassic periods (ca. 1–800 C.E.). The evolution of Teotihuacan society through time is
 emphasized, including transformations in the urban landscape, the lives of commoners, and the relations of the capital city to
 surrounding settlements and resources. Papers include the results of new research on the Tlajinga district, a lower status group
 of neighborhoods in the south of the city, which illustrates the attractions and detractions of urban life for commoners and the
 processes by which the city grew southward. The creation of the first LiDAR map of the city; results of an initial season at the
 Plaza of the Columns; and new investigations at the Moon Plaza, are also presented. Outside of the city, papers examine
 exploitation of the Sierra de Las Navajas obsidian mine and the growth of Epiclassic communities such as Chicoloapan, in the
 southern Basin, amidst the demographic decline of the city, and the erosion of its central political institutions.
 [130] Symposium · "CHANGES IN LATITUDES, CHANGES IN ATTITUDES": TRANSITIONS AND THRESHOLDS
 THROUGHOUT CENTRAL AMERICA AND BEYOND
 The archaeological record presents both opportunities and challenges to archaeologists studying societal and environmental
 change in Mesoamerica and globally. This session explores multidisciplinary techniques to better understand the complexities of
 societal transitions in the ancient Maya world and beyond. Environmental and societal transitions are a complex but vital aspect of
 archaeology. Shifts in environmental patterns, social behaviors, and changes in land use provide multiple datasets for analyzing
 resource extraction and human resilience. We consider case studies on diachronic change from archaeological investigations
 throughout Mesoamerica and neighboring regions. Patterns of change can include the shift from hunting and gathering to long
 term sedentism, the regional climate and soils, historical changes in trade, and shifts in political and economic power. This
 session will examine how we can search for and detect connections between environmental and societal changes throughout the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              19
 archaeological record.
 [131] Symposium · ROCK ART: METHODOLOGY AND INTERPRETATION IN THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE SITE
 (SPONSORED BY ROCK ART INTEREST GROUP)
 The cultural manifestation we label rock art has the potential of being identified and recorded from wherever humanity has
 traveled. In the pursuit of innovative instrumental technique, enhanced interpretive insight, and successful approaches to
 preservation, this Rock Art Interest Group sponsored symposium is intended to provide a context within which recent
 archaeologically informed rock art research can be shared.
 [132] Symposium · TERRAFORMING AND MONUMENTALITY IN HUNTER-GATHERER-FISHER LANDSCAPES
 Monumental constructions, whether economic, political, or symbolic in their origin and use, are integral to how hunter-gatherer-
 fisher (HGF) peoples have constructed and shaped their worlds over much of the Holocene. For this symposium, we bring
 together studies from various areas of the globe to theorize about these practices, and to account for the complex and varied
 ways in which large-scale features were constructed and terraforming was practiced in HGF societies. While monumentality has
 been well-studied in early agricultural and later contexts, the record of HGF monuments is clearly extensive, and attests to a more
 complex engagement with material production, the construction of place, of identity, and of history than is recognized in the
 broader discipline. We seek to provide a set of theoretical and methodological tools to address this record.
 [133] Symposium · RECENT CONSIDERATIONS OF COASTAL SUBSISTENCE PRACTICES IN THE SOUTHEASTERN USA
 The American southeast boasts thousands of miles of crenulated shoreline that has been home to coastal dwellers for millennia.
 As such, the rich traditions of maritime adaptations and lifeways have been the focus of archaeological research in the southeast
 for decades. Specifically, subsistence research in the region has revealed the antiquity and diversity of southeastern coastal
 subsistence strategies and contributed to global understandings of resource seasonality, habitat use, and human mobility and
 settlement. This symposium builds on these foundations by focusing on the recursive relationships inherent to human-
 environment practices, including resource procurement, subsistence strategies, and sociocultural interactions.
 The diversification of method and theory in the past few decades has inspired researchers to engage a broad range of topics of
 anthropological interest. Issues of labor, technology, knowledge, tradition, place, identity, gender, religion, and ritual are being
 addressed with subsistence data. The papers in this symposium focus on these research themes in a turn from strictly ecological
 interpretations of subsistence data. This session aims to highlight the diversity and complexity of southeastern subsistence
 practices in order to encourage discussion both across and outside the region.
 [134] Symposium · APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPE RESEARCH IN ZOOARCHAEOLOGY
 Recent advances in stable isotopic analysis have enabled zooarchaeologists to explore previously unanswerable questions
 regarding past human and animal relationships. Stable isotope investigations using ancient bone and shell remains have the
 potential to assess a number of diverse social and biological topics, including diet and foodway practices, status and differential
 provisioning, exchange patterns, animal rearing and hunting techniques, biological consequences of domestication, and short and
 long term environmental changes. This session examines several applications of animal isotopic analysis from across the globe
 and from both prehistoric and historic eras.
 [135] Symposium · E PUR SI MUOVE: EXPLORING MOBILITIES IN LATIN AMERICA
 Throughout history, Latin America has been the scene of a remarkable mobility of people, animals, things, ideas, languages, and
 even entire communities. Mobility, however, is an elusive research topic that is “as much about meaning as it is about mappable
 and calculable movement” (Cresswell 2011:551). Mobilities shape physical and cultural landscapes, and at the same time they
 are bound up with the production and negotiation of power relationships. As such, when attempting to reconstruct the dynamics of
 movement in the past, not one single discipline can fully untangle the complex interplay between motion, situation, context, and
 meaning. This session will therefore explore archaeological approaches that integrate historical, ethnographic, biological,
 geographical, linguistic, and other methodologies to reconstruct the social and economic dimensions of mobility politics in Latin
 America.
 [136] Symposium · PLURALIDAD EN LOS ESTUDIOS MESOAMERICANOS: REGIONES Y PERSPECTIVAS TEÓRICO
 METODOLÓGICAS
 Desde que Paul Kirchhoff propuso el término de Mesoamérica, éste ha sido usado por múltiples investigadores como
 herramienta conceptual para amalgamar y entender las similitudes en las evidencias arqueológicas halladas en una vasta
 extensión geográfica que abarca gran parte del territorio mexicano y algunos países en Centroamérica. El reconocimiento de las
 similitudes lleva por ende la aceptación de diferencias que han permitido definir regiones culturales con características propias y
 que nos ayudan a comprender el dinamismo con el que las antiguas sociedades se desarrollaron a lo largo del tiempo y el
 espacio. Ese ejercicio se ha dado gracias a la creación de espacios de discusión y difusión de los nuevos hallazgos
 arqueológicos realizados por distintos grupos de investigadores cuyo interés es coadyuvar al entendimiento de las antiguas
 sociedades mesoamericanas y su complejidad. Bajo esa perspectiva es que se propone en este simposio fomentar ese espacio
 de discusión entre las distintas investigaciones realizadas en diferentes regiones culturales de Mesoamérica y efectuadas por
 jóvenes investigadores para que se puedan dar a conocer los resultados obtenidos y, al ser expuestas las posturas teóricas-
 metodológicas de trabajo, reforzar o conocer nuevas propuestas de aproximación a los estudios mesoamericanos.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              20
 [137] Symposium · RECONSIDERING MISSISSIPPIAN HOUSEHOLDS AND COMMUNITIES
 This year marks the twentieth anniversary of Mississippian Communities and Households (Rogers and Smith 1995). The
 landmark volume can be credited with making “household” a popularly employed concept in Mississippian archaeology. Indeed,
 the ubiquity of the household is matched by the diverse ways that this concept has been employed. However, contributors in the
 volume did not explicitly address communities and instead operationalized them as archaeological sites and settlements
 composed of aggregations of houses, pits, and people. In the two decades since the volume’s publication, researchers have
 approached communities and households from many different methodological and theoretical directions. In this symposium, we
 challenge participants from the various temporal and geographic subdivisions of the Mississippian southeast and midwest to
 engage with Mississippian communities and households as situated within entangled networks of peoples, places, practices, and
 things. This can include linking "classic" household archaeology approaches to broader theoretical issues, as well as moving
 beyond traditional spatial and coresidential definitions of community. Further, we encourage contributors to consider the social
 construction of Mississippian communities and households via the varied and often complex processes of multiscalar group
 identity formation and maintenance.
 [138] Symposium · THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF VERNON SCARBOROUGH IN WATER MANAGEMENT AND
 SUSTAINABILITY, PART 1: GLOBAL AND COMPARATIVE
 Working in the Maya area and on water and sustainability issues during the last several decades almost certainly includes
 reading the works of Vernon Scarborough. We are fortunate to gather in this session and comment on Scarborough’s body of
 research. His work on anything having to do with water management and sustainability has set the stage for some of the most
 innovative research on these topics. Vern has taken these skill sets to another level, one that is having global implications
 because of his initiative and ability to accomplish what anthropologists ideally are meant to do—apply our knowledge to global
 concerns. Vern accomplishes this feat with aplomb via various international and national organizations, including IHOPE Maya,
 UNESCO, and others. He has been able to reach scholars from other fields, as well as governmental bodies. This relationship is
 critical as we address living in an increasingly complex world where climate instability continues to increase and people are
 beginning to look to anthropologists to cull lessons from the past on addressing not only sustainability but climate change. In this
 session, contributors focus on Vern’s contributions to global aspects of water management and sustainability and how they have
 impacted their own research.
 [139] Symposium · MOBILITY AND USE OF SPACE IN LATE PLEISTOCENE SOUTH AMERICA: IS IT POSSIBLE TO
 DISCUSS EARLY HUMAN REGIONAL RANKING?
 Over the past decades, significant advances have been achieved in the study of the initial peopling of South America. New sites
 have been discovered at both known and novel study areas and chronological data has been systematically gathered. However,
 once we recognize the distribution of sites throughout a landscape, the artifact assemblages, and the remains of the subsistence,
 we must start to inquire what those contexts mean in a regional framework. What does resource selectivity tell us about the
 economical preferences of the first settlers? When did the earliest patterned movements started? Is it possible to discuss spatial
 redundancy as opposed to places devoid of human presence? In sum, is it possible to discuss the organization of use of space
 and mobility for the initial stages of exploration of South American landscapes? The aim of this symposium is to bring together
 researchers working in different regions of South America to discuss use of space for the initial peopling of the continent. Among
 the main issues to be discussed are settlement models, site or region redundancy and/or avoidance, dispersal routes,
 procurement of raw materials as pointers of spatial organization, resource choices as indicative of environmental selection, spatial
 demarcation, and symbolic aspects.
 [140] General Session · TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES IN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [141] Symposium · CARIBBEAN ARCHAEOLOGICAL COLLECTIONS: HISTORY, MUSEUMS, AND POLITICS
 This symposium aims to bring together scholars working on the histories and movements of Caribbean archaeological objects
 and collections currently housed in museums. We are interested in tracing the multiple trajectories as well as the changing
 meanings and values ascribed to archaeological objects when ‘found’ outside the context of excavations.
 What can contemporary Caribbean archaeology learn from historical and recent museum collections? How can objects without
 proper documentation or context contribute to our understanding of the history of the discipline? How are they socially and
 politically relevant today? How do recent technological innovations change the ways we look at and into objects? What is the
 future of archaeological collections from the Caribbean from a legal standpoint?
 The papers in this panel look chiefly but not exclusively at collections that are presently located in museums outside the
 Caribbean—mainly in Europe and the United States. Finally, the symposium aims to discuss the legal issues and the possibilities
 regarding the ownership and display of Caribbean archaeological objects within the framework of the claims for repatriation and
 reparations.
 [142] Symposium · BRITISH COLONIAL LANDSCAPES OF THE OUTER CARIBBEAN
 Shifting political fortunes in the Americas repeatedly forced the British Crown to implement strategies for managing its subject
 populations. These strategies pushed colonization to ever widening peripheries, transforming natural and cultural landscapes in
 novel ways. New settlements were established for the purposes of extracting resources, commanding trade, and expanding
 military authority. These ventures involved the negotiation of power relations between and among colonizers, indigenous
 societies, and enslaved Africans. Recent archaeological studies examine plantations, outposts, and other built environments of
 the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries that were peripheral, both geographically and economically, to the more profitable sugar
 colonies of the Greater and Lesser Antilles. These studies highlight the importance of the material record to understanding social
 dynamics and globalizing processes within the wider sphere of the Caribbean under British control.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            21
 [143] General Session · EURASIA - WEST ASIA
 [144] General Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF IROQUOIA
 [145] Poster Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF EUROPE
 [146] Poster Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF EUROPE II
 [147] Poster Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF EUROPE III
 [148] Poster Session · CANADA, ALASKA
 [149] Poster Session · STUDYING THE PAST WITH FRAGMENTS FROM THE FIRE: STUDENT RESEARCH ON AN NSF-
 REU FIELD SCHOOL
 Significant population increases, the intensification of craft production, and new forms of agricultural output characterize the
 eighteenth and seventeenth century B.C. on the Great Hungarian Plain. Many archaeologists consider these changes hallmarks
 of an emerging social class. Yet research from different parts of eastern Europe suggests that societies were organized in a
 variety of ways during this regional florescence. This session describes ongoing investigations by the Bronze Age Körös Off-Tell
 Archaeology (BAKOTA) project into a Middle Bronze Age community buried at the cemetery of Békés Jégvermi-kert (Békés 103)
 in eastern Hungary. For the first time, research at this site includes an international team of undergraduate students funded by the
 National Science Foundation Research Experience for Undergraduates Program and the Central European Institute at Quinnipiac
 University. During the 2015 summer field season, a team of 15 students conducted independent research projects on a range of
 datasets from the cemetery and surrounding area. In this session, the students present their findings on the site, reporting on how
 the cemetery population fit into the trade, population movement, and new identities emerging in Bronze Age Europe.
 [150] General Session · CENTRAL ASIAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [151] General Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE SOUTHERN PERUVIAN COAST
 [152] General Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE ISLES: BRITIAN AND IRELAND
 [153] General Session · MID-ATLANTIC ARCHAEOLOGY
 [154] Symposium · CERÁMICAS CEREMONIALES DE MESOAMÉRICA: FENÓMENOS DE CORTA DURACIÓN
 Una de las características de la historia precolombina de Mesoamérica es que, en momentos críticos de la civilización asociados
 con los cambios en la organización social, aparecieron cerámicas que plasmaron en sus particularidades las transformaciones
 culturales de las clases políticas del México antiguo. Sin importar su ubicación geográfica o su dimensión temporal muestran
 elementos en común, principalmente el hecho de ser manifestaciones inequívocas de fuertes cambios políticos y culturales.
 Dichas peculiaridades las han hecho fenómenos llamativos, pero a veces poco comprendidos. Así, para tener un acercamiento
 reflexivo y crítico hacia estas cerámicas, se organiza este simposio, que busca analizar el contexto social e histórico que
 tuvieron. Se pretende examinar varios de estos casos, respetando su dimensión temporal e incidencia regional, con una
 perspectiva comparativa y diacrónica que permita explicar el papel que tuvieron en la relación de las élites, entre sí y con los
 pueblos que las sostuvieron. Al mismo tiempo, explicar también los procesos culturales que promovieron su rápido desarrollo y
 caída. En ese sentido, el estudio compartido de los distintos tipos cerámicos, de sus formas, de sus vinculaciones culturales y
 particular iconografía, permitirá alcanzar un mejor conocimiento de estos complejos fenómenos alfareros de corta duración.
 [155] General Session · PLEISTOCENE-HOLOCENE TRANSITION ARCHAEOLOGY IN THE AMERICAN WEST
 [156] General Session · ARCHAIC AND CERAMIC AGE CARIBBEAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [157] Electronic Symposium · HUMAN-ENVIRONMENTAL DYNAMICS ON THE ATLANTIC COAST OF NORTH AMERICA
 The shorelines and estuaries of North America’s Atlantic coast have undergone significant environmental and cultural changes
 since the Last Glacial Maximum, including the inundation of thousands of square kilometers of land, major shifts in plant and
 animal distributions, the arrival of humans, and the proliferation and diversification of indigenous peoples. Subsequently, the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             22
 arrival of Europeans and widespread urbanization and industrialization have caused significant environmental changes, as well.
 With millions of people living along the Atlantic coast today, and many coastal ecosystems in states of crisis, archaeology
 provides a perspective spanning millennia of interactions between climate change, coastal ecosystems, and human societies.
 This symposium brings together scholars focused on the prehistoric Atlantic Coast and the Native American peoples who called it
 home for thousands of years. Ranging from the Canadian Maritime Provinces to the Florida Keys, the papers in this electronic
 symposium will focus on a range of issues significant to coastal archaeologists, including: sea level fluctuations and landscape
 change, the interaction between human culture/society and environment, the relevance of coastal archaeology to modern
 ecological issues, and future directions. These synthetic papers for each region will serve as a platform for discussion in the
 session at the meeting.
 [158] Forum · PRESENTING THE ANCIENT MAYA IN 3D
 The increased use of 3D technology provides opportunities to record, study, and communicate data about Maya sites, artifacts,
 as well as landscapes in new and sometimes uncharted ways. In this forum, participants will make brief 5-minute presentations,
 with an open discussion following. The participants bring expertise in various kinds of 3D technology including airborne and
 stationary LiDAR; surface imaging of artifacts, skeletal material, and monuments using photogrammetry or laser scanning; 3D
 printing, and manipulation of 3D data. Some researchers collaborate on data acquisition, whereas others do the 3D data
 collection. Data are used for research, education, archiving, as well as communicating to the public on various platforms. Topics
 also include ethical issues of data access, issues of data storage, and issues of communicating and publishing big data sets. The
 forum provides an occasion to discuss the current use and future directions of 3D technology in Maya archaeology.
 [159] General Session · EARLY HUMAN ACTIVITIES IN THE SOUTHEASTERN US
 [160] Symposium · PRIMER OF THE ANCIENT MARINER: NEW PERSPECTIVES ON ADNA RESEARCH AND THE
 PREHISTORIC COLONIZATION OF ISLANDS
 The extraction and amplification of ancient DNA (aDNA) is a relatively new technique that is being increasingly utilized in
 archaeological research. Not only can aDNA provide a wealth of important information related to the presence and dispersal of
 ancient humans, animals, and plants, but also disease transmission, domestication of various biota, and long-term ecological
 relationships on multiple geographic scales. Islands are a particularly interesting setting for aDNA research as their colonization
 required a number of cultural, technological, and biological developments involving seafaring, exchange systems, and
 adaptations to new environments. Additionally, the development and use of commensal models using faunal aDNA as a proxy for
 human movement has proven especially useful in island contexts for exploring questions related to initial colonization and
 population movements. This session will explore the myriad ways in which human, animal, and plant aDNA is being used to
 explore such topics in island regions across the globe, as well as how newer sequencing technologies are expanding the range of
 research questions that geneticists, archaeologists, and other scientists can use to examine the origins and dispersal of modern
 humans in the ancient past.
 [161] Symposium · NORTH AND SOUTH: NEW DIRECTIONS IN MEDIEVAL EUROPEAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 This session provides a forum for promoting advances in medieval archaeology, particularly relating to inter-disciplinary and inter-
 regional approaches, new theoretical frameworks, methodologies, and research agendas. The session is split between southern
 and northern Europe (in the broadest geographic sense, including frontiers, seascapes, and neighbouring regions), recognizing
 the artificiality of sub-divisions within the timeframe of the “Middle Ages,” whilst acknowledging modern geographic research
 parities. Recent developments within the field have contributed to a step-change in the discipline. These have included multiple
 applications of scientific techniques, sophisticated theoretical paradigms, and inter-regional research frameworks moving beyond
 particularism, whilst recognizing the importance of local context. This has been partly driven by increasingly international research
 networks facilitating more supra-regional communication, moving beyond out-dated nationalistic modes of thought. Alternative
 material histories have prompted the reconsideration of traditional narratives embodied in the perception of the European
 medieval past. This has brought northern and southern European scholars, as well as those archaeologists working
 internationally, towards a common nexus, although significant barriers still remain to be overcome. The aim of the session is to
 contribute to this process on the highest international level, capturing these new directions and promoting them with participants
 from both Europe and North America.
 [162] Symposium · THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF VERNON SCARBOROUGH IN WATER MANAGEMENT AND
 SUSTAINABILITY, PART 2: THE CLASSIC MAYA
 Working in Maya during the last three decades almost certainly includes reading the works of Dr. Vernon Scarborough. We are
 fortunate to gather in this session and comment on Scarborough’s body of research. His work on anything having to do with water
 management and sustainability has set the stage for some of the most innovative research on these topics. Vern has taken these
 skill sets to another level, one that is having global implications because of his initiative and ability to accomplish what
 anthropologists ideally are meant to do—apply our knowledge to global concerns. Vern accomplishes this feat with aplomb via
 various international and national organizations, including IHOPE Maya, UNESCO, and others. He has been able to reach
 scholars from other fields, as well as governmental bodies. This relationship is critical as we address living in an increasingly
 complex world where climate instability continues to increase and people are beginning to look to anthropologists to cull lessons
 from the past on addressing not only sustainability but climate change. In this session, contributors focus on Vern’s contributions
 to water management and sustainability in the Maya area and how they have impacted their own research.
 [163] Symposium · CERÁMICA SIN FRONTERAS: DEFINING CULTURAL PHENOMENA AT THE INTERSECTION OF
 HONDURAS, EL SALVADOR, AND NICARAGUA
 This session brings together archaeologists from three Central American nations, the United States, and Canada to present new
 data and review the evidence for regional and interregional interaction in the southeast Mesoamerican periphery and northern
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              23
 Central America. Themes include defining a new ceramic sphere or a cultural sub-region in the southern Mesoamerican
 periphery, possibly around the Gulf of Chorotega (Fonseca); interregional interactions as seen in ceramics and other artifact
 classes; ethnic groups, migration, and boundaries in this cultural mosaic.
 [164] General Session · FLORIDA ARCHAEOLOGY
 [165] Symposium · CELEBRATING NHPA 50TH THE US FOREST SERVICE WAY - IT'S ALL ABOUT PARTNERSHIPS!
 (SPONSORED BY US FOREST SERVICE)
 The U.S. Forest Service is divided into nine regions, each with a Heritage Program Leader responsible for overseeing the
 Heritage programs on the U.S. Forests and National Grasslands throughout the United States and its territories. This symposium
 highlights the celebration of 50 years of the National Historic Preservation Act and its implementation on Forest Service managed
 lands. Each regional presentation showcases success stories about caring for the heritage resources under their watch, the
 innovative approaches used, while focusing on the many partnerships that without them, the monumental task to meet the
 direction of the NHPA (Sections 106 and 110) could not have been fulfilled. It really is all about “Partnerships!”
 [166] Symposium · LONG-TERM SETTLEMENT DYNAMICS AND LAND USE ON THE MANI PENINSULA OF SOUTHERN
 GREECE
 This session presents the results of recent multidisciplinary research conducted in the Mani Peninsula in southern Lakonia,
 Greece. The papers in this forum discuss the evolution of settlement and land use on the peninsula during the later Holocene,
 focusing on case studies from the Neolithic through the Ottoman periods, ca. 6,000 B.C.E.–1900 C.E. Much of the research
 presented in this session is related to investigations conducted under the auspices of The Diros Project, which was established by
 a team of international researchers in 2010 to catalog and publish the Neolithic material from ongoing excavations in Alepotrypa
 Cave and to survey the surrounding Diros Bay in an attempt to place the cave site into a regional context. Several subsequent
 projects have been undertaken as offshoots of the work in Diros Bay, the results of which contribute to the overall understanding
 of settlement dynamics in the broader region.
 [167] General Session · BRAZILIAN ARCHAEOLOGY AND ETHNOARCHAEOLOGY
 [168] General Session · NEW APPROACHES IN SOUTHWESTERN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [169] Symposium · THE CERRO JAZMÍN ARCHAEOLOGICAL PROJECT 2008-2015: DISCUSSING EARLY URBANISM
 AND CITY LIFE IN LATE AND TERMINAL FORMATIVE MIXTECA ALTA, MEXICO
 The Cerro Jazmín Archaeological Project investigated from 2008 to 2015 an early urban center in the Mixteca Alta, a highland
 region of Oaxaca, Mexico. Researchers involved in the project gather in this bilingual session to discuss their work, which spans
 from regional studies, to intra-site spatial analyses, archaeological excavation and artifact analysis, physical anthropology, faunal
 and paleobotanical studies, and chemical analyses on human bone, lithic, and ceramic artifacts. Recent research finds will be
 presented, providing new information on urban households and their mortuary practices, economic, and ritual activities. The
 information presented also speak to the specialized function of this Late/Terminal Formative and postclassic highland city and its
 regional sociopolitical context and environmental impact. Project results will be discussed in relation to existing case studies on
 contemporary Late Formative Mesoamerican urban centers. The emerging results contribute to the growing body of knowledge
 and theoretical discussions on urbanism worldwide.
 [170] Symposium · PAPERS IN HONOR OF LAWRENCE GUY STRAUS
 This symposium honors Lawrence Guy Straus’s four decades of research in Paleolithic archaeology and 20 years’ service as the
 editor of the Journal of Anthropological Research. Straus is best known for his long-term research in the Vasco-Cantabrian Upper
 Paleolithic, though his 40-year career has seen projects in Belgium, Portugal, and France as well as Spain. His research
 syntheses have advanced the understanding of long-term behavioral change in Paleolithic societies and influenced two
 generations of Paleolithic archaeologists. In this session, we invite fellow archaeologists to reflect upon the intellectual and
 personal influence Lawrence’s work has had on our lives and research. The invited papers presented in this session trace
 Lawrence’s long career and highlight his contributions to Paleolithic research and researchers.
 [171] Symposium · INEQUALITY FROM THE BOTTOM UP: MEASURING AND EXPLAINING HOUSEHOLD INEQUALITY IN
 ANTIQUITY
 Archaeologists have traditionally approached social evolutionary questions from the top of the mound (pyramid, Great House,
 ziggurat). But what was going on down below was at least as important for the political structure and long-term prospects of
 society. In this session, we present new, unpublished data on degree of inequality in prehistory in a number of times and places,
 measured using Gini indices or closely related measures of concentration in a distribution. We are particularly interested in wealth
 disparities measured at the level of the household, based on attributes such as floor area, storage area, etc. We also grapple with
 methodological issues arising from such endeavors; for example, what is the association between measures of inequality in burial
 assemblages and those based on household-based data? How do we gain a complete picture of the structure of inequality in a
 complex society? The papers also review and summarize suites of such measures to make arguments for or against models for
 variability in inequality through time or across societies.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              24
 [172] Symposium · COLOR, STRUCTURE AND MEANING IN ANCIENT ANDEAN FIBER ARTS
 Color is among the most notable visual features of the material world of every society, from manufactured objects (e.g., textiles,
 ceramics, paintings, etc.) to the landscape. This symposium focuses attention on color as a meaningful element in the material
 world of the precolumbian Andes. The central problem will be to address the modes of production, uses, and the meanings of
 color in fiber arts (textiles, khipus, wrapped sticks, etc.) and other media. This symposium aims to develop a broad understanding
 of how color differences and color patterning may have constituted a domain of signs and symbols that were drawn on and
 manipulated by crafts persons from the archaic through the early colonial period in the Andes. Ultimately, the goal of this
 symposium is to take interpretations and conclusions outside the narrow field of textile studies where they can be of importance
 for the understanding of social organization and structure, ritual, and other social practices.
 [173] General Session · CHINA AND JAPAN
 [174] Symposium · METHODOLOGICAL TOOL OR PARADIGM SHIFTER? ASSESSING THE STATUS OF GIS IN
 ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
 Over the past few decades, geospatial technologies have cemented themselves as critical tools for analyzing and synthesizing
 archaeological data. The number of geospatial techniques currently used in archaeology is numerous and wide ranging in their
 functionality, varying in theoretical underpinnings, data harnessed, mathematical and spatial formulae implemented, hardware
 and software required, output produced and—not least—in the questions examined about past human behavior. But to what
 degree are we using geospatial techniques to actually answer the hypotheses we set out for them? What kinds of insights about
 past social, economic, and ideological processes have been realized via these means? Do these geospatial tools have the
 potential to shift theoretical paradigms, fundamentally altering how we think about the past and/or the ways that archaeological
 research is conducted? If so, when can we expect such changes to transpire and what might these changes look like? For this
 session, we invite papers that identify where archaeology currently stands as a GIS-using discipline; explain how these
 technologies have served us well and how they could be improved; and define a new geospatially-driven research paradigm, one
 involving enhanced GIS inquiry and more nuanced examination of socionatural processes and transformations in the past.
 [175] Symposium · ROCK ART AND SACRED SPACES: RECENT APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF RITUAL
 LANDSCAPES
 Landscape features can have varying degrees of sacredness. Both prehistoric and historic peoples lived, as many nonwestern
 still do today, within ritual landscapes in which natural features such as caves, springs, and isolated cliffs often represented
 sacred places imbued with spiritual power. Sacredness also resided in the built environment with rock art sites and burial places
 created by earlier peoples incorporated within the cosmologies of later peoples. Networks of natural and constructed places gave
 human lives meaning by linking them to present and past activities across the landscape. These two aspects were not separate
 but intertwined with rock art sites, for example, serving as tangible links to the world of the ancestors to later peoples. The
 researchers in this symposia use in depth regional studies as well as innovative methodologies such as GIS and LIDAR to
 examine the relationship of rock art to other natural and constructed sacred landforms within a global landscape perspective.
 [176] Symposium · NEW METHODS IN ZOOARCHAEOLOGY
 (SPONSORED BY ZOOARCHAEOLOGY INTEREST GROUP)
 Conventional zooarchaeological methods are critical and serve as a fundamental baseline towards generating robust data, yet
 these frameworks may not always be applicable to various datasets. Furthermore, zooarchaeologists are continuously developing
 new techniques and procedures to further enhance our understanding of faunal assemblages through time and across space.
 This session serves to present recent and new approaches and methodologies. The session ultimately aims to synthesize
 dynamic discussions among the zooarchaeology community.
 [177] Symposium · FIRE, FOOD, FARMS, AND FORTIFICATIONS: RECENT ADVANCES IN THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF
 AFRICA
 (SPONSORED BY SOCIETY OF AFRICANIST ARCHAEOLOGISTS)
 In this session, we present results of new and emerging work focusing on the African continent. Papers represent the wide range
 of periods and diversity of research topics in Africanist archaeology. Major themes include early fire and tool use; the beginnings
 of food production; and socioeconomic and settlement shifts during the Atlantic era. Regions covered span the continent,
 including Egypt and the Horn, as well as north, east, west, and southern Africa.
 [178] Symposium · OLMEC, CHAVIN, AND THINGS IN BETWEEN: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH TO EMERGENT
 COMPLEX SOCIETIES
 The goal of this session is to revisit the Formative Americas as an integrated field of study, and consider its role in nomothetic
 interpretations of emergent social complexity. Over the last two decades, our refined understanding of early precolumbian
 cultures has given us new tools to enable these cross-cultural analyses. Integrating this growing dataset with new approaches
 such as hybridity, neo-diffusionism, and cognitive anthropology, facilitates the exploration of the independent, yet related, social
 organizations of North and South America. As a first step toward exploring these opportunities, this session asks a diverse set of
 participants to interpret their scholarship on emergent complexity through an explicitly comparative lens. These objectives extend
 beyond particularist approaches to cultural horizons like Olmec and Chavin, and enable a meaningful consideration of
 heterogeneity in emergent precolumbian social structures. By comparing Mesoamerica and the Andes as test beds of emergent
 social complexity, this session aims to interrogate universalist explanations, and guide continuing research on these phenomena
 worldwide.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             25
 [179] General Session · CRAFT PRODUCTION AND EXCHANGE IN MESOAMERICA
 [180] Poster Session · EAST AND SOUTHEAST ASIA
 [181] Poster Session · AFRICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [182] Poster Session · THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF OCEANIA
 [183] Poster Session · CARIBBEAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [184] Poster Session · EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN, CAUCASUS, NEAR EAST
 [185] Poster Session · WESTERN CANADA, BRITISH COLUMBIA, NORTHWEST COAST
 [186] Forum · ADDRESSING SEXUAL HARASSMENT AND ASSAULT IN ARCHAEOLOGY
 (SPONSORED BY WOMEN IN ARCHAEOLOGY INTEREST GROUP)
 Recent studies show there is a sexual harassment and assault problem in the field sciences, including archaeology. The SAA
 Board of Directors, Ethics Committee, and RPA are drafting a principle advocating for respectful and ethical conduct between
 colleagues. The new principle is an important first step in changing the professional climate in our field. This forum invites the
 archeology community to engage in conversation and create avenues for implementing the principle of respect. A panel of
 archaeologists from across the discipline will bring their experience and perspective to the discussion of these issues. The
 development of educational programs, a support system for survivors, and a large scale survey specific to archaeology are some
 ideas for further discussion.
 [187] Symposium · FORENSIC ARCHAEOLOGY
 This session aims to highlight recent projects from those active in forensic research and case work. As forensic archaeology
 continues to grow as a discipline and is utilized with increasing frequency by law enforcement officials, case studies are of great
 use to those engaged in forensic field work. In addition, research is essential to strengthening the theoretical foundations of
 forensic archaeology. This session also features research projects that will be of benefit to future forensic work and criminal
 justice. Those involved in research have the opportunity to address areas untouched by current practitioners. By bringing
 together researchers and practitioners, this symposium aims to create meaningful dialog and spur collaboration.
 [188] General Session · LANDSCAPE, SETTLEMENT PATTERNS, AND ARCHITECTURE IN EUROPEAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [189] General Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE MEDITERRANEAN
 [190] General Session · CANADIAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [191] Symposium · HERITAGE TOOLS FOR TACKLING CLIMATE CHANGE
 Heritage managers everywhere increasingly observe climate-change related impacts to the resources of which they are stewards.
 Such observations provide notice that we must begin to manage cultural resources in new ways—to adapt to continuous change
 that we do not yet fully understand.
 Climate change brings with it a diverse set of threats, huge and hydra-like in their complexity and ferocity. We may not fully
 understand the changes that the world is about to undergo, but the severity and immediacy of the many problems posed by those
 changes compels us to act. The disciplines associated with the management of cultural heritage have much to offer climate
 change response and adaptation planning. Heritage sites serve both as a source of information past humans’ adaptation to
 changing climate, and as tangible links between contemporary people, their cultural identities, communities, and important places.
 This session presents an array of tools for managing cultural resources in the face of climate change so they may be shared and
 valued well into the future. The tools include identification of the diversity of potential impacts of climate change on resources,
 modeling of threats in GIS, crowdsourcing monitoring, and planning approaches to manage and address risk.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             26
 [192] Symposium · CAPTIVITY AND SLAVERY IN VIKING AGE SCANDINAVIA
 Perceptions of Viking raiding have often considered these activities to have been primarily motivated by the acquisition of portable
 wealth and plunder. However, explicit accounts in historical sources and sagas demonstrate that many Viking groups sought not
 only material wealth but also to abduct large numbers of captives. While some captives were quickly ransomed or killed, there is
 also evidence attesting to the long-distance trafficking, employment, and exploitation of slaves across a geographical area that
 would encompass much of the Viking world, ranging from southern Spain to the lands of the Rūs in the east.
 In recent years, the evidence for captivity and slavery has become better conceptualised within theoretical and methodological
 frameworks. Recent novel and innovative analyses of archaeological material have similarly allowed light to be shed on the
 nuances of slavery among Scandinavian societies. This session will provide a multidisciplinary forum for the presentation of both
 new and continuing research on captivity and slavery during the Viking Age, in addition to the discussion of these practices within
 their wider contexts.
 [193] General Session · HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE MIDWEST
 [194] General Session · CHACO ARCHAEOLOGY
 [195] General Session · MORTUARY PRACTICES IN THE ANCIENT SOUTHWEST
 [196] General Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE LATE INTERMEDIATE PERIOD AND INKA OCCUPATION
 [197] General Session · LANDSCAPE STUDIES
 [198] Symposium · FRAMING THE LOCAL WITHIN THE REGIONAL: CURRENT RESEARCH IN THE CUSCO REGION,
 PERU
 Cusco, Peru, is best known as the navel of the Inca universe, but it was also home to postglacial high altitude hunter-gatherers, a
 network of Formative villages, Wari imperial colonies, rivals to early Inca elites, and a major locus of Spanish colonial rule.
 Coming out of a prolific phase of regional survey programs, the Cusco region has seen an explosion of problem-based
 excavations and analytical laboratory-based research that cuts across disciplinary lines. These projects are refining our
 understandings of biological, economic, and sociopolitical development in the region from the Archaic to Colonial periods. This
 symposium brings together scholars from diverse sociocultural and biological perspectives to explore patterns of change over the
 short term and longue durée. Papers approach themes such as migration, ties connecting Cusco to the outside world, the
 development of multiple and changing political agendas, and how local populations navigated all of the above.
 [199] General Session · LEVANT ARCHAEOLOGY
 [200] General Session · PLAINS LITHIC ANALYSIS
 [201] Debate · THE SOUTHWEST IN THE WORLD: A DISCUSSION OF TIME, DISTANCE, POLITICS, SCIENCE AND
 HISTORY IN SOUTHWESTERN PREHISTORY
 Steve Lekson recently offered a narrative history of the ancient southwest, and now he proposes to use that history scientifically,
 in a book titled "Southwest in the World." The project has many pitfalls: how to write history for prehistory, how to recognize and
 control bias inherent in the field, how to choose appropriate questions, and how to address those questions. The methodological
 issues are as challenging as the substantive product. In the new SAA debate format, Lekson will present his most-recent thoughts
 on the Greater Southwest—its history and the potential uses of that history—to a panel of distinguished discussants. They will
 respond and question, followed by open-format debate/discussion.
 [202] Forum · FOR THE RECORD: ARCHAEOLOGICAL ARCHIVES IN THE 21ST CENTURY
 (SPONSORED BY COMMITTEE FOR MUSEUMS, COLLECTIONS, AND CURATION)
 Whether in the writing or researching phase of a project, accessioning/deacessioning a collection, researching the history of
 archaeology, or reviewing a NAGPRA case, archives play an important role. The earliest archives in the United States can be
 traced back to the eighteenth century—well before modern archival standards existed. Since the professionalization of
 archaeology, museology, and archival science, archives have grown to astounding levels—a trend unlikely to change. Although
 this has led to some archives becoming inaccessible or highly restricted, other archives are quickly being digitized and available
 to anyone from anywhere. This does open up new possibilities and concerns about access, as many archives contain important
 yet sensitive information about cultural heritage and the history of the discipline.
 Regardless of the age of, content within, or structure of an archive, they are important links that connect many pasts (both ancient
 and recent) to an always-unfurling present. This forum seeks to explore the ways in which archives can “speak” to archaeologists
 and other stakeholders interested in the past and the power struggles that ensue. While discussants will focus on a particular
 archive’s management, creation, and/or utilization, this forum seeks to consider the practical and theoretical challenges and
 benefits of archival work.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               27
 [203] Forum · TRIBAL HISTORIC PRESERVATION IN THE UNITED STATES: KEY ISSUES AND DIALOGUES
 (SPONSORED BY INDIGENOUS POPULATIONS INTEREST GROUP; COMMITTEE ON NATIVE AMERICAN RELATIONS)
 In the United States, federally recognized tribal communities can apply under Section 101(d)(2) of the National Historic
 Preservation Act for status as a Tribal Historic Preservation Office (THPO). Obtaining THPO status is a significant achievement
 in regards to the goals of tribal self-governance and self-determination, enabling a tribal nation to assume authority over the care
 for and protection of tribal heritage. This forum is part of an ongoing dialogue at the Society for American Archaeology annual
 meetings that brings together Tribal Historic Preservation departments from across the United States to discuss the unique issues
 of tribal heritage management. Panelists will address how their offices balance the unique requirements of local, state, and
 federal heritage preservation regulations with the specific needs and cultural values of the communities that they represent. The
 goal of these discussions is to generate connections and support between THPOs, archaeologists, and heritage managers.
 [204] Poster Session · SOUTH AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY II
 [205] Poster Session · SOUTH AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY III
 [206] Poster Session · SOUTH AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY IV
 [207] Poster Session · SOUTH AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY I
 [208] Symposium · PUBLIC AGENCIES AND UNIVERSITIES: PARTNERSHIPS FOR THE PAST
 Federal, state, tribal, and even municipal agencies have formed partnerships with Anthropology and Archaeological programs at a
 number of American universities. These partnerships have been mutually beneficial in many ways. The agencies get cost-
 effective access to faculty expertise, a role in the development of young professionals, and the latest in research technologies
 and approaches. Universities benefit from new funding streams, practical and challenging research projects, and growth
 opportunities for both students and faculty. This session will highlight the programs, accomplishments, challenges, and lessons
 learned from six agency-university partnerships and propose ways they can be improved and expanded.
 [209] Symposium · UNDERSTANDING VISUAL CULTURE WITHOUT TEXTUAL SOURCES: WHAT ARE THE
 POSSIBILITIES FOR ANALYSIS?
 This symposium addresses challenges for scholars who are committed to working directly with precolumbian materials. Today
 historical texts are scrutinized for epistemological, interpretative, and rhetorical import, but they may not be directly relevant to
 “pre”columbian culture due to disjunction and gaps between the dates of sources and visual culture. Recent publications and
 panels have addressed a general crisis in art history and, more specifically, the future of precolumbian art history. In many ways
 archaeology is a closer intellectual and temporal ally of precolumbian art history than are contact- and colonial-period art history;
 indeed, the fields share temporal frames and material objects, and seek to understand how societies operated at specific points in
 time. Archaeologists and art historians will discuss Native North America, Mesoamerica, and South America, and address
 analytical strategies that turn away from textual documentation and focus on theories of the object; ocular, auditory, and
 kinesthetic aspects of visual culture; the Spatial Turn; the broad reach of the Digital Humanities; and other avenues. Papers also
 address how developments in archaeology and art history speak back to larger debates about method and theory and what the
 two disciplines have to share around the joint problem of objects without texts.
 [210] Symposium · GLOBAL CHANGE THREATS TO THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND PALEOECOLOGICAL RECORD
 Archaeological sites with good organic preservation are increasingly recognized both as sources of data on past human behavior
 and cultural organization, and as valuable resources for paleoenvironmental reconstruction, with potential similar to other
 paleoenvironmental proxy records. They hold valuable information needed to place human ecodynamics in the broad spatial and
 temporal perspective essential to developing a meaningful and actionable understanding of socionatural systems, often without
 the ambiguities of correlating between archaeological deposits and distant natural proxies.
 Yet, just as new methods increase our ability to retrieve and study this information, global climate change poses a dire threat,
 both to the wealth of organic data in such sites, and to many of the sites themselves. Global change-related threats include:
 increased coastal erosion (due to sea level rise, increases in number and/or strength of storms, and diminished sea ice in Polar
 regions), increased riverine erosion (due to increases in precipitation amount or intensity and increases in glacial melting), drying
 of waterlogged sites and bogs (due to hydrological changes), changes in land use (due to changes in agriculture or displacement
 of populations). In high-latitude areas, the thawing of permafrost is a major and imminent threat to the archaeological and
 paleoecological record.
 [211] Symposium · GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES ON THE IMPACT OF DRASTIC ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES IN HUNTER-
 GATHERER TECHNOLOGIES
 Researchers have long debated the impact of climate change on human culture and particularly in hunter-gatherer societies.
 Climate drifts, particularly abrupt ones, have been continuingly seen as major prompts for rapid technological and cultural
 innovation.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             28
 Recent advances in paleoclimatic reconstructions and ongoing developments in the quality and chronological resolution of
 archaeological data have allowed a better understanding of the extent to which patterns of specific environmental changes
 triggered modifications in the technological systems of hunter-gatherers.
 This session intends to bring together contributions addressing strategic changes in the organization of hunter-gatherer
 technologies as a response to drastic environmental shifts. Discussed topics will include climate-driven alterations in lithic,
 organic tools and ceramic production, pyrotechnology, hunting strategies techniques, pigment processing, use of plants and
 adornments, from all chronologies and geographical contexts.
 We aim to contribute to the continuing debate over cause and effect in the interplay between humans and climate and to a better
 understanding of the role and magnitude of environmental determinism in the archaeology of hunter-gatherers.
 [212] Symposium · THE COPAN KINGDOM AND ITS POLITICAL INTERACTIONS ALONG THE SOUTHEASTERN MAYA
 FRONTIER
 The Copan kingdom sat on the edge of the Maya lands well away from the competitive tightly-spaced kingdoms of the Peten. Its
 political alliances reached both across the Maya world and over the frontier into non-Maya regions to the south and east. Both
 current excavations, and re-analysis of artifacts from older projects, are bringing new definition to the web of relationships Copan
 held with its neighbors and trading partners along this frontier, demonstrating strong ties previously unknown with some
 communities, such as Tazumal in El Salvador, and refining interactions with others in the areas of Cucuyagua, Sensenti, and Rio
 Amarillo. In this session, scholars use a range of data from flakes of chert and obsidian to finely carved macaw markers, to
 hieroglyphic inscriptions, copador ceramics, representations of K’inich Yax K’uk’ Mo’, differences in cuisine, and GIS modeling, to
 trace these relationships. Some of the papers explore not only how Copan’s intercession changed communities, but also what
 happened once that intercession was gone.
 [213] General Session · HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY IN THE SOUTHEAST
 [214] Symposium · EXPLORING THE MICROSCALE: ADVANCES AND NOVEL APPLICATIONS OF MICROSCOPY FOR
 ARCHAEOLOGICAL MATERIALS
 Archaeologists employ a wide range of microscopy techniques to understand subtle traces of past behaviors in the archaeological
 record. This session explores innovative methods of analyzing archaeological traces at the microscale, whether it is through new
 developments in microscopy or novel applications of established techniques. These methods are not limited to a specific type of
 material culture and thus this session explores microscopy for the study of lithics, bones, metals, residues, and other materials.
 Furthermore, analytical techniques using microscopy draw on numerous disciplines including physics, engineering, and
 chemistry, encompassing a wide range of techniques to visualize and record microscopic traces. By bringing together research
 on different materials with diverse approaches, this session aims to develop new collaborations to explore archaeological
 materials at the microscale. Reaching out beyond the archaeological realm into interdisciplinary pursuits, we gain new insights
 into the past.
 [215] Symposium · THE POETICS OF PROCESSING: MEMORY FORMATION, COSMOLOGY AND THE HANDLING OF THE
 DEAD
 Throughout time, the human body has acted as a canvas for survivors. Processing of the body varies in time and space and is
 contingent upon the relationship between the living and the dead. Body processing acts as a mechanism for the recreation of
 cosmological events and is important for memory creation. The creation of processed bodies has the capacity to transform space,
 ritually open and close spaces, and to reinforce relationships between the living and the dead. This session will focus on how the
 processing of the body, in any way that occurs, impacts and is impacted by the use of the body as a social tool.
 By including both old and new world case studies, general patterns of human behavior can be compared and contrasted. Through
 a large-scale analysis, we can examine common threads of the use of the body as a social tool that builds a relationship between
 the living and the dead, memory creation, and the use of space for both the living and the dead.
 [216] Symposium · IMPACTS, ARTICULATIONS AND INNOVATIONS IN THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL STUDY OF THE
 MESOAMERICAN GULF COAST: SPATIO-TEMPORAL, ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC ORGANIZATION / INCIDENCIA,
 ARTICULACIÓN E INNOVACIÓN DEL CONOCIMIENTO ARQUEOLÓGICO EN LA COSTA DEL GOLFO MESOAMERICANO:
 ORGANIZACIÓN ESPACIO-TEMPORAL, ECONÓMIC
 Through this symposium we are establishing a dialog among specialists in the prehispanic societies of the Mesoamerican Gulf
 Coast. The objective is to evaluate the impact and articulation of archaeological and iconographical knowledge that has been
 documented throughout the region. This session is focused primarily on the critical review of advances and methods in systematic
 investigations of demographic transformations, chronology-building, and economic relationships that serve as important building
 blocks to better understand the social organization of prehispanic sites throughout the Gulf lowlands.
 En este simposio se establecerá un diálogo entre especialistas de sociedades prehispánicas de la Costa del Golfo
 Mesoamericano. El objetivo es evaluar la incidencia y articulación del conocimiento arqueológico e iconográfico que se tiene
 actualmente en la región. Esta sesión está enfocada principalmente en la revisión crítica de avances y métodos de investigación
 sistemática, así como de elementos demográficos, cronológicos y económicos, que constituyeron los fundamentos de
 organización social de los habitantes de algunos sitios prehispánicos de la Costa del Golfo.
 [217] Symposium · ENVISIONING AND RE-ENVISIONING ARCTIC ARCHAEOLOGY: THE ENDURING LEGACIES OF J.
 LOUIS GIDDINGS (1909-1964)
 J. Louis Giddings (1909–1964) undertook pioneering archaeological research in the Arctic that integrated natural science
 perspectives with archaeological investigations—at site-specific, regional, and trans-continental scales; ethnographic and folkloric
 research; collaborations with indigenous communities at all levels of research; and experimentation with cutting-edge methods.
 He introduced dendrochronology and dendroclimatology to Arctic archaeology, developed the concept of "beach ridge
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               29
 archaeology"—using the formation of maritime beach ridges to date sequences of archaeological sites upon them; discovered the
 Denbigh Flint complex—paving the way for understanding ASTt connections from eastern Siberia to Greenland; established the
 western Arctic's Holocene archaeological sequence through research at Cape Krusenstern and Onion Portage—the first deeply
 stratified interior archaeological site investigated in Alaska; and brought his findings to scientific and public attention through
 scientific articles, popular books, and Brown University's Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology. Since Giddings' death in 1964,
 his perspectives, students, and collections have guided or influenced northern research. In this symposium, scholars working on
 sites, collections, ideas, approaches, and problems linked to Giddings' work reassess his legacy and explore what remains to be
 done with the collections, sites, and concepts on which his research was based as we set new priorities for northern research.
 [218] Symposium · HUMAN ADAPTATIONS TO LATEGLACIAL AND EARLY HOLOCENE CLIMATE AND
 ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES: TOWARDS A TRANS-ATLANTIC PERSPECTIVE (PART 1)
 Increasing resolution of paleoenvironmental records are beginning to show the spatiotemporal dynamics of ecosystem responses
 to different climate changes during the Lateglacial and early Holocene. A primary cause of many of these climate changes were
 glacier meltwater outbursts from the Laurentide Ice Sheet into the North Atlantic. At present, there has been more consideration
 of the impacts of these different abrupt climate change events on European than North American human populations. This
 session sets the foundations for bridging this gap and connecting researchers investigating these questions in Europe with
 researchers investigating these questions in North America. The session seeks to know what particular periods of climate and
 environmental change impacted both North American and European populations, as well as the periods when there were no such
 impacts, and where these impacts or non-impacts occurred. Presentations will focus on questions of: 1) paleoenvironmental and
 archaeological data quality and amenability for integration and tests of correlation, 2) temporal leads and lags in local or regional
 ecosystem and/or human responses to climate change events, and 3) the specific adaptive strategies employed in these human
 responses (e.g., population collapse, mobility, social networks, raw materials, lithic technology).
 [219] Symposium · COLONIAL ENCOUNTERS IN THE PREHISPANIC ANDES
 Over the past three decades, research on colonial processes in the south Central Andes has advanced substantially. This
 session explores the social, political, economic, and ideological transformations in the Andean past through a millennia of
 colonization in southern Peru. We examine the roots of social inequality in colonial settings through a diverse set of
 archaeological data, with a special focus on the Wari, Tiwanaku, Inca, and Colonial Spanish enterprises. This work, built upon
 the Programa Contisuyo's three decades of research, draws now on the work of the next generation of scholars working in the
 region under the rubric of the Programa Colesuyo, a multi-year, interdisciplinary research program that unites three excavation
 projects and a set of museographic studies to highlight patterns in the process of colonization over the past 1,500 years.
 [220] Symposium · NEW INSIGHTS INTO THE ARCHAIC OF THE CIRCUM-CARIBBEAN
 With the development of new trends in long-term perspectives on human ecodynamics, multidimensional approaches to
 biocultural evolution, and synergies between modellers and palaeoecologists, research on the early peoples of the circum-
 Caribbean became increasingly interdisciplinary and informed by the realization that humans are not passive adaptors to their
 environment but creatively shape and re-shape it as a landscape, while being simultaneously molded through dynamic biological,
 sociocultural, and environmental feedbacks. Concomitantly with these theoretical shifts, aided by increasingly sophisticated
 techniques, the approaches aimed at disclosing the origin of the Archaic Age populations, their mobility and exchange, modes of
 life, and transitions to horticulture have also been transformed. No longer are these phenomena perceived as caused by single
 ‘revolutionary’ events, but as multistranded trajectories depending on combinations of economic, social, and ideological
 processes, liberated from the dependency on propitious environmental conditions, and from the previously inseparable co-
 phenomena of sedentarism, domestication, and pottery making. The approaches have also been changed by the denial of any
 clear-cut distinction between foragers and farmers’ modes of living and world viewing.
 We aim to discuss new theoretical, methodological, and analytical approaches that are used to understand the origins and
 dynamics of the Archaic Age in the Circum-Caribbean.
 [221] Symposium · ENGENDERED ARCHAEOLOGIES: INTERSUBJECTIVITY IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL HERITAGE
 PRACTICE AND INTERPRETATION
 (SPONSORED BY WOMEN IN ARCHAEOLOGY INTEREST GROUP (WAIG))
 Heritage work, including archaeology and related disciplines, has been recognized as an intersubjective endeavor but theoretical
 examinations largely sidestep gender as a framework for analysis. However, critical approaches to participatory models of
 heritage practice necessitate a theoretical and action-oriented engagement with gender. This session aims to bring together two
 currently disparate contributions to archaeology— stakeholder-focused archaeological heritage work and an analysis of gender in
 the archaeological record. We hope to examine the complex entanglements that arise when working with stakeholders and
 interpreting and representing archaeological remains. Explorations may include feminist, queer, postcolonial, indigenous, and
 other theoretical frameworks as well as considerations of aspects of selfhood including race, class, religion, age, etc. These may
 also draw on methodologies like community-based, collaborative, activist, participatory, ethical, action-oriented, and public
 approaches. How are collaborative archaeology projects and heritage work more broadly engendered? How do participants in
 archaeological and heritage projects perform and enact gender? How do discourses of masculinity, femininity, and queer
 identities influence all phases of research: from conception through public engagement, fieldwork, analysis, presentation,
 publication, and preservation? At the heart of these questions lies an exploration of practice, power, memory, and narrative
 production that will enhance efforts at preserving and understanding heritage.
 [222] Symposium · CARIBBEAN ENVIRONMENTAL ARCHAEOLOGY: NEW PERSPECTIVES ON HUMAN ECODYNAMICS
 AND SOCIAL RELATIONS
 (SPONSORED BY ISLAND AND COASTAL ARCHAEOLOGY INTEREST GROUP)
 Worldwide, archaeological research increasingly demonstrates the complexity of interactions between human groups and the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 30
 environment. In the Caribbean, this complexity is underscored by environmental archaeology studies that reveal how past
 landscapes and seascapes have been shaped at multiple scales by interlinked cultural and ecological systems. The analytic
 methods of zooarchaeology, archaeobotany, geoarchaeology, and biochemistry have become powerful tools to understand these
 dimensions of connectivity. This session will examine human social and ecological relations across space and time in the
 Caribbean based on various environmental and biogeochemical proxy records. Session themes include, but are not limited to,
 human mobility and interaction, animal translocation, anthropogenic environmental impacts, cultural responses to ecological
 change, ecosystem and human social resilience, insular adaptation, and cultural diversity across space. The session will highlight
 the many dynamic lines of inquiry in environmental and biogeochemical archaeology under investigation in the Caribbean, situate
 Caribbean-based research within broader topics of environmental archaeology and human ecodynamics, and foster dialogue with
 researchers pursuing related studies in regions elsewhere.
 [223] Symposium · BIOLOGICAL EXCHANGE IN THE ANTHROPOCENE: ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND GENETIC
 PERSPECTIVES
 Human trade, travel, and transport have led to the movement of a vast number of plants, animals, and pathogens, and the
 creation of cosmopolitan assemblages of organisms across all continents. Perhaps the best-known example of large-scale
 human-mediated translocation is the Columbian Exchange, which famously led to the exchange of a diverse array of
 domesticates, weeds, and diseases between the Old and New Worlds in the decades after 1492. Archaeological and genetic
 research have nonetheless begun to reveal the earlier roots of biological exchange in various global contexts. This session will
 adopt a multidisciplinary perspective, exploring biological exchange in the Anthropocene using the latest techniques in
 archaeology and genetics.
 [224] General Session · CURRENT RESEARCH IN THE MAGREB, EGYPT AND THE HORN OF AFRICA
 [225] General Session · MISSISSIPPIAN BUILT ENVIRONMENT AND DAILY PRACTICES
 [226] General Session · COLLABORATIVE AND COMMUNITY ARCHAEOLOGIES
 [227] General Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF OCEANIA
 [228] Symposium · FROM THE BOTTOM UP: HILLTOP USE AND SIGNIFICANCE IN ANTIQUITY
 Archaeologists have interpreted hilltop sites as spaces serving heterogeneous purposes, ranging from functional explanations as
 defensive outposts to symbolic interpretations as ceremonial places. In this session, we seek to move beyond such a dichotomy
 to understand how hilltop settlements, fortifications, shrines, or pilgrimage areas were integrated into the larger political system,
 recognizing that the exercising of political authority often relies more on ideology than force to establish security. The prominence
 of these high points in the landscape, along with the resulting viewsheds they offered, shaped people's understanding of the
 landscape. Hilltops, therefore, can be interpreted as a crucial locale to a central authority with the intent to control the landscape,
 as well as a source of power to people attempting to flee a state’s influence. If such environments can be at different times
 peripheral or central to the political and religious agenda of a state authority, archaeologists can track changes in socio-political
 processes by examining settlement histories at these elevated spaces. Do hilltops indeed represent a refuge from state authority,
 and if so what cultural processes drive people to seek out such areas? Alternatively, are hilltops crucial to state control of the
 landscape and integrated into surrounding settlement structure?
 [229] Symposium · ARCHAEOLOGY IN THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE 1916-2016
 In 2016, the National Park Service (NPS) celebrates two anniversaries: 100 years of managing archaeological resources for the
 public's benefit and 50 years of the Southeast Archeological Center. As we look to the next century, the history of NPS
 archaeology is something to celebrate for its contributions to the nation and to the world. Archaeology was a primary motivator for
 preserving lands under federal management and it continues to drive cultural resources work as well as interpretation and
 education. It underlies the most significant issues facing the NPS today and into the future: climate change, relevance to all
 peoples, population shifts to urban areas, economic benefits of parks, the importance of grants, and site evaluation programs to
 communities nationwide. Presenters in this session will present on a range of topics looking to the past and to the future of NPS
 archeology.
 [230] Symposium · CAVE ART AND ARCHAEOLOGY AT OXTOTITLÁN, GUERRERO
 Oxtotitlán Cave, renowned for a corpus of Formative polychrome murals, is the focus of recent NGS and NEH-funded
 collaborative research involving scholars from several U.S. institutions, the National Autonomous University of Mexico, and
 representatives of the archaeological committee from the modern community of Acatlán, Guerrero, where the site is located. The
 cave, one element of a large Early to Late Formative settlement encompassing nearby terraced hillslopes and surrounding
 settlement zones, is a primary focal point of recent investigations. Research unites the high resolution photographic,
 computational, photogrammetric documentation, and technical drawings of the art with the archaeological study of the cave and
 larger site. Our current research builds on earlier work undertaken by David Grove, Paul Schmidt, Sandra Cruz Flores, and other
 UNAM and INAH-affiliated archaeologists and conservators. In this session, we discuss the on-going results of the mural
 documentation project, a program to date the art employing micro sample AMS radiocarbon dating, excavations both in
 association with the art and elsewhere at the site, and the drone-based photogrammetric survey of the entire complex within its
 geographical setting.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               31
 [231] Symposium · INTERACCIONES SOCIALES, MANEJO Y GESTIÓN EN LA ARQUEOLOGÍA MEXICANA
 La investigación arqueológica, especialmente en los espacios donde confluyen sitios y vestigios con poblaciones vivas, no podría
 ser posible sin un adecuado proceso de gestión y trabajo conjunto entre los habitantes de estos lugares con las instituciones
 especializadas en su estudio. Así también la conservación y protección del patrimonio cultural son un reflejo de un adecuado
 trabajo de colaboración entre todas las partes involucradas en los trabajos realizados en estos.
 El simposio presentado ofrece una serie de experiencias exitosas llevadas a cabo por investigadores que han realizado trabajos
 arqueológicos en México, país en el cual estos procesos de colaboración entre diversos actores tanto institucionales, de
 investigación y de la sociedad civil han hecho posible la consolidación de proyectos de gran envergadura, desde proyectos de
 larga duración hasta la puesta en valor de sitios ahora patrimonio cultural de la humanidad por la UNESCO, estos procesos son
 una muestra para los diversos proyectos arqueológicos que se piensan efectuar con la colaboración de los habitantes actuales
 de estas áreas, de la conformación de un marco de trabajo ético y responsable hacia los herederos de este patrimonio intangible.
 [232] General Session · LITHICS IN ANCIENT NORTH AMERICA
 [233] General Session · INKA ARCHAEOLOGY
 [234] Poster Session · CENTRAL AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [235] Poster Session · MESOAMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY I
 [236] Poster Session · MESOAMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY II
 [237] Poster Session · MESOAMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY III
 [238] Poster Session · BEYOND THE SHORE: THE UNDERWATER MAYA PROJECT, PAYNES CREEK NATIONAL PARK,
 BELIZE
 A series of posters will illustrate recent work on the Paynes Creek Salt Works from the Underwater Maya Project, Department of
 Geography and Anthropology, Louisiana State University. This research is part of the larger long-term project in southern coastal
 Belize to further the understanding of how the coastal participated in the larger Classic and Postclassic Maya cultural sphere. The
 Classic period (A.D. 300–900) salt works were submerged by a sea-level rise that occurred after the Late Classic (A.D. 700–900).
 The salt works are associated with large-scale workshop production using the technique of evaporating brine in pots over fires,
 resulting briquetage—the broken salt-making pottery. Remnants of wooden structures used for production and storage of salt,
 were preserved in the anaerobic red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle) peat below the sea floor. The posters will include an
 overview of the project and new directions for future research, dietary implications from a shell midden located at the Eleanor
 Betty Site, a comparison of the workshops between the Paynes Creek and Placencia Salt Works, and an overview of the
 stratigraphy of two earthen mounds.
 [239] General Session · ZOOARCHAEOLOGY IN THE SOUTHWEST
 [240] General Session · MISSISSIPPIAN RITUALS
 [241] General Session · MESOAMERICAN ICONOGRAPHY AND EPIGRAPHY
 [242] Symposium · HUMAN ADAPTATIONS TO LATEGLACIAL AND EARLY HOLOCENE CLIMATE AND
 ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES: TOWARDS A TRANS-ATLANTIC PERSPECTIVE (PART 2)
 Increasing resolution of paleoenvironmental records are beginning to show the spatiotemporal dynamics of ecosystem responses
 to different climate changes during the Lateglacial and early Holocene. A primary cause of many of these climate changes were
 glacier meltwater outbursts from the Laurentide Ice Sheet into the North Atlantic. At present, there has been more consideration
 of the impacts of these different abrupt climate change events on European than North American human populations. This
 session sets the foundations for bridging this gap and connecting researchers investigating these questions in Europe with
 researchers investigating these questions in North America. The session seeks to know what particular periods of climate and
 environmental change impacted both North American and European populations, as well as the periods when there were no such
 impacts, and where these impacts or non-impacts occurred. Presentations will focus on questions of: 1) paleoenvironmental and
 archaeological data quality and amenability for integration and tests of correlation, 2) temporal leads and lags in local or regional
 ecosystem and/or human responses to climate change events, and 3) the specific adaptive strategies employed in these human
 responses (e.g., population collapse, mobility, social networks, raw materials, lithic technology).
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               32
 [243] Symposium · REALITIES ON THE GROUND: PASTS, PRESENTS, AND FUTURES OF THE NATIONAL HISTORIC
 PRESERVATION ACT
 Fifty years after implementation, the National Historic Preservation Act shapes the majority of archaeological research and
 employment in the United States, including the Cultural Resource Management industry. The consultation process of Section 106
 of the NHPA has resulted in the identification and preservation of a broad range of historic properties. However, the lack of
 regulatory mechanisms has resulted in the unmitigated destruction of many resources, including historic properties. Increasing
 engagement with Native American groups at various levels, most notably the development and growth of Tribal Historic
 Preservation Offices, has added layers of complexity to the Section 106 process, with varied results. In the twenty-first century,
 “Section 106 compliance” has created byzantine webs of relationships between archaeologists in the public and private sectors
 dependent on clients and governmental agencies for necessary resources such as funding, eligibility determinations, or staffing.
 Client pressures, inter-agency structures, and broader political realities create varied demands on those charged with identifying,
 researching, evaluating, and/or managing cultural resources in the United States. Authors in this session examine, analyze, and
 critique the growth of CRM over the last 50 years and explore possibilities for growth and change over the next 50 years.
 [244] Symposium · TRASH RULES: INTRASITE ZOOARCHAEOLOGY
 Faunal remains are an important type of trash for archaeologists interested in everything from subsistence strategies to the social
 negotiations of feasting to animals as symbols. Zooarchaeologists increasingly grapple with how contexts—be they residential
 areas, ritual spaces, or dedicated trash dumps—impact interpretations. Over the years, certain ‘trash rules’ have been suggested,
 linked to variables such as site function, specific activities, and physical and climatic parameters. This session revisits some of
 these and explores a few more, looking at diverse cultural and ecological settings and applying a range of analytic methods. What
 is gained when zooarchaeological analyses look more closely at intrasite spatial variations? What analytic approaches are
 productive in recognizing how the trash gets to where we find it, and what human choices were at play?
 [245] General Session · CALIFORNIAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [246] Symposium · THE BELLE GLADE CULTURE REVISITED
 The Belle Glade culture is one of the least understood prehistoric cultures. The culture area is confined to the bounds of the
 Kissimmee River Valley and Lake Okeechobee Basin and terminates somewhere in the northern Everglades. Early
 investigations lacked the opportunities that methods and theories afford today. Many of the early conclusions regarding this
 culture were drawn from other regions and applied without the benefit of data-driven testing of these hypotheses. The lectures
 presented in this symposium will discuss the results and inferences made from recent investigations using modern methodologies
 in the Belle Glade region.
 [247] General Session · THEORETICAL APPROACHES IN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [248] Forum · ARCHAEOLOGICAL “ART”: ART, MATERIAL CULTURE, VISUAL CULTURE, OR SOMETHING ELSE?
 Archaeologists and anthropologists agree that the modern, Western concept of “art” is misleading when applied to objects from
 other cultural contexts. Yet simply abolishing “art” and treating objects such as pictures, sculptures, and music as “material
 culture” may obscure how they interact affectively with people using them. A third, recent position reclaims “art” as a kind of
 material culture with specific aesthetic or social powers, sometimes linked into cosmological, sexual, racial, or social hierarchies.
 As a fourth approach, if “art” is our category of objects with special affective powers, do other peoples have equivalent—or
 radically different—categories? Can archaeologists investigate how ancient people understood the ontological nature, power,
 value, and danger of special things, how they affected people, and how people interacted with them?
     This forum—sponsored by the Cambridge Archaeological Journal—poses several questions:
 • Is the term "art" actually useful? If so, how? If not, what conceptual vocabulary fits the problem?
 • Do critiques in anthropology, archaeology, art history, and visual culture provide helpful ways forward?
 • How can we theorise cultures of seeing and hearing? Can we generalise about them?
 • Are there analytical strategies for accessing them in material objects?
 [249] Forum · ISSUES IN SUBMERGED PREHISTORIC ARCHAEOLOGY IN THE AMERICAS
 Over the past 40 years, archaeologists have conclusively demonstrated the ability to identify and sample archaeological sites of
 great antiquity that are preserved in submerged contexts. It is no longer a matter of arguing for the potential of submerged sites,
 or needing to demonstrate the validity of the basic methodologies. While the submerged archaeological record offers unique
 opportunities for investigating time periods, cultures, and adaptations that are only poorly known on land, underwater research to
 date has focused on chance discoveries and isolated finds, and rarely produces the systematic coverage of space and material
 culture that is needed to conduct anthropologically relevant research. Given the growing number of researchers actively engaged
 in this type of work, questions abound concerning future directions for submerged prehistoric archaeological research. The
 panelists for this session include academic, regulatory, and CRM professionals, with experience across the Americas. Topics of
 discussion will include, but are not limited to, how to operationalize regional approaches, the integration of terrestrial and
 submerged sites research, and the roles of funding and development in underwater research.
 [250] Forum · WHO OWNS THE PAST? A DISCUSSION BETWEEN NAT GEO'S DIGGERS AND PROFESSIONAL
 ARCHAEOLOGISTS
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             33
 (SPONSORED BY MEDIA RELATIONS COMMITTEE)
 This panel will consist of a friendly exchange between the personalities of National Geographic’s Diggers, their staff
 archaeologist, and archaeologists from both the academy and cultural resource management firms. The topic of the discussion
 will be “Who owns the past?” and will focus on how shows like Diggers, and other media, can bring together metal detectors and
 professional archaeologists to preserve the past, and encourage the public to engage with their cultural heritage. Tensions
 between the television program, other media, and metal detectors in general, and professional archaeologists will be addressed,
 with an objective of uncovering how the groups can work together in the future.
 [251] Symposium · "UNLESS WE REMEMBER WE CANNOT UNDERSTAND": ARCHAEOLOGICAL INQUIRIES INTO THE
 ACT OF REMEMBERING
 This session aims to provide a variety of perspectives on the relationship between archaeological inquiry and memory. Along with
 asking how the act of archaeological research contributes to memorialization and commemoration, we aim to disentangle
 definitions of memory for different stakeholder communities by shedding light on various scales of memory (individual, societal,
 etc.). Further, this session will consider how memory work can shape or challenge current interpretations of the past, and how
 memory from documents, ethnography, and other sources interlace with archaeological research. What types of memory are
 typically addressed in archaeology and are certain types privileged over others? This session seeks to examine which people or
 events get remembered through archaeology, what privileges we take in our memory work, and how, why, and for whom we
 practice archaeological research.
 [252] General Session · SOUTH ASIA
 [253] Symposium · ADVENTURES IN ARCHAEOLOGY: A SYMPOSIUM IN HONOR OF WM. JERALD KENNEDY
 For over three decades, Wm. Jerald Kennedy mentored undergraduate and graduate students at Florida Atlantic University.
 Students interested in archaeology at the growing Boca Raton campus were welcomed by Jerry’s affable nature and inquisitive
 personality. He mastered the art of connecting students with the right projects and field opportunities, often providing subtle
 direction, sometimes in ways that those students only understood years or decades later. Jerry received his Ph.D. from Tulane in
 1968, based on pioneering research conducted in Costa Rica, but his work over the next 40 years reached from Central America
 to Florida, and from Ireland to Ecuador. He frequently deployed science and technology applications in archaeology, and
 pioneered the use of GIS in Florida field surveys, along with proton magnetometer remote sensing, PIXE analysis, thin-sectioning,
 and more. Jerry’s work was always student-centered and he encouraged us to follow our interests and passions. Through his
 example, we learned public archaeology and the value of community-based research. This symposium brings together some of
 Jerry’s colleagues and students who share their research in tribute to their mentor and friend. Jerry was named Professor
 Emeritus in 2003.
 [254] General Session · WORLDWIDE PRESERVATION AND HERITAGE MANAGEMENT: ADVANCES AND CHALLENGES
 [255] General Session · PREHISPANIC ANDEAN TECHNOLOGIES
 [256] Symposium · UNDERSTANDING CLASSIC MAYA HEGEMONIC NETWORKS THROUGH TEXTUAL-MATERIAL
 SYNERGIES: THE CASE OF THE “SNAKE” KINGDOM
 Over the past two decades, it has become increasingly clear that the ancient Maya political landscape was permeated by
 asymmetrical power relations. The hegemonic networks these created fluctuated through time, but the steady presence of a few
 especially dominant polities shows that they were a persistent feature with very real socio-political effects. Yet, much about these
 regional systems remains unexplained. Their developmental history, systems of maintenance, coercive mechanisms, degree of
 cultural assimilation, and impact on their respective patron and client economies are all issues in play. In this symposium, we
 propose to combine archaeological and epigraphic approaches in order to unravel deeper layers of what are in some cases
 entrenched, at others ephemeral, connections. Focusing on the impact of the Kaanul “Snake” kingdom seated at Calakmul,
 Campeche, Mexico, scholars will collaborate to synergize textual and material data from different polities to help define and
 delineate the nature of the most pervasive and successful hegemonic network of the Late Classic Maya.
 [257] General Session · EUROPEAN BRONZE AGE
 [258] Symposium · COLLABORATIONS AND COMPETITION BETWEEN PROFESSIONALS AND NONPROFESSIONALS IN
 THE PRODUCTION OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL KNOWLEDGE IN THE AMERICAS
 (SPONSORED BY HAIG BIENNIAL GORDON R. WILLEY SYMPOSIUM ON THE HISTORY OF ARCHAEOLOGY)
 The archaeological record has always intrigued a wide variety of people with different interests, aesthetics, and aspirations, only
 some of whom became recognized as professionals—and they, too, are a diverse group, as the succession of "new archaeology"
 movements attests. How Americanist archaeological institutions emerged and grew from the interactions of such "founders," how
 professional identities were forged—both by excluding and embracing collectors, antiquarians, amateurs, or avocationalists in
 complex social networks—and how the creation of new knowledge depended on the patterns of those interactions, are intriguing
 and enduring questions in the history of Americanist archaeology. A Gordon R. Willey symposium focused on the relationships of
 avocationalists (who lack professional credentials but aspire to contribute comparably to professionals) or amateurs, antiquarians,
 and collectors (who often had/have their own independent goals) with professionals opens up a wide field of inquiry aimed at
 better understanding the meaning and means of professionalization and its alternative conceptions, as well as the contingencies
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  34
 of knowledge production.
 [259] Symposium · RETHINKING THE INKA: THE VIEW FROM THE SOUTH
 Historically, the majority of archaeological research on Inka provincial rule has been done in the Collasuyu, the quarter of the
 empire that falls within what is today far southern Peru, Bolivia, Argentina, and Chile. More recently (since 2010, based on
 Thomson-Reuters Web of Knowledge), there are twice the number of articles on Collasuyu than on the rest of the empire
 combined. Yet, within the English-language literature on the Inka, this vast body of research (published primarily by Latin
 American archaeologists in Spanish) is infrequently acknowledged or cited. The findings of recent and long-term projects on the
 Inka in Collasuyu require us to rethink Inka provincial expansion and administration and the dynamics of Inka-local relations.
 Papers in this session highlight research on landscape and memory, political economy, ideology and materiality, and identity and
 authority, and as such contribute not only to Andean studies but to a general understanding of ancient empires.
 [260] Symposium · MY BEST (AND WORST) DAY AT FPAN: CELEBRATING 10 YEARS OF FLORIDA PUBLIC
 ARCHAEOLOGY NETWORK PROGRAM HIGHLIGHTS AND CONTINUING CHALLENGES
 The Florida Public Archaeology Network (FPAN) began operations in 2005 and since that time has experienced a range of public
 archaeology highs and lows. Papers in this session will be delivered by current and past staff asked to consider their best
 program and greatest challenge. Some of the highlights will include the Submerged Sites Education and Archaeological
 Stewardship (SSEAS), Cemetery Resource Protection Training (CRPT), Archaeology Works, Teacher in-service, local
 government assistance, and partnered programs with Florida’s Division of Historical Resources. Challenges include assessment,
 measuring impact, large population centers, rural outreach, turnover rate of partners, and navigating economic trends.
 [261] Symposium · WHAT DO WE MEAN BY “DIGITAL CURATION?”
 Archaeology is all about information. Increasingly, this information is derived from data that exists in digital formats.
 Archaeological investigations both create and utilize substantial amounts of digital data. Just as the physical objects recovered
 from archaeological field studies require proper curation, digital data generated by investigations need to be cared for so they can
 be accessed and re-studied in the future. The curation of digital archaeological data involves interrelated activities that may occur
 at different scales, e.g., for individual projects, for a single organization, or in a broadly-utilized repository. The overall goals of
 digital curation are to maintain, preserve, and add to the value of digital data (e.g., Lord, et al. 2004; Digital Curation Centre 2010;
 Choudhury et al. 2013). The presentations in this session will address one or more of these goals by describing organizations that
 provide overall digital curation services and projects that are compiling, publishing, and using digital data in various ways that add
 to the value of the digital data and related information.
 [262] Symposium · COMPARATIVE APPROACHES TO COMPLEXITY IN THE TROPICS
 Tropical environments around the world have been the foundation upon which many complex societies have risen, peaked, and
 ultimately collapsed. Exploring the complexities found within the environment, agricultural strategies, water management
 practices, urbanism, as well as social and political organizations, provide avenues to understanding why these classical state
 societies followed similar or divergent trajectories. Over years of discourse, a wealth of information has accumulated on these
 tropical societies, but only occasionally, have scholars collectively assessed and compared their research questions, methods,
 and results. This symposium provides an arena to discuss the importance of comparative approaches to understanding the
 complexities exhibited by tropical societies.
 [263] Symposium · MULTIDISCIPLINARY APPROACHES TO AMAZONIAN LANDSCAPES
 The symposium will explore the environmental and anthropogenic factors that have created a distinctive Amazonian landscape
 over the past millennia. Unlike the Andes and Mesoamerica, the Amazon region was long believed to be a pristine land, a place
 where the environment constrained the formation of complex social formations. However, it is now known that prior to European
 colonization, larger groups of people with hierarchical socio-political organization and extensive networks of communication
 inhabited this region. Archaeological and ethnohistorical data demonstrated that the natives in the Amazon actively modified the
 landscape to meet economic, political, and social needs. Thus, this distinctively anthropogenic landscape provides one of the
 most important database for understanding routinized social practices and their role in historical transformation.
 The presentations in this session will discuss theories of landscapes as culturally meaningful places and as products of the
 interaction between human and non-human entities. Case studies from diverse areas will demonstrate how the study of the
 Amazon landscape enriched our understanding of past social organization, religious organization, and historical change.
 [264] Symposium · INCIDENCIA, ARTICULACIÓN E INNOVACIÓN DEL CONOCIMIENTO ARQUEOLÓGICO EN LA COSTA
 DEL GOLFO MESOAMERICANO: ORGANIZACIÓN IDEOLÓGICA, POLÍTICA Y RITUAL. / IMPACTS, ARTICULATIONS AND
 INNOVATIONS IN THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL STUDY OF THE MESOAMERICAN GULF COAST: IDEOLOGICAL, POLITICAL
 Y RITUAL ORGANIZATION
 En este Simposio se establecerá un diálogo entre especialistas de sociedades prehispánicas de la Costa del Golfo
 Mesoamericano. El objetivo es evaluar la incidencia y articulación del conocimiento arqueológico e iconográfico que se tiene
 actualmente en la región. Esta sesión (1) está enfocada principalmente en la revisión de elementos ideológicos, políticos y
 rituales que constituyeron los fundamentos de organización social de los habitantes de algunos sitios prehispánicos de la Costa
 del Golfo.
 In this symposium, we are establishing a dialog between specialists in the prehispanic societies of the Mesoamerican Gulf Coast.
 The goal is to evaluate the impacts and articulation of archaeological and iconographical knowledge that exists for the region.
 This session (1) is focused primarily on the review of ideological, political, and ritual components that constructed the foundations
 of social organization of the inhabitants of various prehispanic settlements in the Gulf Coast.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               35
 [265] Poster Session · MUSEUM MEET AND GREET
 (SPONSORED BY THE COMMITTEE ON MUSEUMS, COLLECTIONS, AND CURATION)
 Many museums’ and repositories’ archaeological collections are filled to the brim with artifacts. These collections offer countless
 research projects that are all too often under-utilized. This poster session offers archaeologists an opportunity to get to know what
 types of collections museums and repositories have to offer and how they can go about accessing these collections for research.
 Come learn about aspects of collections that are under researched and be inspired to start a research project. Become informed
 about the current projects underway at various institutions that involve community outreach and collaborative projects with Native
 groups, and how you can assist with these efforts. This session will also allow for inquires about what archaeologists can do to
 improve the documentation of collections from the initial repository process all the way through to long term curation and future
 research.
 [266] Poster Session · NAGPRA AND BEYOND: SUCCESSES AND SHARED BENEFITS OF COLLABORATION
 (SPONSORED BY INDIGENOUS POPULATIONS INTEREST GROUP)
 This invited poster symposium will serve as a venue to continue building on the dialogue concerning the implementation of
 NAGPRA, collaboration and its many shared benefits, and the history of NAGPRA and laws leading up to its passage.
 Participants will present a wide variety of case studies from across the U.S. and represent the successes that have come from
 collaboration among Native American communities, museums, colleges/universities, archaeologists, and other stakeholders.
 Presentations will focus on the relationships that were built as a result of required consultations and repatriation events, but will
 also focus on collaborations and relationships that existed before the passage of NAGPRA and the laws that set precedence for
 national legislation. Poster topics will also extend beyond the scope of NAGPRA to highlight the successes of public education
 and outreach events and instances where upcoming generations have been educated about the importance of maintaining the
 ties that have been made or strengthened in the process.
 [267] Poster Session · CELEBRATING THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF A COMMUNITY OF PRESERVATION: FOREST SERVICE
 PARTNERS AND VOLUNTEERS
 (SPONSORED BY USDA FOREST SERVICE)
 National forests contain special places of historic and cultural importance to local communities, Native American tribes, and
 humanity. We rely on partners and volunteers to help us be stewards of these special places. This year we are honoring the 50th
 anniversary of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). The NHPA helps us maintain our connection to the land learning
 more about our past while managing for use into the future. This symposium will celebrate the research, interpretive programs,
 and stewardship efforts developed by the Forest Service together with partners and volunteers. These programs help unite a
 diverse community, including academics and interested citizens, towards common goals which further understanding,
 preservation, protection, access, and appreciation of our cultural resources.
 [268] Poster Session · RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH IN PETRIFIED FOREST NATIONAL PARK
 Petrified Forest National Park has been the subject of archaeological research for well over 100 years. In 2004, Congress
 authorized a boundary expansion, effectively doubling the protected land in Petrified Forest National Park. As these lands are
 slowly being purchased and added to the park, a three-year project began in 2013 to inventory cultural resources. This session
 presents the preliminary results of the survey project which have recorded a stunning density and diversity of archaeological
 remains. Archaeological sites spanning the last 10,000 years of human occupation have been identified and recorded, including
 most notably extensive preceramic sites and lithic landscapes, large Basketmaker villages, and a densely settled Puebloan
 landscape. The National Park Service has taken this opportunity to use the boundary expansion project as a teaching laboratory
 and platform for future investigation, incorporating student interns and researchers into the project. This session presents an
 update of the recent archaeology completed in Petrified Forest, and highlights some of the independent student research
 projects.
 [269] General Session · CURRENT RESEARCH IN SOUTHERN AND EASTERN AFRICA
 [270] General Session · SUBSISTENCE AND AGRICULTURAL STRATEGIES IN MESOAMERICA
 [271] General Session · GREEK AND ROMAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [272] Electronic Symposium · EVOLUTIONARY ARCHAEOLOGIES: NEW APPROACHES, METHODS, AND EMPIRICAL
 SUFFICIENCY
 Over the past decade, methodological advances and the expansion of the application of evolutionary frameworks have led to
 critical insights into a host of anthropological and archaeological problems. Enduring topics in evolutionary archaeology such as
 cultural transmission and population dynamics are benefiting from these new methodologies. Concurrently, expanding
 evolutionary models seek to explain specific human interactions and historic processes through the study of material culture. The
 papers in this symposium display the breadth of current archaeological research that engages with a range of evolutionary
 models, from the influence of cognitive biases in social learning and the impacts of population dynamics on cultural diversity to
 how optimal foraging and signaling models can help archaeologists tease apart the historical dynamics behind social practices.
 Our papers demonstrate how different evolutionary models are aiding archaeologists in teasing apart the dynamics behind
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               36
 assemblages in diverse contexts, ranging from the Classic Maya to enslaved plantation workers.
 [273] General Session · MAYAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 [274] General Session · PALEOINDIAN SETTLEMENT AND PORTABLE ART
 [275] Symposium · CURRENT BIOARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH IN THE CASAS GRANDES REGION
 Bioarchaeological research has played an important role in archaeological investigations of the Casas Grandes region, including
 interpretations of population growth, long-distance social interaction, and patterns of violence and sacrifices. There has been a
 steady increase of bioarchaeological analyses over the past several years that have built upon initial studies. The goal of this
 session is to provide a synthesis of current studies utilizing the large skeletal assemblage recovered from Paquimé, Convento,
 and surrounding sites. While the participants employ a range of bioarchaeological techniques, including genetic, isotopic,
 osteological, and paleobotanical analyses, their research converges on key issues in southwest/northwest prehistory, namely
 migration, subsistence, and social organization. By exploring population interaction and changes in subsistence practices over
 time, the results of these analyses can contribute significantly to the ongoing debate concerning the development of Medio period
 complexity, as well as the eventual collapse of Paquimé.
 [276] General Session · BIOANTROPOLOGICAL STUDIES IN SOUTH AMERICA
 [277] General Session · HUMAN-COASTAL INTERACTIONS IN THE PAST
 [278] General Session · EUROPEAN PALEOLITHIC AGE
 [279] General Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF NORTHERN SOUTH AMERICA: ECUADOR, COLOMBIA AND VENEZUELA
 [280] General Session · ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE CAROLINAS
 [281] General Session · COLONIAL ARCHAEOLOGY IN THE ANDES
 [282] Symposium · MORE THAN A LABEL: SOCIAL COMPLEXITY, VARIABILITY AND SOCIAL DIVERSITY IN THE
 ORINOCO AND AMAZON BASINS
 The variability of the social organization of precolumbian and colonial societies constitutes one of the most critical aspects to the
 archaeological debate in the Orinoco and Amazon basins. Since the seminal works of Lathrap, Meggers, Roosevelt, and
 Whitehead, the question about the nature of the sociopolitical, leadership on the societies from both the Orinoquian and
 Amazonia has been at the core of the archaeological and ethnohistorical research. The study of agricultural production,
 settlement patterns, and exchange among others, resulted central to understand the great diversity of social organization of the
 human groups in this area. This session proposes the discussion about the social political dynamics of the societies from the
 Orinoco and Amazon Basin. An important focus of the session´s discussion will rest on the methodological issues as well as the
 critics on the use of concepts as such as chiefdom, chiefs, chieftancy, and complex societies to understand the area’s cultural
 development.
 [283] Symposium · CONSUMPTION PATTERNS AND FUNERARY RITUALS AT THE SITE OF PANQUILMA, LURIN
 VALLEY, PERUVIAN CENTRAL COAST
 (SPONSORED BY INSTITUTO DE ESTUDIOS PERUANOS)
 According to ethnohistoric sources, during the Late Intermediate and Late Horizon periods, social landscape in the Lurin Valley
 was dominated by the coastal religious center of Pachacamac. This session will discuss the role of Panquilma, a rural community
 located 20 km up valley from Pachacamac, in the social organization of the Lurin Valley during these periods. Special emphasis
 will be placed in addressing the nature of the relationship between Panquilma and the religious center. To this end, papers in this
 session will present the results of the analyses of different types of materials such as botanic remains, animal bones, ceramics,
 and textiles, excavated during the 2015 field season at the site. Based on this information, we will propose the existence of well-
 defined intra site consumption patterns and activities, including the profuse performance of funerary rituals.
 [284] General Session · HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE MID-ATLANTIC
 [285] General Session · EASTERN WOODLANDS
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 37
 [286] General Session · EASTERN US BIOARCHAEOLOGY
 [287] General Session · PUBLIC ARCHAEOLOGY
 [288] Symposium · EXPLORING TWO THOUSAND YEARS OF HUMAN HABITATION IN THE BELIZE VALLEY: SITUATING
 CAHAL PECH IN LOWLAND MAYA PREHISTORY
 The Belize Valley has traditionally been considered a peripheral region of the southern Maya Lowlands. Twenty-eight years of
 research by the Belize Valley Archaeological Reconnaissance project at Cahal Pech have, however, demonstrated that the
 medium-sized polities of the Belize Valley actively participated in the socioeconomic and political processes that unfolded in the
 central Maya Lowlands. Research in the Belize Valley has also provided critical information for understanding the rise of cultural
 complexity in the Middle Preclassic Period, and the subsequent growth, fluorescence, and decline of Classic Period Maya
 civilization in this sub-region of the Maya Lowlands. Besides elucidating 2,000 years (ca. 1100/1000 B.C.–A.D. 1000) of
 prehistory at this major Belize Valley site, this session will also serve to demonstrate that Cahal Pech, and other Belize Valley
 sites were important participants in the events occurring in the Maya world from the Middle Preclassic to the Terminal Classic
 periods. It is expected that participants of the session employ a broad range of methodologies (e.g., settlement patterns,
 architectural analysis, mortuary analysis, ceramic studies, etc.) to accomplish the purpose of the session.
 [289] General Session · CONNECTIONS IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
 [290] Symposium · THE ARCHAEOLOGY, ART, AND ICONOGRAPHY OF FLORIDA’S WATERY LANDSCAPES
 (SPONSORED BY TOOMEY FOUNDATION)
 Frank Hamilton Cushing’s 1896 excavations at Key Marco revealed astonishing carved and painted objects of wood rarely seen
 by archaeologists. Those following in Cushing’s footsteps have assembled a corpus of aesthetic objects from Florida, often in
 perishable materials. These range from an embarrassing number of dugout canoes, to the elaborate paddle-stamped pottery of
 Swift Creek, and from the wooden animal carvings of Fort Center’s mortuary pond to the owl totem of Hontoon Island.
 Connections to neighboring areas have been sought with some success; in general, however, the diversity of imagery often
 makes comparison a challenge. The papers in this symposium explore new discoveries and revisit existing museum collections,
 asking new questions or employing innovative analytical techniques. Cushing concluded his slim Key Marco report with the
 surmise that the boundless life of the sea provided the energetic impulse behind the artworks that he uncovered. While we might
 reach a different conclusion today, it’s clear that ancient Florida is difficult to comfortably place within the southeast or Caribbean
 and that much of that difficulty arises from the iconography born of Florida’s watery landscapes.
 [291] Symposium · PRECLASSIC TO COLONIAL: CURRENT INVESTIGATIONS IN THE PETÉN LAKES REGION,
 GUATEMALA
 This session focuses on current archaeological research performed in the Petén lakes region, Guatemala. Speakers will present
 results from excavations and/or laboratory analyses from several Maya centers dating to different temporal periods from the
 Preclassic to Colonial Period. Recent research has highlighted the diversity of occupation in the region, and papers include in-
 depth discussions of ceramic, mortuary, and lithic analysis. The objective of this session is to facilitate information exchange
 among scholars in order to obtain a broader regional perspective on the cultural continuity and change in this area.
 [292] Symposium · RECENT APPLICATIONS OF LUMINESCENCE DATING IN ARCHAEOLOGY
 Luminescence dating is a well-established dating technique applicable to materials exposed to either heat or light in the past,
 including ceramics, fired lithics, and sediments. One advantage of luminescence dating, especially for ceramics, is that it directly
 dates the manufacture or last use of the pottery, rather than inferring a date from association of pottery with 14C-dated organic
 materials. In the past two decades, the application of luminescence dating has gradually increased in archaeological studies in
 the U.S. Several studies using luminescence dating for ceramics and sediments have been published recently. Recognizing that
 luminescence dating may now be “coming of age” in archaeology, we present in this session several recent applications of
 luminescence dating in archaeology. The papers include studies from the American southwest, Central and South America,
 Mexico and eastern and mid-continental United States. The goal of the session is to illustrate some of the potential of
 luminescence dating to answer research questions in archaeology.
 [293] Symposium · BEYOND THE ETHNICITY DEBATE: EXAMINING THE MANY CONTEXTS OF COLONOWARE
 Colonoware refers to handbuilt, low-fired earthenware likely produced by both Native Americans and enslaved Africans between
 the mid-seventeenth to the mid-nineteenth centuries in the United States. Traditionally, researchers have debated the ethnicity of
 colono producers by formulating arguments around specific vessel attributes that might be considered “Native American” or
 “African.” While these debates provide important insights, a focus on ethnicity obscures research avenues that can address
 critical questions about social and economic networks. The papers in this session move beyond the ethnicity debate to
 interrogate colonoware and its contexts, using attribute-based analyses and incorporating new analytical techniques, such as
 Geographic Information Systems and compositional analysis. The papers examine colonoware from a variety of perspectives to
 explore processes such as production, use, exchange, and interaction, and the ware’s role in local and regional economies. The
 studies cover a wide geographic distribution and demonstrate that this pottery tradition—while exhibiting general similarities in
 material traits—is also highly variable and based on the particular social and economic contexts of its users and producers.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             38
 [294] Symposium · NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN MESOAMERICAN SUBTERRANEAN ARCHAEOLOGY
 Subterranean archaeology is an outgrowth of Mesoamerican cave archaeology, as the latter has encountered new features, often
 human constructions, which fall outside of what are normally considered to be caves. The features require the specialized field
 methodologies first developed by cave archaeology and, thus far, all are considered landmarks in the ancient sacred landscape.
 As such, their importance derives from their association with the Maya concept of a sacred animate earth. The shift to the term
 subterranean archaeology serves to emphasize that a great deal more appears to have been occurring below the ground level in
 ancient times than archaeologists have heretofore appreciated. The expansion of the discipline’s field of vision is in its infancy so
 it is expected the types of subterranean features will continue to multiply in the future.
 [295] Symposium · FORESTS OF PLENTY: ETHNOGRAPHIC AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL RAINFORESTS AS HOTSPOTS OF
 HUMAN ACTIVITY
 In popular discourse, rainforests are synonymous with ‘nature’ and ‘wilderness,’ battlegrounds between apparently pristine floral,
 faunal, and human communities, and the unrelenting industrial and urban powers of the modern world. Indeed, in the 1980s,
 anthropologists and human ecologists argued that tropical rainforests were unattractive environments for long-term human
 navigation, subsistence, and occupation. However, archaeological and anthropological research over the last two decades has
 increasingly demonstrated that the tropical rainforests of the Americas, Africa, and Asia have been persistent ‘hotspots’ of human
 subsistence and activity across prehistoric, historical, and ethnographic periods. This symposium aims to connect and compare
 the regional and temporal diversity of these rainforest ecologies, and their associated records of human occupation, in order to
 understand their desirability for our species and its close relatives. In doing so, this symposium explores the developing
 methodologies that are increasing the resolution with which we can study human rainforest demographies, adaptations, and
 practices, as well as the ecological resilience of different rainforest habitats to both anthropogenic and climatic pressures.
 [296] Symposium · MODEL ENVIRONMENTS: HUMAN ECODYNAMICS ON ISLANDS
 (SPONSORED BY THE JOURNAL OF ISLAND AND COASTAL ARCHAEOLOGY)
 Although island archaeology has moved beyond the simplistic "islands as laboratories" view, islands continue to be used as
 models for coupled human and natural systems, or human ecodynamics. Island environments have the potential to serve as
 useful case studies for a range of important topics in world prehistory, especially when approached comparatively. This session
 will address a range of issues implied by human ecodynamics on islands, such as historical ecology, migration and interaction,
 subsistence change, conflict and territoriality, impacts on native biota, monumentality, and sociocultural evolution. Papers will
 address theoretical and substantive topics from islands and archipelagos across the globe. Those taking a comparative approach
 are especially welcome.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   1
 THE ANNUAL MEETING of the Society for American Archaeology provides a forum for the dissemination of knowledge and
 discussion. The views expressed at the sessions are solely those of the speakers and the Society does not endorse, approve, or
 censor them. Descriptions of events and titles are those of the organizers, not the Society.
                                   ABSTRACTS OF INDIVIDUAL PRESENTATIONS
A Lazagabaster, Ignacio [207] see Wilkin, Shevan
Abbott, David [289] see Schwartz, Christopher
Abell, Natalie and Myrto Georgakopoulou (University College London, Qatar)
[257]             Re-casting from Scrap: The Role of Ayia Irini in Bronze Age Aegean Metallurgy
Metallurgy is considered key in understanding the prominence of Ayia Irini during the Bronze Age in the Aegean Sea. Over the course of the Bronze Age,
metal production and circulation flourish, with Attica and the western Cyclades considered primary ore sources, with their importance fluctuating within this
period. The role of Ayia Irini, located in the center of this metal-bearing zone and with extensive evidence for local metallurgical activities, remains to be
clarified. A new project by the authors constitutes the first systematic analysis of the extensive collection of metal and metallurgical finds from Ayia Irini,
excavated in the late 1960s and 1970s. The methodology involves archival research, macroscopic examination of all finds including fabric categorization of
metallurgical ceramics, and non-invasive portable XRF analysis of metallic artifacts. Our research has so far identified over 1,000 objects, spanning all
Bronze Age periods of occupation, as well as subsequent historical periods. This paper summarizes the emerging picture with regards to spatial and
chronological distribution of Bronze Age metal and metallurgical finds at Ayia Irini. It discusses changing patterns of metal procurement, working, and
consumption across the site and considers typological and technological changes over time.
Abeyta, Armando [245] see Burnett, Katherine
Abrams, Elliot (OHIO University)
[119]             Discussant
Abtosway, Matthew
[234]             Monuments Unmasked
Ometepe Island, Zapatera Island and Las Isletas of Lake Nicaragua are home to a distinctive group of monumental ground stone statues of up to two
meters in height. Sometimes referred to as the “Alter-Ego” style, they depict humans with full animals on their back and shoulders, or elaborate
headdresses with animalistic imagery. Well known throughout the country, they are featured prominently in murals and even currency. Yet their purpose
and symbolism remains poorly understood due to challenges in dating production (estimates range between 300-1520 AD), but also difficulty in recovering
original details following centuries of physical and chemical weathering. Using photogrammetry, high resolution three dimensional models of many of these
statues were produced from thousands of photos collected over several years. These models offered the ability to look past the stained coloring and now
seemingly irregular surface revealing surprising new details. Decorative elements that are absent from artists’ depictions and aren’t apparent through visual
examination became discernable using these methods. Beyond a simple demonstration of photogrammetry’s applicability, it is hoped that this method will
inform iconographic comparisons with ceramics and statuary from other regions of Nicaragua and Costa Rica.
Acabado, Stephen [262] see Yakal, Madeleine
Acebo, Nathan (Stanford University)
[128]             Palimpsests in the Colonial Borderland at Black Star Canyon, Orange County, California
The Santa Ana mountain landscape of contemporary Orange County, CA has been dichotomously characterized as “a wild colonial borderland” and “a
prehistoric indigenous space” where the material and social histories of indigenous communities are ossified while legacies of Spanish, Mexican, and
American colonial society are both solidified and continued. Within this landscape, the Black Star Canyon village (CA-ORA-132) objectifies this historical
disjunction in that the site constitutes a multi-component prehistoric/historic period site that was associated with the local history of the “Battle of Black Star
Canyon,” in which recalcitrant Indians were accused of stealing horses and were subsequently killed in 1831 by American fur trappers. This paper seeks to
complicate the disunion the modern characterizations of the archaeological landscape highlighted above by exploring how prehistoric and colonial era
materialities of the mountain contributed to local and non-local indigenous practices of social and economic subversion in conjunction with the formulation
of citizenship and violence through time.
Acevedo, Veronica (Licenciada Veronica J. Acevedo)
[204]             Combined use of Different Lines of Evidence for the Analysis of Polychrome Archaeological Ceramics of the Quebrada de Humahuaca,
                  Jujuy, Argentina
Polychrome archaeological ceramics called “vírgulas or comas” hold a comprehensive but an unequal space distribution. They are found in limited
quantities in archaeological sites in regions as North and Central Puna, Quebrada de Humahuaca, Jujuy and Northeast areas of Argentina.These ceramics
vessels had been used in both regions since 900 AD until the Spanish post-colony. Then, we come to the conclusion about the movement of these
ceramics pieces with a significant use and a ritual or ceremonial consumption between borders. Thus, the combined use of different lines of evidence such
as actualistic studies and archaeometric techniques—paste analysis, ceramics petrography, Raman spectroscopy, and alike—have been enlightening to
classify shards and ceramics. In this current work and on-going research, technological and stylistic aspects have been considered to be analysed
throughout diverse lines of evidence which have let us stand closer to a possible identification of traditional workmanship that might have stemmed from a
passive expression of identity and so, have intended to communicate it. It was considered depicted shapes and sizes, particular surface finishes, design
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 2
elements represented by some of these fragments (vírgulas, recoating, use of hydroxyapatite), similarities in pastes with non-plastic white inclusions and
petrographic differences, among others.
Ackerly, Neal (Dos Rios Consultants, Inc.)
[168]             Prehistoric Land Use in the Southern Tularosa Basin, New Mexico
Systematic archaeological survey of more than 100,000 acres in the southern Tularosa Basin of New Mexico has resulted in the discovery of almost 600
prehistoric sites and upwards of 65,000 isolated occurrences. These data, combined with highly detailed information regarding environmental
characteristics of the study area, allow time-sequent reconstructions of land-use patterns over thousands of years. To anticipate more detailed discussions,
there is evidence for long-term central places that structured past land use in the southern Tularosa Basin.
Acosta, Jocelyn [93] see Copeland, Lauren
Acosta Ochoa, Guillermo [55] see Lohse, Jon
Acuff, Alana (College of Charleston), Jaime Ullinger (Quinnipiac University) and László Paja (University of Szeged)
[149]             Analysis of Possible Anatomical Order in Microexcavated Bronze Age Funerary Urn Material from Hungary
On-going excavations conducted by the BAKOTA project at the Bronze Age cemetery of Békés 103 in eastern Hungary have uncovered 69 human burials,
the majority of which are cremated skeletal remains deposited in ceramic urns. Cremains are an often-overlooked archaeological resource as information
regarding age at death, sex, and pathologies can be more difficult to assess after a body has been burned. While demographic information may be limited
in this context, the stratigraphic distribution of bones within their burial contexts may inform us about the treatment of the deceased and their deposition in
the archaeological record. This study sought to identify patterns of anatomical variation internal to discrete microstrata of one urn, Human Burial 54. Based
on a preliminary analysis (Paja et al. 2014), we hypothesized that there would be a concentration of cranial elements within upper levels of the urn,
whereas postcranial elements would be concentrated within lower levels. Bone fragments were evaluated by size, shape, and internal organization to
determine anatomical association and statistics were generated for each level. Our results substantiate our hypothesis, with the ratio of cranial to
postcranial elements decreasing in direct correlation with the microstratigraphic levels.
Acuna, Mary Jane [138] see Freidel, David
Adams, Chris [78] see Laluk, Nicholas
Adcock, Sarah E. (University of Chicago)
[74]              Exploring the Collapse of the Hittite Empire as a Social Phenomenon
In this paper, I explore how viewing collapse as a social and political phenomenon might change how we interpret the collapse of the Hittite empire in
Turkey at the end of the Late Bronze Age (ca. 1200 BC). To this end, I consider the implications of changes and continuities in animal management at two
sites in central Turkey following the collapse of the Hittite empire. The end of the Late Bronze Age was characterized by significant political and economic
disruption throughout the eastern Mediterranean, and the subsequent period has often been understood as a ‘Dark Age.’ Here I present the results of new
faunal analyses from the Hittite capital of Hattuşa and from Çadır Höyük, a rural town, monitoring the faunal evidence for changes and continuities in the
organization of practices related to the production, processing, and distribution of both antemortem and postmortem animal resources. By studying how
people used animals and their products at these two very different sites, I look for potential shifts in social practices across the Late Bronze-Early Iron Age
transition, and I consider how the Hittite collapse may have been experienced differently by people living in different parts of the empire.
[74]              Chair
Adderley, Paul (University of Stirling), James Woollett (Université Laval ), Guðrún Gísladóttir (Fornleifastofnunar Íslands (Institute of Archaeolo)
and Uggi Ævarsson (Minjastofnun Íslands (The Cultural Heritage Agency)
[95]              Increasing the Resolution from Climate Change to Weather Events: Understanding Past Land-use Management on the Svalbarð Estate,
                  North East Iceland
Climate change has commonly been invoked as the most major force in determining land-use in the Norse settlement of Iceland. Recently, climate studies
in the North Atlantic have focused on regional-scale shifts in temperature, ice-cover, and storminess. In contrast, the post-settlement period is increasingly
understood from excavation and analyses of the material culture associated with farming practices, as well as literature-based and geomorphological
perspectives. While climate evidence provided by regional proxies such as ice-core data interpretation is increasingly and readily available, the linkage
from these data to patterns of landscape use and management remains largely speculative. Furthermore, there is an obvious contention when considering
the direct impact of climate change on landscape productivities, relative to the ability for past farming communities to adapt. In this paper we examine the
results of a project being conducted across a set of farm-sites on the Svalbarð estate, north east Iceland. Examining both major farmsteads and those in
the hinterland, novel high-resolution instrumented analysis of above- and below-ground temperature and moisture conditions is scaled relative to regional
data. This enables us to model landscape productivities available to past farmers and, augmented by archaeological survey and excavation, to consider
detailed scenarios of past land-use.
Adler, Michael (Southern Methodist University)
[43]              Destruction of Stored Food in Pre-Contact Northern Rio Grande Pueblo Communities: Food for Thought
Past archaeological interpretations of site destruction and the elimination of associated food resources, namely through burning, focus largely on conflict-
based models of village warfare. This paper considers the role that food-related issues, particularly food-related toxins, might also have played in the
destruction of food resources and relocation of village populations during the late pre-contact (AD 1200-1540) period in the Northern Rio Grande region.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                3
Adler, Rachel (MS, Architectural Conservator, Los Alamos, NM, USA), Barbara Judy (National Park Service), Sarah Stokely (MSc, Architectural
Conservator, Washington, D.C., ) and Rory Gauthier (National Park Service (Retired))
[210]             Climate Change Challenges at Bandelier National Monument: Adapting Conservation and Monitoring Responses for Cultural Sites in the
                  Desert Southwest
The Ancestral Puebloan sites at Bandelier National Monument include both masonry pueblos and man-made cave sites. The dry climate of northern New
Mexico in conjunction with the environmental awareness and architectural ingenuity of the builders have played an important role in the preservation of
these sites, which continue to yield valuable archaeological information. Changes in the semi-arid climate in which the monument is located have begun to
threaten the equilibrium between these archaeological sites and their setting. Large-scale wildfires exacerbated by regional drying trends, and a
lengthened monsoon season characterized by an increase in storm severity, are examples of circumstances potentially tied to climate change that call for a
new approach to site preservation. This paper looks at how cultural resources programs at Bandelier managed two groups of sites in response to the
effects of climate change. One group has undergone several years of documentation, as well as treatment to protect it from erosion effects of a major
wildfire that took place in 2011. The other group is the subject of a proposed monitoring program to determine if natural environmental processes, visitor
access, climate change, or a combination of these are contributing to the deterioration of these resources.
Adovasio, J.M. [63] see McBrinn, Maxine
Adovasio, J. M. (Mercyhurst Archaeological Institute MAI), Tom Dillehay (Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN) and J. S. Illingworth (Mercyhurst
Archaeological Institute, Mercyhurst Un)
[69]              Another F-----g Basket Baper: Decorated Specimens from Huaca Prieta, Peru
Recent analysis of the basketry assemblage derived from the re-excavation of Huaca Prieta, Peru indicate the production of several highly complex “wall”
types concurrently with escalating cultural complexity at this unique coastal site. These basketry variations include two expressions of twining which are
presently unparalleled in South America. Both types also exhibit blue dyed elements and appear to have been intentionally dismembered before
deposition. The technical attributes, chronological placement, and depositional context of these specimens are described and an assessment of their
potential role(s) in the genesis and subsequent evolution of cultural complexity in this portion of South America is offered.
Aebersold, Luisa (University of Texas at Austin)
[130]             The Blue Creek Rejollada Revisited: Transitional Imprints on Sedimentological Records
Early to mid-Holocene humans domesticated a wide variety of plants and animals, which widely changed societies and environments around the world.
The Archaic period in the Maya Lowlands was suited for this transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture with its abundant resources such as edible
wild plants and animals, fertile soils, and abundant freshwater. To better understand long-term societal and environmental changes by early inhabitants,
we studied sedimentation and paleosols in a collapsed doline, called a rejollada, and a soil toposequence over the 200 m slope profile to the ancient Maya
site of Blue Creek, Belize. Blue Creek had a known occupation from the Middle Preclassic, about 2500 B.P., through the Late Classic, about 1100 B.P.
We will present a chronology of the site’s human activities, as well as dated paleosol and sedimentation rates based on 2003 and 2015 excavations to a
depth of 5 m. We will also present findings from a series of paleosols, between 3.5 and 2.9 m, and their associated stone tools dated to the Archaic period
(3900 to 4300 BP) based on AMS dating, chemical and texture analysis, and Pb 210 dating.
[130]             Chair
Ævarsson, Uggi [95] see Adderley, Paul
Afshari, Sebastian [20] see Vaughan, Andrew
Agolli, Esmeralda (University of Tirana)
[188]             The Use of Space: Settlement Pattern during the Late Prehistory in the Lake of Small Prespa (Southeast Albania)
The question of settlement pattern during the Late Prehistory (Late Bronze and Early Iron Age 1300–900 B.C.) in Albania comprises an unresolved topic
constantly discussed over during the last few decades. The high presence of the tumuli mounds and the lack of the contemporary data from a settlement
context complicated increasingly the understanding of the way these communities conceptualized their space and exploited the environment. However,
recent excavation campaigns in the cave of Tren and the hill above it, and some additional data recorded from latter surveys around the lake of Small
Prespa and the adjacent valley of river Devoll offer some invaluable insights regarding the settlement pattern. The paper argues that during the Late
Prehistory in this area the location in one settlement is not at all practiced. On contrary, the Late Prehistoric communities largely conditioned by the
environmental factors, demographics, natural defense, and social organization chose to live at various small and convenient dwelling spots close and
around the lake.
Agüero, Carolina [76] see Santana Sagredo, Francisca
Aguilar Pérez, María Antonia (Arqueóloga)
[216]             ¿Y antes de la playa de Vicente?: Cronología de sitios prehispánicos en el Tesechoacán
El municipio veracruzano de Playa Vicente es fundado oficialmente en 1873 a partir de un caserío que se desarrolló alrededor de una playa formada a
orillas del río Tesechoacán, el asentamiento es producto de la ruta que seguían los comerciantes de madera que bajaban de la sierra de Oaxaca hacía las
costas veracruzanas. Sin embargo antes de que se establecieran allí los nuevos lugareños el área estuvo habitada tiempo atrás, pero de aquellos
pobladores poco se ha sabido. En la última década se han localizado sitios arqueológicos que dan cuenta de los antiguos centros de población
prehispánica que se desarrollaron en esa zona y que algunos autores han llamado “zona de confluencia” por su situación geográfica entre los llanos y la
sierra, sitios que presentan cronologías diversas y que dan cuenta del pasado de “la playa de Vicente.”
Aguirre-Samudio, Ana (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico), Blanca González-Sobrino (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico),
Rafael Montiel (Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para la Biodivers), Brenda Álvarez-Sandoval (Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para la
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   4
Biodivers) and Abigail Meza-Peñaloza (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico)
[236]            Ancient DNA in Archaeological Bone Tools from La Ventilla, Teotihuacan: Sex Determination and Genetic Structure
La Ventilla is a household from Teotihuacan, a great city whose people lived during the Classic Period (1-700 A.C) reaching a vast demographic grow.
Farmers and merchants were residents of La Ventilla. Archaeological evidence has shown commercial, political, and service interchanges with
Teotihuacan spreading to all of Mexico. We analyzed population diversity and genetic distance between La Ventilla and 11 ancient groups from Mexico.
Materials from a bone tools set were processed yielding ancient DNA; the protocol was made under rigorous methodology preventing contamination. The
results were verified in other ancient DNA laboratory. Sex determination with amelogenin gene was compared with tool type and American mitochondrial
variation. Sample consisted in 45 percent males and 55 perecent females with haplogroups A (58 perecent), B (16 perecent), C (21 perecent) and D (5
perecent). A suit of cluster analysis, genetic distance, and a population movement estimation showed demographic connections between La Ventilla and
groups from the center and south of Mexico. Discriminant analysis had two population agglomerative hierarchical clustering. We found genetic structure of
19.68 perecent (p< 0.01). We inferred a population dynamic may respond to gene flow and movement among La Ventilla and other places from Mexico.
These processes contributed to changes in the structure of the inhabitants of Mesoamerica.
Ahlman, Todd (Texas State University)
[126]            The Historic House Yard Landscapes of St. Kitts’ Southeast Peninsula Plantations
Like most of the Leeward Islands, St. Kitts' historic economy was powered by sugar cultivation. Enslaved Africans and ultimately freedmen were the labor
source in the sugar fields and from the late seventeenth century onward enslaved Africans outnumbered Europeans 15 to 1. By the early nineteenth
century there were over 100 known slave villages across the island. Using data from three investigated plantation sites from St. Kitts’ southeast peninsula,
the spatial arrangement of the enslaved African villages and house yards are compared. At a macroscale, enslaved Africans took advantage of and
manipulated the natural landscape in each village’s spatial arrangement. A close examination of one village shows how enslaved Africans organized their
activity areas to shield themselves from the overseer as well as other village members. Diachronic changes and intra-village differences in housing types
are also explored.
Ahlrichs, Robert (UW-Milwaukee)
[285]            Differential Use of Copper in Northern and Southern Wisconsin Socieities
Avocational collectors in Wisconsin have collected thousands of copper artifacts over the last century and half. This copper has gone largely unexamined
by the professional archaeological community. The archaeological literature is therefore silent on basic facts such as size ranges and changes in use of the
raw material from society to society. Copper entered the economic systems of these Archaic Wisconsin societies as an innovative, but ultimately redundant
raw material given the existence of bone and stone artifacts of apparently equivalent use-value. It is expected that copper as a raw material fundamentally
changed the cultural systems of its adoptive societies and that its use will vary relative to its accessibility. This study reports in-progress results from a large
copper collection from both Lake Koshkonong in southeast Wisconsin and the Lake Nokomis and Pembine areas in northern Wisconsin. The use of copper
as a raw material will be compared between northern and southern Wisconsin locales using metric, morphological, and use wear data from the three
source areas.
[285]            Chair
Ajithprasad, P. [134] see Brad, Chase
Akemann, Kevin
[244]            An Intrasite Analysis of Faunal Remains at the Bell Site (47-Wn-9)
GIS is being used increasingly in archaeology today, but can also enhance the understanding—through intrasite analysis—of sites excavated before GIS
became popular. The Bell site (47-Wn-9), in Winnebago County, Wisconsin, is one such site. The faunal remains collected there represent two short,
distinct occupation periods and distinct cultural traditions. An analysis of the quantity, artifact associations, and provenience of faunal remains recovered
can add to the established understanding of the site's utilization, and point the way to areas where further analysis can be conducted.
Akgül, Gülfirde [103] see Viganò, Claudia
Akmenkalns, Jessika (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[224]            Understanding Sociopolitical Change through Ceramic Morphological Diversity in the Ancient Nubian Hinterlands
Ceramics have played a central role in archaeological studies of ancient Nubia. They have been used to refine the regional chronology and to enhance our
understanding of social, political, and economic processes. While many such studies have focused primarily on large, centralized polities, fewer attempts
have been made to investigate how hinterland communities engaged with changing life ways throughout the region’s long cultural history. This paper
examines a collection of ceramic samples taken from sites in the Upper Nubian hinterland during the UCLA Dongola Reach Expedition conducted in 1997
and 1998 and investigates how ceramic repertoires changed alongside shifting sociopolitical and environmental conditions from the Neolithic through the
Islamic period. I employ diversity analysis to examine diachronic changes in ceramic morphological diversity across the sites sampled. The evidence
suggests a trend of group conformity, cooperation, and inclusivity across neighboring communities in the Neolithic, Pre-Kerma, and Kerma periods, which I
take to indicate the presence of a shared regional habitus. This was followed by heightened exclusivity and variation concomitant with the changing social
organization that characterized the New Kingdom through the Islamic period, which I argue indicates the creation of unique, highly localized community
identities.
Akoshima, Kaoru (Tohoku University)
[170]            Late Wurm Adaptive Systems in Tohoku Japan: Viewed from Lithic Use-Wear Analysis
The paper investigates lithic use-wear data from the viewpoint of human mobility patterns and functional inter-site variability. Microwear analysis based on
controlled experiments was initiated in 1970s in Japan, and the method combined both a high power and low power (that is, high magnification and low
magnification) approach. Since then accumulated case studies focused on the Upper Paleolithic period of Northeastern Honshu Island of Japan (Tohoku
District). Chronological sequences and characteristic site structure, and analyses of spatial distributions in conjunction with functional identification of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  5
formal tools and debitage, shed light on the variety of adaptive systems during the late Wurm period. The presentation includes problems such as transition
to the Upper Paleolithic, emergence of blade techniques, large “ring model” of settlements with lithic concentrations, meaning of various types of knife
blades, introduction of micro-blade technology to the archipelago from the north, and cultural transformation toward the Jomon Age. Results of meticulous
microwear analysis are connected to large scale understanding of human adaptations with key concepts of technological organizations and inter-intra site
variabilities.
Al Kuntar, Salam (University of Pennsylvaina)
[11]              Heritage Preservation Efforts in Northwest Syria
As the security situation in northern Syria deteriorated following the beginning of the Syrian Revolution/civil war, members of civil society, heritage activists,
and museum workers have placed themselves at risk to safeguard the country’s cultural heritage. This paper discusses two heritage protection projects in
the Idlib region in northwest Syria, a region that has fallen out of the control of the Assad regime to opposition groups. The projects are self-initiative efforts
by local activists and are supported by the international Safeguarding the Heritage of Syria and Iraq Project. Situated at one World Heritage Site and
another important Tentative World Heritage Site, these projects aim to document damage, preserve the most at-risk parts of the sites, and prevent further
site looting. Implementation teams leading these efforts are working closely with local communities and internally-displaced Syrians who have taken refuge
at the heritage sites, with the goal of involving these affected groups directly in the protection of their cultural heritage.
Alaica, Aleksa [99] see Spence-Morrow, Giles
Alaica, Aleksa (University of Toronto)
[135]             Moving the Animal: Camelid Herding on the North Coast of Peru and the Temporalities of Human-Animal Interactions during the Moche
                  Period
The north coast of Peru during the Middle Horizon Period witnessed a shift in the way that people, things, and animals moved across the landscape. The
often fragmented polities that formed the occupation sites for communities engaged in Moche ideology and politics were also associated with trade and
interregional interaction on a different scale. The role of animals in this exchange is often overlooked and taken for granted. Camelids (alpacas and llamas)
were the conduits of mobility within the highlands and on the coast of Peru with skeletal evidence revealing the intensity of caravan trading. If we consider
the amount of time dedicated to the exchange of things, ideas, languages, and even the movement of entire communities, animals—in particular,
camelids—were present for each of these processes. The reorganization of temporalities that surrounded camelids not only reordered the lives of how
these animals were used but it also restructured the way that human communities engaged with the landscape, with each other, and how the notion of
value was altered by the use of animals. This paper will argue that the intensified use of animals as a means of mobility ignited a recapitulation of
communities, politics, and self.
Albarracin-Jordan, Juan [139] see Capriles, Jose
Albert, Rosa María [125] see Alonso Eguíluz, Mónica
Alberti, Benjamin [99] see Laguens, Andres
Albury, Nancy [222] see Steadman, David
Alcaina Mateos, Jonas [125] see Lancelotti, Carla
Alcantara, Keitlyn (Vanderbilt University Department of Anthropology), Lane F. Fargher (Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados de),
Aurelio Lopez Corral (Instituto Nacional de Antropología y Historia - Tl), John K. Millhauser (Department of Sociology and Anthropology, North
Ca) and Verenice Y. Heredia Espinoza (Centro de Estudios Arqueológicos, El Colegio de Mi)
[86]              Burial Distribution as a Reflection of Social Organization in Late Postclassic Tlaxcallan
The Late Postclassic state of Tlaxcallan represents a void in Aztec hegemony that is still poorly understood. Ethnohistoric studies, extensive archaeological
survey and limited excavation suggest that the social and political organization of this group diverged from the empire’s policies of rule, allowing for much
local authority and cooperative governance. Fargher et al. (2010) argue that a unique form of social organization may have contributed to the state’s ability
to remain autonomous from the Aztec Empire. Mortuary archaeology and the analysis of burial patterns contribute a new line of evidence for reconstructing
past ideology, social organization, and political relationships. Comparing preliminary excavation results to patterns found at earlier and contemporaneous
sites in Mesoamerica, this paper will use mortuary archaeology to explore the significance of burial patterns at Tlaxcallan. Excavations conducted in the
2013–2015 field seasons of the Proyecto Arqueológico de Tepeticpac and Tlaxcallan Archaeological Project revealed burials in four central plazas, with no
burials appearing in household contexts. This pattern may suggest a more collective burial trend, which downplayed residential structures as centers for
the creation of group identity. The burial patterns found will be further discussed in the presentation.
[86]              Chair
Alconini, Sonia (University of Texas At San Antonio)
[51]              Inka Frontier Political Economy: The Kallawayas and Yampara
In this paper I will evaluate the political economy of the ancient Inka imperial frontier in order to understand the ways in which competing border lords
affiliated themselves to the empire, including associated processes of social competition, specialized production, and changes in the indigenous local
trajectories. In doing so, I will explore two Inka frontier segments. The first is located in the Yampara territory in the southeastern region, and the second, in
the central frontier in the Kallawaya region. Using regional-scale surveys, site excavations, and comparison of the architecture and cultural materials, I will
discuss the ways in which the Inka presence affected existing settlement trajectories, promoted changes in the exchange networks and local economies,
and prompted the massive migration of mitmaqkuna colonies.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  6
[259]             Discussant
Alcover, Omar (Brown University)
[228]             Pyramids, Plazas, and Walls: Hilltop Settlements at the Periphery of El Zotz, Guatemala
Landscape studies provide new insights into the ways communities manipulated and used their environments. Among the ancient Maya, settlements at the
outskirts of important centers varied greatly in design, elevation, and function, pointing to a unique and complementary form of urbanism. Among these,
hilltop groups are key to understanding some of the social and political dynamics taking place in the Maya Lowlands. Serving as strategic locales in the
landscape, hilltop settlements served varying roles for the nearby community. Recent research at the site of El Zotz draws attention to the importance of
hilltop groups at the periphery of civic-ceremonial centers, evidencing clustering of Early Classic (AD 250–AD 600) settlements at hilltops with subsequent
Late Classic (A.D. 600–900) architectural groups dispersed on ridges and valleys. The design and material culture associated with these structures
suggest that they were unique, yet complementary architectural groups, serving particular social and political roles in the Buena Vista valley. Drawing on
GIS analysis, landscape studies, and ethnographic research, this paper seeks to understand changes in the use and manipulation of the landscape in light
of varying political dynamics taking place in the Maya Lowlands during the Early Classic to Late Classic transition.
[228]             Chair
Aldana, Gerardo (University of California Santa Barbara)
[273]             14C and Maya Long Count Dates: Refining the Approach to Classic Maya Chronologies
In 2013, an innovative study applied Bayesian statistical analysis to new AMS 14C samples taken from a Classic Maya lintel originating at Tikal. Because
the lintel was inscribed with a Maya Long Count date, the authors argued that the results of their study confirmed the Calendar Correlation Constant known
as the GMT. There are, however, two key problems with this new study and its conclusions. The first is an error of interpretation of the hieroglyphic text; the
second is the questionable handling of an underlying assumption within their problem formulation. In this paper, I offer a new analysis of the 14C record
from Tikal that incorporates the abovementioned study’s new data, but yields different results. For this study, I offer a new method for integrating multiple
Long Count dates into the construction of a site’s/structure’s 14C chronology, I correct the error in hieroglyphic interpretation, and I reconsider the key
assumption behind the former study’s conclusion. The result supports the broader application of Bayesian statistics to 14C datasets within Maya
archaeology, and while it corroborates the 1σ accuracy of the GMT, at the same time it opens up the possibility of revision by 20 or more years.
Aldenderfer, Mark (University of California)
[178]             Early Expressions of Persistent Leadership and Inequality in the Andean Preceramic
Research over the past few decades in the Andean world has identified a number of preludes to sociopolitical complexity, persistent leadership, and
emergent inequality that involve a diversity of social and cultural forms, including the control and manipulation of ritual or religious power, the mobilization
of labor to construct a variety of forms of public architecture, the display of status or prestige items, and control over access to socially valued goods. In
many archaeological contexts across the region, different combinations of these preludes have been observed. Unsurprisingly, not all preludes lead to
persistent leadership and a greater degree of social inequality. In this paper, I will compare and contrast successful and failed trajectories in these preludes
in search of commonalities that help to explain the emergence of complexity from this preceramic baseline.
Alegria, Crystal [71] see Malloy, Maureen
Alemán, Diana [102] see Seki, Yuji
Alex, Lynn [266] see Pope, Melody
Alexander, Rani (New Mexico State University) and Héctor Hernández Álvarez (Facultad de Ciencias Antropologicas, Universidad A)
[100]             Household Ecology and the Legacy of the Secondary Products Revolution in Yucatán
In this paper we examine the changes in household ecology that resulted from the introduction of European domesticates and their secondary products to
Yucatan after the sixteenth century Spanish invasion. Andrew Sherratt proposed that nineteenth-century industrial capitalism in Europe was predicated on
the substitution of animal traction and derivative secondary products for human muscle power. Yet, in Yucatan this developmental trajectory was not
straightforward. The adoption of new plants, animals, and their derivative products not only transformed local ecologies but also contributed to uneven
socioeconomic development across the peninsula. Archaeological and zooarchaeological evidence dating to the nineteenth and twentieth centuries from
laborers’ house lots at the Hacienda San Pedro Cholul is compared to evidence from domestic contexts found in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
farming settlements in central Yucatan. The environmental legacies of Sherratt’s secondary products revolution in Yucatan involved alteration of mutualistic
relations among humans, plants, and animals; changes in farmers’ patterns of movement between their houses and their fields, household organization
and the gendered division of labor; and transformation of hydraulic technologies and transportation across the landscape.
Alexander, Craig [146] see Freund, Kyle
Alexandrino Ocaña, Grace (Stanford University - PACO) and Rosa Maria Varillas Palacios (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú - PACO)
[151]             Cerro de Oro Funerary Practices: Continuity and Change in Two Funerary Bundles from the South Coast of Peru
The following presentation will compare and contrast two funerary bundles found in the Cerro de Oro site (Cañete Valley, Peru). One from an intrusive Wari
funerary structure, with more than 250 offerings, including over 100 textiles which present an unusual variety of manufacturing techniques and
iconography. The other, from a local earlier Cerro de Oro occupation; though smaller in size and quantity of offerings, is still impressive being the first
bundle of this complexity found for this time period. By making special emphasis on the analyses of the textile offerings, it will be attempted to show both
continuity and change in the funerary practices for these two different occupations of the same site.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  7
Alfaro, Silvia [57] see Falabella, Fernanda
Alfonso-Durruty, Marta (Kansas State University, SASW Department), Flavia Morello (Centro de Estudios del Hombre Austral, Instituto d), Miguel
Vilar (Genographic Program, National Geographic Foundatio), Nicole Misarti (Water and Environmental Research Center (WERC), Un) and
Headley Dustin (Department of Interior Architecture and Product De)
[204]             Preservation of Ancient Teeth Geomorphometry through Computer Tomography Scanning and 3D Printing: An Accuracy Test
Human remains are pivotal to our understanding of the past. While much bioarchaeological analysis continues to rely on macroscopic and non-invasive
methods, scientific and technological developments in the last 30 years have revolutionized the discipline. Among others, isotope analyses, and the
extraction of ancient DNA (aDNA) have further unveiled the richness of information that bones and teeth can provide. In spite of their potential, the
application of these methods is limited due to their invasive and destructive nature. The development of 3D technology has dramatically altered the storage
and dissemination of archaeological material for educational, culture management, and scholarly projects. This study presents the implementation of
Computed Tomography scanning (CT) along with 3D printing, in the fabrication of casts of ancient teeth prior to aDNA extraction and sequencing. This
study presents all the processes involved in the production of an accurate product, including: CT scanning, CT imaging conversion for 3D printing, and 3D
printing. The study also compares the original teeth with their respective casts to test the accuracy of the information generated by the 3D models. Overall,
this application preserves the geomorphometry of the teeth, while enabling their replication and expanded dissemination through digital file sharing and
reprinting.
Alfonso-Durruty, Marta [206] see Vilar, Miguel
Alix, Claire [124] see Crawford, Laura
Alix, Claire (CNRS UMR9096 / Université de Paris 1 Sorbonne), Glenn P. Juday (Natural Resources and Extension, University of Ala) and Jess
Ryan (Natural Resources and Extension, University of Ala)
[217]             Following in Giddings' Footsteps—Tree-Ring Signal, Dendro-Provenance, Travel Time and Climate Sensitivity of Alaska River Driftwood, a
                  Key to Tree-Ring Dating of Archaeological Wood in Coastal Alaska
Giddings’ pioneering dendrochronology research in Alaska and his extensive and impressive sample collections were left mostly untouched since the
1960s. For the last 10+ years, we have undertaken an effort to re-establish a library of dendrochronologies from live trees along the main driftwood-
producing rivers in Alaska to re-initiate archaeological tree-ring research in Arctic coastal regions. We are now examining Giddings’ original samples, most
of which were never measured. We believe these samples have the potential to lengthen chronologies characteristic of different forest types and to confirm
regional tree-ring signals in the state. Trees from interior Alaska fall in the rivers and are transported downstream to the sea. Some logs get stuck in the
rivers, others sink in the ocean, while a few end up on the coast and are used by people. Over the centuries, wood remains have been frozen into
archaeological middens, which are under-utilized for chronological and climatic reconstructions. In this paper, we refine Giddings’ original conclusions,
propose an average transit time for driftwood between place of origin and first use, and discuss applicability of chronologies to archaeological wood.
Potentially, Giddings’ trees also share common climate signals, which would be useful for long-term climate reconstructions.
Alizadeh, Karim (Harvard University)
[87]              Residential Segregation at Köhne Shahar, an Early Bronze Age Settlement in Iranian Azerbaijan
There are some important differences between modern and ancient urban centers in terms of contextual variables and some social dynamics; however,
theoretical frameworks derived from studies on social composition of modern urban centers can provide useful insights into the organizational dynamics of
complex societies in the past. Hence, current understanding of the dynamics of residential segregations may enable us to address anthropological and
archaeological questions. Our surveys and excavations at Köhne Shahar, an Early Bronze Age and Kura-Araxes settlement in Iranian Azerbaijan,
demonstrated that a fortification wall separated a densely built citadel or inner town from the more sparsely built extramural area. Because of its social
implications, understanding residential segregation at the site is very important. Understanding residential segregation at the site not only may shed some
light on internal dynamics of the settlement and Kura-Araxes communities but also highland societies of the ancient Near East. This paper aims to address
possible causes and consequences of residential segregation at Köhne Shahar.
Allaby, Robin, Oliver Smith (University of Warwick) and Vincent Gaffney (University of Bradford)
[223]             Identification of Early Anthropogenic Movements of Exotic Species using sedaDNA
The Anthropocene is defined as the global modification of ecosystems by anthropogenic activity and is evidenced by traces in the geological record.
Debate is ongoing regarding the onset of the Anthropocene, with some regarding the first traces of human activity as a starting point, while others point to
later intensification and clearer anthropogenic signatures as more suitable. An early geological signature of human activity is recorded in the DNA laid
down and sealed in marine sediments (sedaDNA). In this context we can see the arrival of non-endemic organisms associated with humans such as the
exotic species associated with the Mesolithic/Neolithic transition. The integration of archaeological and genetic information sheds light on the development
of the human ecology of the Neolithic in North West Europe, which in turn informs the process by which large scale ecologies were influenced by humans.
The marine sedaDNA approach releases a latitudinal constraint on ancient DNA investigations because of the pan global nature of the preservation
environment. In the future we can expect to see such approaches applied on the tens of thousands of years time scale, possibly capable of detecting the
geological influence of humans from their initial expansions out of Africa.
Allard, Amelie (University of Minnesota)
[70]              The Eighteenth-century Fur Trade: A Colonial Endeavor?
The late eighteenth-century fur trade in the western Great Lakes region offers a particular multi-ethnic context in which social relations between Indigenous
peoples and men of European or mixed descent were created and negotiated on a daily basis. With his seminal book “The Middle Ground,” Richard White
(1991) challenged prior views, often of a Marxist bend, of the fur trade as a strictly colonial endeavor that led to the inevitable acculturation of Native
peoples. While the Montreal merchants and their fur traders may have harbored feelings of superiority over Native peoples, in practice power relations in
the interior were not always in favor of Europeans, quite the opposite. In this paper I explore these notions and the potential applicability of the colonialism
framework to the interpretation of fur trading endeavors in the western Great Lakes. Using examples from Réaume’s Leaf River Post, a late eighteenth-
century trading post in Central Minnesota, I argue that practices and discourses rather suggest an ambivalent rhetoric that embodied a tension between
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                     8
colonial ideals of social boundaries based on ethnicity and rank, and a desire to belong to the fur trade community, itself a community on the move.
[70]               Chair
Allard, Francis (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[173]              Out of Sight and Out of Mind? The Non-Funerary Burial of Objects in Early Southeast China
The archaeological record of Lingnan (Guangxi and Guangdong) during the Neolithic and Bronze Age periods includes many non-utilitarian objects buried
singly or in small groups, in non-funerary contexts that suggest widely shared ritual beliefs. Examples include the so-called “stone shovels,” the majority of
which have been found in southern Guangxi, as well as a number of later bronze vessels and bells which appear to have originated in central and northern
China. Importantly, many of these stone shovels and bronzes travelled within Lingnan along what were likely indirect exchange routes. The details of such
objects’ depositional contexts suggest that even as knowledge of their specific origin and function were likely forgotten over the course of long-distance
movements, they nevertheless played a ‘terminal’ role in generalized and widely-shared behaviors marked by the non-funerary disposal of ‘exotics.’ This
finding in turn points to the need to differentiate between generalized and specific ritualized behaviors, whose respective spatio-temporal ‘borders’ may not
be coterminous.
Allen, Susan (University of Cincinnati) and China Shelton (Framingham State University)
[19]               Disturbing Households: Assessing Contextual Integrity with Botanical Remains
Since 2008, we have been investigating botanical evidence for subsistence practices, economic organization, and environmental change at the Bronze
Age site of Iklaina in southwestern Greece. The spatially intensive sampling strategy we have adopted—the first of its kind to be applied to a Mycenaean
administrative center—promotes a high spatial resolution for the archaeobotanical dataset. As such, in addition to providing insights concerning changes in
subsistence and land use during the Mycenaen period, the macrobotanical assemblage illuminates deposit taphonomy, particularly concerning plant
macroremain preservation and contextual integrity.
In addition to generally poor preservation of carbonized plant remains, our samples also include modern carbonized materials that result from on-site
burning of olive trimmings and adjacent surface vegetation. To assess post-depositional disturbance, we developed a method for calculating a modern
seed rain contamination value (MSRC) through semi-quantitative recording of the relative abundance and diversity of modern seed rain types. Our
assessment of samples from two household units using MSRC highlights differential disturbance within and between rooms and reveals loci where plant
remains likely reflect human behavior. We argue that the use of MSRC facilitates recognition of charred plant remains that cannot be assumed to be
ancient or to reflect past human behavior.
Allen, Kathryn (University at Buffalo)
[147]              Life in Suleiman’s Army: Preliminary Investigations of Health in an Ottoman Cemetery Site
In recent years, analyses of human skeletal remains have significantly contributed to our understanding of the past. A cemetery collection of 160 skeletons
from the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries excavated from the city center of Timişoara, Romania have provided a rare opportunity to study a brief,
tumultuous time when the Ottoman Empire extended into Central Europe. The inhumations, representative of the Ottoman population that relocated into
the fortified city center after Turkish expansion, provide insight into the composition and health of this military group. Preliminary research on more
complete inhumations was conducted in the spring of 2015. Biological profiles indicate a larger percentage of males than females, unsurprising results for a
garrison town. Preliminary pathological investigations highlight a wide range of pathological insults on the skeletal remains relating to trauma and disease,
as well as non-specific indicators of stress. Future research will solidify conclusions but initial results indicate a stressful time for those responsible for the
day-to-day operations of the empire’s borderlands. While it is rarely denied that colonization results in deleterious health effects for conquered populations,
this study may indicate biological impacts on the conquerors as well.
Allen, Melinda (University of Auckland), Alex Morrison (International Archaeological Research Institute, I) and Andrew McAlister (University of
Auckland)
[296]              Modelling Climate Impacts on Human Societies and Marine Fisheries in Central Polynesia
The effects of past climate change on Polynesian societies are poorly understood, in part because detailed palaeoclimate records have been lacking.
Drawing on recently assembled palaeoclimate observations from across central Polynesia, along with those from realistically forced climate simulations, we
assess how climate variability affected marine fisheries and long-term trends in harvesting practices. Little Ice Age (ca. A.D. 1400–1800) conditions are
modelled for central Polynesia focusing on those likely to affect nearshore fisheries, such as variability in sea surface temperatures, cyclonic activity, and
the tempo of El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) activity. The hypothesis that Little Ice Age conditions adversely affected marine fisheries in this region is
evaluated, comparing model expectations with archaeological observations. To this end we use the almost-atoll of Aitutaki in the southern Cook Islands as
a model ecosystem, exploiting both its central location with respect to (ENSO) processes and its robust archaeofaunal archives.
Allison, James (Brigham Young University)
[104]              Rethinking Fremont Chronology
The dating of Fremont sites is based almost entirely on radiocarbon dates. A large number of dates exist from the region as a whole, but many of the
largest Fremont sites are poorly dated. Most of the important sites excavated prior to the 1980s have at best a few dates, and many of the dates that do
exist are on charcoal from structural wood. In some cases the only available dates are clearly centuries too early for the sites and structures they purport to
date. In addition to problems with the data, some reports and publications about Fremont archaeology make statements about Fremont chronology that do
not actually rely on the available radiocarbon dates. Instead, they recycle assertions about Fremont chronology that have been repeated for decades and
ultimately are based on dubious (or at least debatable) interpretations of small numbers of charcoal dates obtained in the 1960s and 1970s. Based on the
much larger number of dates now available, including a number of not-yet-published AMS dates on cultigens from some of the classic Fremont sites, this
paper reexamines the dating of individual sites and the Fremont tradition as a whole.
Almeida, Fernando [23] see Garcia, Lorena
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                     9
Alonso Eguíluz, Mónica (Equip de Recerca Arqueològica i Arqueomètrica University of Barcelona (ERAAUB)), Rosa María Albert (Catalan
Institution for Research and Advanced Stud) and Javier Fernández Eraso (University of Basque Country, Research Group in Pr)
[125]            Microarchaeology Applied To Foumier Deposits: The Use Of Phytoliths, Spherulites And Ash Pseudomorphs As A Tool For Reconstruct
                 Livestock Practices
Fumier deposits are important sources of information to better understand past livestock practices. The Neolithic site of Los Husos II (Álava, Spain), in the
upper Ebro Basin, is the oldest Basque Country site where livestock practices were detected dating to 6990–6760 cal B.P. Hence, the site offers a unique
opportunity to study the adaptation of early livestock practices and their expansion to the western Pyreness, as the Ebro Basin is the main route by which
the new economic system penetrated. We present the results of the study of the fumier deposits from Levels IV to IX through phytoliths, spherulites, and
ash pseudomorphs analyses. The results indicate a constant pattern in livestock practices throughout the study period. The principal component of the
cattle diet was that of wild grasses from the vicinity area. The presence of inflorescences suggests a summer grass-rich diet. In addition to grasses,
dicotyledonous plants were also documented, both through phytoliths and ash pseudomorphs. Faecal spherulites from herbivores were also noted and
together with phytoliths and ash pseudomorphs give important information regarding formation processes of the studied deposits.
Alonzi, Elise (Arizona State University)
[30]             Results of the 2015 Repatriation Survey
In 2015, the Society for American Archaeology conducted a survey on members’ opinions on repatriation and the SAA’s Statement Concerning the
Treatment of Human Remains. Among other things, this survey was intended to gauge support for changing the SAA’s statement to privilege the wishes of
Native American communities, to emphasize scientific values, or to more strongly recognize interests of multiple stakeholders. The majority of the 1,905
respondents to the survey believe that the SAA’s Statement Concerning the Treatment of Human Remains should be changed, but opinions are divided on
how best to revise it. The paper will show how beliefs about changes to the SAA Statement Concerning the Treatment of Human Remains are related to
reported demographic factors, including year of degree, work setting, research region, and past experience with repatriation. Survey results reveal that
attitudes towards changing the Statement differ amongst groups who earned degrees in different decades and who have different previous experiences
with repatriation. Results of interviews with a few individuals identified with the different positions will provide additional context for discussing the statistical
results.
Alonzi, Elise [147] see Daly, Niamh
Alsherif, Ahmed (Sebha University, Libya)
[224]            The Cultural and Historical Connection between Tefinagh Inscriptions and Rock Art Sites in Tadrart Acacus (Southwest Libya)
This paper discusses what kind of cultural and historical correlation between Tefinagh inscriptions and rock art in the Tadrart Acacus. The Tuareg alphabet,
Tefinagh, is one of ancient African alphabets documented not only in Libya but also Algeria and Tunisia, among other countries. It is traditionally taught by
a mother to all her children. This alphabet, which dates back at least to the second half of the first millennium B.C.E, is used by approximately 50 percent of
the Tuareg for short messages and inscriptions. Furthermore, hundreds of Tefinagh inscriptions have been discovered in the Tadrart Acacus, some placed
near or at sites with rock art. The rock art sites in the Tadrart Acacus dated from 12000 B.C.E to 100 C.E. The study area, Tadrart Acacus, is an area of
about 150 km in length and 50 km in width. It is located in the Fazzan region situated in southwest part of Libya. Tadrart Acacus hosts one of the richest
concentrations of Saharan rock art and was included on the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites in 1985.This paper attempts to undertake interviews with
Tuareg people as per the questionnaire provided, and also uses standard recording sheets.
Alt, Susan [18] see Pauketat, Timothy
Alt, Susan (Indiana University Bloomington)
[107]            Mother Earth, Father Sky, Figurative Art and Reproduction at Cahokia and in the Mississippian World
In the Cahokian world the sounds and sights of night would have brought stories: the moon, morning star, and evening star; human origins. Origin stories
generally abound with sex (mother earth, father sky) ,but our analyses are oddly devoid of sex. Yet Mississippian figurative art plays with the seen and
unseen of sex as it hints at how cosmic principles, sex, and gender were entangled and tied to night and reproduction. By focusing on reproductive
themes, but not sex, archaeologists have not fully faced feminine principles. They have instead focused on warrior and shaman images. In the Cahokian
figurative world, where women birth corn and gourds, much more can be teased out about how sex and reproduction were intertwined with the cosmos at
night.
Altamirano-Sierra, Ali [283] see Avila Peltroche, Mary Claudia
Altenderfer, Mark [19] see Zimmermann, Mario
Altschul, Jeffrey [10] see Majewski, Teresita
Altschul, Jeffrey (Statistical Research, Inc./SRI Foundation)
[261]            Discussant
Álvarez-Fernández , Esteban [177] see Steele, Teresa
Álvarez-Sandoval, Brenda [236] see Aguirre-Samudio, Ana
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  10
Alves, Daiana (University of Exeter), Jose Iriarte (University of Exeter) and Denise P. Schaan (Universidade Federal do Pará)
[263]            Ancient Plant Management at ADEs on Santarem Region from an Archaeobotanical Approach
ADEs are highly fertile soils found in association with archaeological sites all over the Amazonia that result from ancient societies’ landscape management.
We present preliminary results on the research of plant consumption on Amazonian Dark Earths (ADE) sites at Santarem region, Lower Amazon. To tackle
questions concerning plant food production and the formation of ADEs at the region three sites are under investigation from an archaeobotanical approach:
Serra do Maguari and Cedro on terra firme plateau and the riverine Porto de Santarem. Soil samples for phytolith and micro charcoal analyses were
collected in test pits column soils and excavations on the sites. So far, palm phytoliths were identified on samples from Serra do Maguari.
Alveshere, Andrea (Western Illinois University)
[285]            Field and Forest, Pond and Stream: Experimental Taphonomic Research in West-Central Illinois
Established in 2015, the Western Illinois Taphonomic Research Sites provide access to a variety of environmental contexts for experimental research in
skeletal and molecular taphonomy. These secluded, rural sites include deciduous wooded and open areas along a creek in a deep valley, and a hilltop
coniferous forest bordering an upland pond. Equipped with several game cameras, these unfenced sites afford unique opportunities to observe the
responses and effects of local wildlife as they encounter decomposing faunal remains. Carcasses are deposited at the sites, in buried or surface contexts,
as they become available from area agricultural programs. Studies of soil and water chemistry, site vegetation patterns, insect activity, decomposition
rates, and skeletal and molecular taphonomy are ongoing. This presentation will summarize the results of the first year of research, and ideas for project
expansion.
Amador, Julio (UNAM)
[175]            Defining Sacredness of Rock Art Sites in the Sonoran Desert
Based on landscape archaeology, achaeoastronomy, the analysis of rock art iconography, ethnohistoric, and ethnographic documents, this paper proposes
to define the factors that determine the sacredness of rock art sites in the Sonoran Desert. Well characterized common patterns can be found in most of
the rock art sites that will be described, facts that confirm with certainty we can speak of shared cultural traits within the region.
Ambrose, Stanley (U. Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Andrew Zipkin (U. Illinois, Urbana-Champaign), Mercy Gakii (National Museums of Kenya)
and Craig Lundstrom (U. Illinois, Urbana-Champaign)
[13]             Ethnography and Archaeometry of Red Ochre use by the Maasai and Samburu in Kenya
Red ochre occurs in African archaeological sites spanning more than 250,000 years. It is usually considered to be evidence of the evolving capacity for
symbolic behavior. If geological outcrops have distinctive geochemical fingerprints then it may be possible to determine the sources of pigments in
archaeological sites and rock art, and reconstruct source preferences, transport distances, and perhaps exchange network patterns. Although ochre is
almost universally used in Africa, ethnographic descriptions of red ochre source exploitation patterns, selection criteria, preparation, and uses are virtually
unknown. In 2012 we undertook a pilot study of ochre source geochemistry in the southern and central Rift Valley of Kenya, and found excellent
discrimination among sources. In 2015 we systematically sampled 42 geological sources of ochre in the northern and southern Rift, guided by Maasai and
Samburu informants who we interviewed about their traditional uses of ochre. We also collected samples from 12 rock art sites, and pigment fragments
and artifacts with ochre residues from 10 Middle Stone Age, Later Stone Age, and Neolithic sites. We will provide an overview of what we have learned
thus far from this ethnographic survey, and from trace element and isotopic analyses of these samples.
Ambrosino, Gordon (La Universidad de Los Andes), Antonio Curet (The Smithsonian) and Jill Segard (Field museum)
[50]             Rock Art of the Ceremonial Center of Tibes, Ponce, Puerto Rico
Located near the south-central coast of Puerto Rico, the site of Tibes is the earliest known civic-ceremonial center in the Greater Antilles. Systematic
mapping, nighttime photography, and 2-dimensional drawing, during the 2010 field season, revealed a total of 17 petroglyph panels, displaying
anthropomorphic, zoomorphic, geometric, and abstract imagery. All of the rock art panels that remain in situ are integrated with several of the ceremonial
plazas, which characterize the site. They are located on a variety of rock types, display varying degrees of conservation, and are generally oriented
towards the plaza´s interior. It is still unknown if these inscriptions were created before, during, or after the construction of the plazas. However, these
factors combine to suggest that these art works played a critical role in the site´s formation and redefinition. Specifically they indicate that the plan of Tibes
may have changed through time, in that these structures were built, dismantled, and their parts were re-used in the construction of new structures. These
associations of rock art, in a built environment, inspire new debates regarding the production and use of rock art, in terms of locational strategies, in the
region, over time.
Ames, Kenneth [114] see Gilmour, Danny
Ames, Kenneth (Portland State University), Kisha Supernant (University of Alberta), Andrew Martindale (University of British Columbia), Susan
Marsden (Museum of Northern British Columbia) and Corey Cookson (Treeline Consulting LLC)
[132]            A Hunter-Gatherer-Fisher Urban Landscape in Prince Harbor, British, Columbia?
Urbanism is almost exclusively associated with agriculture, although hunter-gatherers sometimes have seasonal aggregations numbering in the thousands.
This paper considers the evidence for an urban-like settlement on the northern Northwest Coast. By A.D. 1787, the villages of nine tribes of the Northern
Tsimshian were concentrated in a small area in Prince Rupert Harbour (PRH), British Columbia and had been so for centuries. Prior to ca. 1500 cal B.P.
the Northern Tsimshian lived in villages of varying sizes scattered throughout their territory. At some point after that date, this settlement pattern was
reorganized with residential sites in the region abandoned and those in the PRH expanded into a residential core. Available data suggests harbor village
                                                                                             2
middens grew to accommodate the increased population, with some reaching 55,000 m . There is also evidence that these villages were not independent,
but rather formed a linked network for defense as part of an urbanized political alliance. What had been residential areas became a logistical hinterland for
the PRH villages.
Ames, Nicholas (University of Notre Dame), Meredith Chesson (University of Notre Dame), Ian Kuijt (University of Notre Dame) and Rahul Oka
(University of Notre Dame)
[171]            Complex but Equal: Developing an Archaeological Inequality Index to Investigate Social Inequality at the Bronze Age III site of Numayra,
                 Jordan
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                    11
The origins, evolution, and variation of inequality comprise a central overarching theme within anthropological archaeology. Various ideas, including
hierarchy and heterarchy and their material correlates, have been proffered to explain the origins and impact of inequality on past social, economic, and
political organization. Within Economics and Development Studies, various indices and measures, e.g., Gini coefficient, Theil Index, HDI and GDP, and the
Consumption Approach have been offered as potentially useful approaches for measuring inequality. Although many of these approaches are not directly
applicable to the archaeology given the relative holes within the paucity of data, we can combine the theoretical bases of the approaches with cross-
cultural ethnographic data on using material and spatial indicators, and differential consumption to develop an Archaeological Inequality Index (AII) (Oka
2013) to infer and quantify inequality in human societies. Applying AII to the fortified Early Bronze Age III site of Numayra (c.2850–2550 B.C.E. cal), we
argue that despite considerable architectural and economic complexity, there is no significant evidence to suggesting institutionalized inequality in
Numayra in any of the phases of settlement. The Archaeological Inequality Index provides an alternative means for understanding and assessing inequality
or lack thereof in past societies.
Anbar, Ariel [135] see Marsteller, Sara
Anderson, David (University of Tennessee)
[55]              Climate Change and Cultural Response in Holocene Southeastern North America
The historical trajectories of many societies in southeastern North America have been linked to changes in climate and biota. Rainfall regimes influenced
population distributions as much as political geography during the late prehistoric era, and arguably well back into the past. Likewise, sea-level fluctuations
shaped settlement near changing shorelines and resulted in population movement over much larger areas. Changes in biota over large areas brought
about changes in settlement at the macroscale, as when mixed hardwood communities were replaced by pines in the Coastal Plain during the mid-
Holocene. These offer insight into changes and responses likely in the near future.
[5]               Discussant
Anderson, Derek (Mississippi State University) and D. Shane Miller (Mississippi State University)
[8]               The Mississippi Paleoindian and Early Archaic Point Database Redux
The Mississippi Paleoindian and Archaic Point Survey was initiated in 1968 by archaeologists at the Mississippi Department of Archives and History, and
due largely to the efforts of Sam McGahey over the next 30 years, grew to include over 2,100 points at the time of his retirement in 2003. The survey was
idle for a decade, but was recently reinstituted with the help of numerous avocational “citizen scientists” who share an interest in Late Pleistocene and
Early Holocene hunter-gatherers. Intact Paleoindian and Early Archaic sites are rare in Mississippi, and most of the projectile points that are recovered
from these time periods are isolated finds from disturbed contexts like fields and streams. These points are often the only artifacts that remain from early
cultural groups, and our interpretations about the people who used them are based on locations of finds, raw material types, and morphometrics. This
poster reintroduces the updated Mississippi point survey, provides examples of the variety of early points found throughout the state, and examines
distributions of styles and material types across time and space.
Anderson, David G. [49] see Carmody, Stephen
Anderson, Stephen (UMass Boston)
[61]              Smoking Areas: Change and Continuity of Eastern Pequot Smoking Practices through Spatial Analysis and Clay Tobacco Pipe
                  Distributions
Throughout the process of colonialism, many cultural traditions have been negotiated through the interactions of different sociocultural groups. One such
tradition that was deeply affected was smoking. Tobacco, a staple product of the Americas, was returned to Europe by colonizers; this began a tobacco
smoking revolution which spread clay tobacco pipes back to North America in the seventeenth century. These instruments made smoking a more
accessible and leisurely activity for Native American and European communities, while also retaining some ritual significance to some Indigenous groups.
My research examines the continuity and change of Pequot smoking traditions from the late seventeenth through the nineteenth century. Data collected
from numerous eighteenth- and nineteenth-century household sites from the Eastern Pequot Archaeological Field School seasons and two English
households from the same period are used to explore this research problem. Specifically, the use of space and clay pipe distributions across these sites
are used to determine similarities and differences of smoking practices between and within the two cultural groups over time. The aim of my comparative
research is to see how this Pequot community negotiated their smoking traditions during the course of English colonization and American settler
colonialism in New England.
Anderson, Andrea (University of Delaware) and Tom Rocek (University of Delaware)
[168]             GIS Modeling of Agricultural Suitability in the Highlands of the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon Culture of Southcentral New Mexico
Changes in the importance of agriculture in prehistoric economies are of major interest in a range of contexts worldwide. Measures of site location in
relation to agricultural potential are an important tool for identifying relative shifts in the importance of agriculture over time within a given region. Here we
examine the application of GIS modeling of agricultural potential based on soils, topography, temperature, precipitation, and horizontal coordinates in the
highlands of the Jornada branch of the Mogollon culture of southcentral New Mexico to explore shifts in agricultural reliance over time.
We describe the methods, potential limitations, and potential advantages of this approach, as well as preliminary results. Identifying variables that reliably
predict agricultural potential is complicated by the limited resolution of available data for the large study area, overlapping legal jurisdictions (state versus
federal land), complex topography, as well as by a lack of modern non-mechanized farming data to ground-truth estimates of relative productivity.
Nevertheless, the approach allows comparisons for relative changes in settlement placement over time in relation to variables that are likely to impact
agricultural productivity. Importantly, the GIS data also permit analysis of site location data biases, contrasting sites found by systematic survey versus
incidental finds.
Anderson, Douglas
[217]             Discussant
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   12
Anderson, Shelby (Portland State University)
[217]             Arctic Ceramic Traditions and Late Holocene Social Interaction; Revisiting Giddings’ Arctic Woodland Culture
In 1952, J.L. Giddings defined the Arctic Woodland Culture as a unique northwestern Alaskan inland lifeway combining elements of both Eskimo and
Athabascan cultures between approximately 800 B.P. and the contact era. He proposed that Arctic Woodland people were closely tied to both coast and
interior through seasonal movements and exchange systems, and hypothesized these ties made a semi-permanent lifeway along the river possible.
Subsequent research refined local chronologies and raised new questions about coastal-inland relationships during the socially and environmentally
dynamic Late Holocene period. This paper explores evidence for coastal-interior interaction in northwest Alaska through analyses of ceramic distribution
patterns. I will review results of new fieldwork on Giddings' sites along the Kobuk River and ceramic compositional analyses of his collections, along with
new ceramic thermo-luminescence dates from Arctic Woodland sites. My results point to several distinct patterns of coastal-inland interaction that changed
over time, supporting Giddings' hypothesis that a distinct Kobuk River ceramic tradition existed during the Arctic Woodland period. These findings have
broad implications for Late Holocene Arctic social interaction and change.
Anderson, Amber (RIT, Medaille College)
[279]             Sacred Spaces and Ideology in the Pambamarca Fortress Complex
In the northern Andes of Ecuador just north of Quito lies the Pambamarca Fortress Complex. This region was one of the last to fall to the Inca in the late
1490s/1500s as they expanded their empire, and they met great resistance from the indigenous societies of Northern Ecuador. Fighting occurred for over a
decade and power strategies changed to conquer this region. These struggles are apparent, best seen through the high number of Inca fortifications and
enclosures throughout the landscape. The highest concentration are found in the Pambamarca Fortress Complex, which is defined by several large
fortified sites, and six smaller high elevation enclosures which served as outposts, economic way stations, or sacred landscape spaces. This paper will
focus on research completed at three small sites in the PFC ( Pi12, Pi13, and Pi15), and will discuss their ideological and geographical importance to the
Inca during their struggle. These three sites afford us the opportunity to discuss Inca ideological and religious attributes, and to explore their sacred
landscape, especially in areas associated with war and conquest towards the end of their empire.
Anderson, Atholl (Australian National University)
[296]             Ecological Contingency in Very Early Offshore Seafaring
Recent interest in accounting for very early offshore seafaring, generally from about 15,000 to 50,000 years ago, but in some cases extending up to one
million years ago, has seen arguments for and against the influence of biogeographic factors, human behavioural ecology, and advances in cognition,
language, and technical expertise. I suggest that the seafaring milieu, as a natural system taking in conditions for offshore passages and the availability of
resources for making offshore-capable boats, amongst other things, remains a particularly important factor. I consider comparative examples of offshore
seafaring, as deduced from island colonization in Southeast Asia, East Asia, and South America, to argue that very early seafaring offshore suggests an
influential role for ecological contingency.
Andrews, Anthony (New College of Florida) and Fernando Robles
[26]              An Intracoastal Waterway and Trading Port System in Prehispanic Northwest Yucatán, Mexico
Archaeological and historical research along the northwest coast of the Yucatán peninsula during the last half century have led to a preliminary
reconstruction of a 200 km-long navigable intracoastal waterway between the Celestun estuary and Dzilám de Bravo during the Classic period. Along this
waterway are remains of settlements, ports, and port complexes that supported an extensive trade network that connected northern Yucatán to more
distant trade networks to the south, via the coast of Campeche and rivers leading into the southern Maya lowlands and beyond.
Andrews, Sherri [110] see Hoppa, Kristin
Andrieu, Chloé [26] see Demarest, Arthur
Andrieu, Chloé (CNRS Université Paris I La Sorbonne)
[26]              Flake Deposits and the Missing Workshops of the Maya Lowlands: the Complexity of Classic Maya Lithic Economy
Technological and distributional analysis of the lithic collections from Cancuen, La Corona, Rio Bec, and Naachtun show that the same goods were
produced under different production contexts, some specific debitage being deposited in elite cache, whereas the same flakes were also gathered in
domestic refuse. This suggests that some aspects of production were carried out in independent workshops, but a part of some knapping actions were
given as tribute with particular stages of debitage held in separate deposits. The proportion of this assigned production is different from one site to another,
showing the diversity of Classic Maya sites in their production systems and forms of distribution of the product. This diversity in distribution of obsidian and
chert, not just in terms of artifacts, but also of debitage, indicates that certain flaked items had multiple values in terms of both distribution and usage.
Future studies may be able to plot the variable contexts of production and the distribution of both artifacts and by-products to help elucidate other aspects
of Classic Maya economy and its variability in time and space.
Andrus, Fred [28] see Sandweiss, Daniel
Andrus, C. Fred (Department of Geological Sciences, University of Alabama)
[133]             Assessment of Past Subsistence Strategy and Environmental Impacts using Novel Geochemical Analyses of Mollusk Shells
Archaeologists are beginning to apply two new analytical techniques to estuarine mollusk shells: inferring paleo-salinity from sclerochronological oxygen
isotope profiles and assessing anthropogenic waste loading from mollusk nitrogen isotope measurements. These related approaches may offer insight into
subsistence priorities and environmental alteration, but data from each should be interpreted with caution until these proxies are more completely validated.
Potential uses and limitations of these methods will be discussed. For example, absolute values of oxygen isotope profiles in American oyster (Crassostrea
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                13
virginica) and quahog clam (Mercenaria spp.) reflect the average salinity of the shellfish’s habitat, permitting estimates of the relative distance people
travelled to collect. However, coastal hydrology changes over time, and salinity gradients are geographically variable, so detailed reconstruction of
collection location is not possible. Similarly, nitrogen isotopes measured in the shells of the same species may trend across salinity gradients, which could
corroborate oxygen isotope salinity analysis. However, shell nitrogen isotope values also reflect anthropogenic N loading. Deconvoluting the influences of
salinity and anthropogenic pollution could create useful proxies for both parameters, but may be difficult to accomplish in areas where environmental
variation is subtle or site formation processes are complex.
Anduze, Richard [64] see Slaughter, Mark
Angelbeck, Bill (Douglas College)
[132]             Trenches, Embankments, and Palisades: Terraforming Landscapes for Defensive Fortifications in Coast Salish Territory
The Coast Salish hunter-gatherer fishers of the Northwest Coast built substantial defenses, involving the labor of multiple households and entire villages.
These fortifications, perched upon high bluff promontories or at the points of narrow coastal sandspit ridges, often involved deep trenches and steep
embankments that were enclosed by tall palisades of cedar planks. Such constructions would have dominated the viewshed of their seascape. In this
presentation, I’ll highlight the degree of terraforming involved in their constructions and consider the monumental aspects of these defensive works.
Further, I will also address the collective monumentality of numerous sites, wherein fortifications appear to be built in conjunction with neighboring sites. In
so doing, they exhibit both the material manifestation of their own autonomous power in defense at individual sites, while also establishing and signifying
their allied power in closely-networked fortifications to serve needs at inter-community scales.
Angiorama, Carlos (IAM-UNT/ISES-CONICET) and Constanza Taboada (IAM-UNT/ISES-CONICET)
[259]             Impact, Expansion and Heterogeneous Strategies of the Tawantinsuyu at its Borders: The Case of Santiago del Estero in the Eastern
                  Lowlands of Argentina
In this presentation we discuss the particular situation of a set of archaeological sites located in a small area of Santiago del Estero’s lowland (central
Argentina), outside the territory traditionally included in the Collasuyu. The area concentrates several sites where Inca and Andean artefacts were found at
the beginning of the twentieth century, along with Inca features incorporated to the archaeological pottery and to ethnographic textiles. Moreover, there are
certain kind of archaeological objects found in exorbitant number, a strong presence of quichua language in the area and myths related to the Inca.
However, there are not Inca settlements or other type of Inca artefacts such as imperial pottery. The area could be the origin of ceramist and warrior
mitmaqkuna, but also a center of production of objects at large scale. Based on on-going fieldwork, we propose that this area and its inhabitants could
have been of economic and politic interest for the Tawantinsuyu. In this sense, the latter would have developed alliances with this population framed on its
spatial and strategically heterogenous expansion to certain sectors of the Eastern lowlands at the end of the Empire.
Ankele, William (University of Oklahoma) and Meghan J. Dudley (University of Oklahoma )
[200]             “One of These Things Is (Not?) Like the Other:” A Reassessment of Middle and Late Archaic Projectile Point Types in the Rocky Mountains
                  and Great Plains
Many Archaic projectile points from the Rocky Mountains and the Great Plains are poorly defined stylistically and chronologically, particularly in contrast to
those from the earlier Paleoindian Period. As a result, we suspect that projectile points are often classified as different types based solely on geographic
location and not necessarily on variation in the point style or technological characteristics. Stemmed points in the Middle Archaic are called Duncan or
Hanna in the north and Pinto in the south, and Middle-Late Archaic corner-notched points are Pelican Lake in the north and Elko in the south. We reassess
these projectile point typologies from the Middle and Late Archaic to determine if the types differ significantly from one another when systematically
compared morphologically and technologically. If they do not, it is difficult to support continued use of different terminology for statistically identical
specimens.
Anovitz, Lawrence [214] see Fayek, Mostafa
Antczak, Konrad and Miguel Lentino (Fundación W. H. Phelps, Caracas, Venezuela)
[100]             “Cultivating” Salt: Human Ecology of the Saltpans of the Venezuelan Caribbean, 16th–19th Century
This paper discusses a diachronic human ecological approach to the interaction between humans and saltpans in the Venezuelan Caribbean from the
sixteenth to the nineteenth century. This research is based on historical archaeological and oral historical evidence marshaled to understand the dynamics
of past solar salt production, and the impacts of the natural environment on the final product’s output and quality. “Tending” a saltpan was not always
straightforward business as knowledge of the weather patterns, yearly, monthly, and daily tides, and the right physical conditions and biotic factors involved
in the concentration of brine and the subsequent crystallization of sodium chloride was indispensable to augmenting the quantity and quality of a salt
harvest. Furthermore, human management of saltpans, such as the construction of dikes and walkways and the pervasive flattening and compacting of the
ground of the pans has left still-visible modifications and impacts. This research also indicates that the Dutch in the sixteenth and seventeenth, the Anglo-
Americans in the seventeenth and eighteenth, and the Bonaireans and Americans in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, each applied a different
know-how to the process of salt “cultivation” on the Venezuelan saltpans, resulting in a variable final product geared towards diverse market necessities.
Antczak, Andrzej (Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University, The Netherlands)
[220]             The Archaeology of the Archaic Age on Margarita Island within the Context of the Venezuelan Caribbean
Since the 1950s, the archaeology of Margarita, the largest island of Venezuela, has been neglected, leaving an important lacunae open in the current
knowledge of Venezuelan and Caribbean archaeology. In 2008, human bones were accidentally unearthed on the island, allowing the recovery of two
individuals and associated cultural materials that included lithics, shells, and red ochre. The archaeological layer and human bones date to between 4,090
and 2,160 B.P. The osteological analyses show consistency with similar Archaic finds reported from the insular Caribbean and support the claim for a
marked anthropo-physical difference between the Archaic Age individuals and latter Ceramic Age settlers. This discovery prompted the initial
reconnaissance of Margarita and Cubagua islands carried out in 2014, and further systematic archaeological survey that began in 2015 as part of the
Nexus 1492 ERC project of Leiden University, in synergy with Venezuelan scholars and institutions, and the communities of the Guaiquerí Indians. Thus
far, nine Archaic sites have been located and evaluated through surface collections and test pit excavations. This paper discusses the preliminary
interpretations of settlement patterns and the subsistence economy of the Archaic Age settlers of Margarita Island within the wider geographical and
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              14
historical-cultural context of the Venezuelan Caribbean.
[220]             Chair
Antczak, Ma. Magdalena [220] see Antczak, Andrzej
Antczak, Marlena (Faculty of Archaeology Leiden University), Maria Magdalena Antczak (Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands and Uni),
Andrzej Antczak (Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands ) and Miguel Lentino (3Colección Ornitológica, Fundación W. H. Phelps, C)
[222]             Avian Remains from the Late Pre-colonial Amerindian Sites on the Islands of the Venezuelan Caribbean
This paper presents the results of the analyses of an assemblage of over 3,000 bird remains systematically recovered in various late prehispanic sites (c.
A.D. 1000–1500) on the islands of the Venezuelan Caribbean. We discuss possible signatures of seasonal occupancy of the island campsites as inferred
from the bio-ecology of the identified bird specimens. The data indicates that several families of birds were persistently targeted by Amerindians for food
and/or feathers, and their bones were used as raw material for making tools and adornments. We discuss the process of recovery of the specimens under
study, their archaeological contexts, the taphonomy at play, and analyze diverse categories of bones. The analyzed categories include unmodified and
modified bones, and worked bones and manufacture debitage. Bird iconography present on various artefacts recovered on the islands and the use and
valuation of birds in interrelated island and mainland sites are also discussed. Finally, we examine the references to the Amerindian use of birds in the
study region contained in early colonial ethnohistorical sources.
Anthony, Ronald (The Charleston Museum)
[293]             Lesesne Colono Ware
As part of the analysis of the colono ware from Lesesne and Fairbanks Plantations on Daniel Island, South Carolina, in the mid 1980s, a class of colono
ware called “Lesesne Lustered” was described and offered as a variety of colono ware likely present in colonial Lowcountry, South Carolina. Subsequent
research since the Daniel Island study and a recent re-look at colono ware from selected Lesesne Plantation contexts support an interpretation of Lesesne
Colono Ware as a rural as well as an urban market ware in Lowcountry, South Carolina.
Antonelli, Caroline (University at Albany—SUNY)
[270]             Ancient Impacts on a Modern Environment: Soil Management and Intensive Agriculture in a Pre-Columbium Urban Context
This paper investigates the relationship between soil enrichment and ancient urban environments. I will measure the degree to which ancient settlement
density and modern agricultural potential correlate. At the Postclassic Maya center of Mayapan, a spatial concentration of black, midden-like soils have
been identified by local farmers. Results of systematic soil transect samples tested for physical and chemical properties reveal agricultural potential. Soils
from the urban center were compared to those outside of the site core within and beyond the city wall. These data indicate that key features of the modern
landscape derive from centuries of Pre-Columbian landscape modification. Geochemical analyses suggest intentional enrichment of and anthropogenic
impacts to land use through time.
Antorcha Pedemonte, Ricardo, Lane F. Fargher (Co-Author), Richard E. Blanton (Co-Author), Verenice Y. Heredia Espinoza (Co-Author) and
John K. Millhauser (Co-Author)
[27]              The Build Environment on Late Postclassic Terraces in Tlaxcallan
During intensive survey and mapping of the Late Postclassic City of Tlaxcallan, we noted that the inhabitants of the ancient city of Tlaxcallan, in Tlaxcala,
Mexico, developed a dense settlement pattern and complex urban landscape during the Late Postclassic (A.D. 1250–1521). Specifically, massive terraces
and open and accessible plazas dominated this landscape. In this paper, we present the initial results of excavations on a series of terraces located at the
northern edge of the city. This research indicates that these terraces exhibit a complex history of construction and use. Importantly, the results demonstrate
that these terraces were covered with many structures, formal patios, possible workshops, and middens that resulted form diverse activities. Furthermore,
the sizes of middens indicate intensive occupation and social reproduction of terrace inhabitants. For these reasons, we suggest that these terraces were
not simply agricultural terraces or the residences of nuclear-family households.
Apaydin, Veysel (University College London)
[71]              Effective or Not? Success or Failure? Assessing Archaeological Education Programs–The Case of Çatalhöyük
Recent decades have witnessed an increasing involvement of archaeology projects in planning and carrying out heritage education programs to increase
heritage awareness among the public. This paper aims to explore ways in which models of education programmes in public archaeology could be more
effective in ensuring the protection of heritage sites by examining the one of the world’s longest education program that has been run by Çatalhöyük
Research Project in Turkey. It is important to pay attention to multi-vocal elements such as social, political, and educational backgrounds of the
communities to develop more effective education programmes, and most importantly it is crucial to assess the effectiveness and success of those
programs. However, most of the archaeological education programs have failed to do this important component, too. In order to be effective and
successful, the success of the education programs and the ways in which they are implemented and their results must be known and critically examined.
Specifically, this paper will discuss the necessity of measuring the effectiveness of the education programmes, suggest the most suitable methodology for
assessment, as this kind of study is a unique in world wide context, through examining the Çatalhöyük education programs.
Applegate, Darlene
[40]              Applying Key Archaeology Concepts: Activities for the Undergraduate Classroom
Instruction in introductory archaeology courses focuses on student understanding of key concepts such as artifact, preservation, formation processes,
context, stratigraphy, and association. This poster presents hands-on activities for applying key archaeology concepts in the undergraduate classroom.
[286]             Chair
Applegate, Darlene [286] see McElroy, Kate
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                15
Aragon, Leslie [17] see Dungan, Katherine
Aragon, Leslie (University of Arizona)
[64]              We Built This System: Hohokam Irrigation Communities as Social Networks
In the prehispanic Salt River Valley (SRV), the extensive canal systems that provided irrigation to the desert farmers, known by archaeologists as the
Hohokam, also serve as tangible networks that link villages along an individual canal’s route. Many of the villages in the valley are incredibly long-lived,
spanning hundreds of years and multiple generations, providing unique time-depth in which to study how social relationships changed within a region of the
Southwest. In order to better understand the relationships between villages, connectivity between them must be examined based on multiple lines of
evidence. The primary objective of this research is to systematically examine the relationship between canal networks and material-based social networks
in the SRV. Specifically, this study will address questions of whether or not the social networks linking settlements in the Hohokam core area were
structured by their location within an irrigation network, what role irrigation communities played in surviving hardship, and how these networks changed
over a millennium, from approximately A.D. 450 to 1450.
Arakawa, Fumiyasu (New Mexico State University), Garrett Leitermann (New Mexico State University), Kailey Martinez (New Mexico State
University) and Austin Schwartz (New Mexico State University)
[267]             Hands-on Experience: NMSU Summer Fieldschool at Twin Pines Village in the Gila National Forest 2015
To develop a better partnership between academics and United States Forest Service, and disseminate the concept of stewardship to the public, the Gila
National Forest and the Department of Anthropology at New Mexico State University collaborated together at a fieldschool at the Twin Pines Village—a
northern Mimbres settlement and the largest Mimbres phase site—for six weeks in 2015. The major goal of the project is to add our understanding of the
cultural trajectory of the Twin Pines communities and assess the damage of the site by looting activities. Based on the collaboration between the two
groups, students learned three major aspects of archaeological research, conservation and stewardship, and public outreach. First, although pothunters
destroyed several portions of the site, the excavation at Twin Pines site still allows students to learn about the complexity of site formation processes,
including natural and cultural activities. Second, the excavation at Twin Pines helps students assess looting activities and understand the significance of
preservation and conservation. Finally, students have engaged in outreach programs, such as teaching K-12 students, using the Twin Pines Village
collections, which enhances the concept of being stewards of cultural resources for the public at large.
Arantes, Antonio [10] see Majewski, Teresita
Araoz Silva, Miriam [198] see Bauer, Brian
Arata, Megumi [102] see Seki, Yuji
Araujo, Astolfo [292] see Feathers, James
Arbolino, Risa (National Museum of American Indian) and Kit Nelson (New Orleans Center for Creative Arts)
[67]              Archaeology Girls: Mentoring of Women in Archaeology and the 1960s Girl Scout Archaeological Unit
In the 1960s, women were beginning to make major strides in the field of archaeology. It is also during this time that informal mentoring relationships began
between women active in the field and young women interested in pursuing their interests in archaeology. One such example is the role of Bertha Dutton
with the Girl Scouts during the early 1960s. Working out of Camp Elsa Seligman, Girl Scouts conducted survey and excavation within Sandoval County.
Their field notes, archaeological field collections, and personal reflections document the important role of women mentorship in southwestern
archaeological research while also providing important archaeological data from sites within the Jemez Springs area.
Arbuthnot, Michael (SEARCH) and Michael Faught (SEARCH)
[290]             The Karst Spring Vent as Receptacle with Meaning: Chassahowitzka Headsprings Weeden Island Period Dolphin Fin Effigy
Restoration dredging of the Chassahowitzka Headsprings along the west coast of central Florida produced a wealth of artifacts representing virtually all
culture periods including Paleoindian, Middle Archaic, early (Deptford) Woodland, late Woodland (Weeden Island), and Contact period Native American, as
well as sixteenth through twentieth century Euro-American (Historic) such as rare (broken) Majolica bowls and an asymmetrical paddle. All of the Euro-
American artifacts can be attributed to secondary deposition (i.e., trash and accidental loss from small boats and shore). The same is not necessarily true
for the Native American artifacts. Some of these items were likely thrown into the headsprings with intention and possibly supplication. These include a
Suwannee Paleoindian point, an intact Pasco Plain ceramic vessel, a large plainware bowl (broken, but virtually whole), and a carved wooden dolphin fin
effigy. This latter item (1270 +/- 30 BP [AD 690–770]) is illustrated and described, and its potential meaning is compared to other rare pre-contact wooden
effigies found in Florida.
Archebelle-Smith, Aric
[7]               Manasota Key Cemetery: New Burial Pattern Interpretations from the Florida Gulf Coast
The Manasota Culture prospered from around 500 B.C. to A.D. 800 along the Florida coastline that stretches from Tampa Bay to the northern end of
Charlotte Harbor. The Manasota Key Cemetery in Englewood, Florida, is one of the largest known Manasota burial sites with one hundred and twenty-two
documented burials. Wilbur “Sonny” Cockrell excavated the site along with a team of Florida archaeologists and local volunteers from 1988 to 1989. Very
few publications discuss the Manasota Key Cemetery. Of the few publications that do discuss the cemetery, none focus on interpreting the burial patterns
present at the site. Due to the site’s size and overall importance for understanding the archaeology of the Florida Gulf Coast, it is necessary to attempt to
decipher the burial patterns at the cemetery. Through such an analysis, it is possible to gain insight into the lives and beliefs surrounding death of the
people interred within the cemetery. This poster presents new interpretations of the site’s burial patterns and examines what these interpretations may
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               16
suggest about the Manasota people.
Archila Montanez, Sonia (Los Andes University, Department of Anthropology) and Saul Torres Orjuela (Los Andes University, Department of
Anthropology)
[50]              Characterisation of Charcoal Assemblages from the Ceremonial Center of Tibes, Puerto Rico
Charcoal assemblages from five different excavation units dug at the ceremonial center of Tibes, Puerto Rico, have been studied in order to get information
on human use and selection of woody taxa during the past. This archaeobotanical data will be related to the archaeological information which includes
different features and cultural materials such as lithic artefacts, sherds, shells, human burials, and faunal remains.
Ardren, Traci (University of Miami)
[157]             Traditional Ecological Knowledge of Coral Reef Small Islands: A History of Human Adaptation in the Florida Keys
The Florida Keys have been largely overlooked in models of social interactions within both Florida and the greater Caribbean. Environmentally and
culturally distinctive, the more than 1,700 islands that make up this coral reef archipelago are consistently viewed from the mainland in models of human-
environmental dynamics over time. This paper synthesizes available archeological data on the prehistoric human occupation of the Florida Keys with
attention to the island landscapes of these sites that are unique within Florida prehistory as well as elements shared with coastal sites throughout the
region. Recent new research documents the many ways Keys sites demonstrate different ecological and subsistence systems in comparison to the rest of
the Glades culture area, with a greater reliance on vertebrates over invertebrates perhaps as an outgrowth of the deep water environment of the
archipelago. This paper points toward possible ways to address new questions through attention to the intentional management of the rich natural
resources of the Keys and adjacent regions by a population well-adapted to a delicate balance of marine and coastal relationships.
[25]              Chair
Ardren, Traci [133] see Napolitano, Matthew
Areche Espinola, Rodrigo Javier
[151]             Cambiando Roles, del centro administrativo al centro ceremonial. El Caso de Cerro Azul, Cañete
Los estudios incas en los Andes Centrales dan cuenta sobre los mecanismos de instituciones religiosas heredadas y desarrolladas por un estado
expansivo. La importancia y éxito de estas instituciones radica en justificar y legitimar la dominación de diferentes grupos a través de la captación y
manipulación de creencias locales, materializado en la reocupación de sitios religiosos locales. Sin embargo, los Incas, también, transformaron lugares
secundarios en centros de poder religiosos imponiendo su orden social en las regiones conquistadas. Nos centramos en la Costa Centro Sur del Perú,
específicamente en Cañete. Presentaremos el caso de Cerro Azul, un sitio del litoral mencionado en crónicas como “La Fortaleza del Huarco” y de
cualidades administrativas antes de la llegada Inca. Cerro Azul muestra como los incas transformaron un sitio secundario administrativo en un centro
ceremonial importante, consolidando su dominio mediante la apropiación del paisaje natural, invirtiendo grandes recursos humanos y logísticos en la
construcción de edificios sagrados asociados al mar y anexándolo a un paisaje religioso imperial inter valle, tras un contexto local convulsionado.
Arenas, Camila [139] see Flores-Fernandez, Carola
Arendt, Beatrix [36] see Ptacek, Crystal
Arias, Pablo [49] see Duarte, Carlos
Arikan, Bulent
[95]              Macrophysical Climate Model and Comparisons with the Proxy-Based Paleoclimate Reconstruction in Central Anatolian Plain between
                  14000 and 7000 cal. B.P.
Central Anatolian Plain, which was once covered with a Pleistocene lake, witnessed major environmental transformations from the Epipaleolithic to the end
of the early Holocene. As the paleolake dried up it exposed valuable resources such as soil and created marshlands where the earliest Neolithic
settlements, such as Aşıklıhöyük (tenth millennium B.P.) and Çatalhöyük (ninth millennium B.P.) emerged. These sites represent the first locales of human
experimentation with domestication and they represent the establishment of the food producing economies in a different environmental context than the
rest of the southwest Asia. Applying the Macrophysical Climate Model (MCM), a regression-based, local downscaling of a global paleoclimate general
circulations model, will provide retrodictions of past precipitation and temperature at 100-year resolution. The results of MCM can then be compared to the
results of proxy-based reconstructions. Cross–comparison of reconstruction methods will not only enable us to identify the level of correlation between
different methods, hence increasing the reliability of retrodictions based on numeric models, but it will also allow us to use quantifiable results from MCM in
stochastic and agent–based models of land use. Such models will be used in developing and testing hypotheses about human adaptive behavior and
processes of decision-making.
Aristizábal, Lucero [122] see Bernal, Marcela
Aristizabal Losada, Lucero (Universidad de los Andes) and Melanie Miller (University of California Berkeley)
[122]             Reflexiones sobre la naturaleza del poder en una población muisca de la sabana de bogotá a través de estudio de la dieta
En esta presentación, queremos enfocarnos en la relación entre alimentación y otras dimensiones sociales de la sociedad Muisca asentada en una aldea
del sur de la Sabana de Bogotá del periodo muisca tardío, como es el caso de status y género. Tradicionalmente, se ha asumido la existencia de un
grupo de élite que tuvo ciertos privilegios y beneficios por encima del resto de individuos; sin embargo, la información de la dieta a través del análisis
isotópico de una muestra de 250 individuos evidencia diferentes patrones en torno a la alimentación y la naturaleza del poder de la población de estudio.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  17
La información obtenida contribuye al debate no solo sobre el poder en la sociedad muisca, sino que también permite discutir la relación entre
alimentación e inequidad, y alimentación y género, visto desde una secuencia cronológica del desarrollo biológico de los individuos.
Arjona, Jamie
[128]             Indigenous Histories and the Queer Future of Archaeological Anachronism
Archaeological representations of modernity can inadvertently bind Indigenous history to a political past. Native origin myths, archaeological exhibits, and
racist mascots cement the prior-ness of Indigenous communities. In order to challenge settlement in the present, Indigenous bodies must disrupt a settler
state that fossilizes Native sovereignty. The case studies presented in this article consider moments when haunting intimacies with Indigenous presences
queered the tense of settlement. Throughout this paper, I explore the queer resonance of uncanny affects swelling through earthworks encountered by
Euro American settlers in the nineteenth century. Drawn towards sublime landscapes, settlers built homes and families on ruins of earthen monuments
erected by Indigenous communities throughout North America. Focusing on the Emerald mound site and broader mound discourses, I examine how
material intimacies underlying this nineteenth century phenomenon periodically corrupted Romantic sensibilities. Specifically, I highlight aspects of archival
and spatial data that capture fleeting moments when the presence of Indigenous histories queered the tense of settlement.
Arjona, Jamie [221] see Fields, Shawn
Arksey, Marieka (University of California, Merced)
[294]             Does Size Matter? Comparing Cave Size to Degree of Modification Outside their Entrances
Over the past three years, investigations of over fifty ritual cave sites across the country of Belize by the Las Cuevas Archaeological Reconnaissance
Project and the Belize Cave Research Project have yielded surprising findings: at least nine of the caves have modifications or construction directly outside
of the entrances. These modifications took place for the first and only time during the Late Classic, a centuries-long period characterized by droughts,
overpopulation, the failure of Maya kingship, and a complete restructuring of the social hierarchy in the Maya Lowlands. Thus, these modifications—clearly
associated with sacred features of the ritual landscape—are an ideal paradigm from which to question how ritual practices were potentially used to
reinforce social rules and norms during a time of social and political crisis. However, these studies have revealed a puzzling variation in the forms and
degrees of modification seen during this time period. This paper will present some of the preliminary results of analysis attempting to correlate the size of
cave with the forms and degree of constructions outside their entrances in an effort to approach the potential functions that these spaces may have
afforded the ancient Maya.
Arkush, Elizabeth (University of Pittsburgh)
[228]             Discussant
Armit, Ian (University of Bradford)
[95]              Rapid Climate Change and Demographic Decline at the End of the Irish Bronze Age
The accumulation of large 14C data-sets over recent decades provides archaeologists with a substantial resource which has only recently begun to be
systematically explored. Such data-sets offer the potential to explore temporal variations in the intensity of past human activity at a range of geographical
scales, although the ‘reading’ of such data is far from unproblematic. One area of clear potential is the relationship between patterning evident in 14C and
palaeoclimate data-sets. In this paper we examine the substantial 14C data-set available for Ireland in the Later Bronze and Iron Ages (1200 B.C.–A.D.
400) in relation to the high-precision proxy climate data available for the region. In particular we will focus on the period of rapid climatic transition evident
at c.750 cal. B.C.
[52]              Discussant
Armit, Ian [103] see Büster, Lindsey
Armstrong, Douglas [126] see Williamson, Christian
Arnhold, Nicholas (The University of Kansas and AECOM) and Frederic Sellet (The University of Kansas)
[123]             Niche Construction of Predictable Landscapes: Redundant Caching in Ecological Niches on the Central Plains
Prehistoric groups were able to anticipate the use of redundantly visited landscapes by constructing niches with toolkits, called caches. The small size of
caches and frequent absence of diagnostic tools limited the information available from studying individual caches. It was hypothesized that caches were
examples of anticipated mobility to provision predictable ecological niches with tools for the presence or absence of resources in potential activity areas.
Sixty-two caches from the Central Plains of Kansas and eastern Colorado were compared based on their location to identify patterns in cache distribution.
The caches were mapped against the distance to rivers, lithic quarries, and regional ecoregions as predictable landscapes. At least 56 percent of caches
were located near transitional zones between ecoregions. The median distance between caches and rivers was 0.67 km. Additionally; 64 percent of
caches were greater than 18 km from a lithic quarry. Past groups potentially anticipated their movement through transitional niches by caching, particularly
near rivers and in landscapes where lithic materials were limited. While the functional role of caching may never be fully understood, this research
compares caches against the externally available resources and may identify patterns in the intentional planning of cache distribution.
Arnold, Dean E. [46] see Arnold, Dean
Arnold, Dean (Field Museum) and Dean E. Arnold (Field Museum)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 18
[46]              How Does the Organization of Ceramic Production Change through Time? An Ethnoarchaeological View
Changes in pottery through time and their organizational correlates are fundamental to archaeological inference. Such correlates rely upon theory based
upon distilling various ethnographic cases filtered through a series of socio-economic and socio-political assumptions about the relationship of production
to the society at large. This paper summarizes some of the results of a diachronic study of pottery production units in Ticul, Yucatán, from 1965 to 2008.
The data show that the kin structure and physical location of household production persists in comparison to other types of units such as entrepreneurial
units and workshops attached to tourist hotels. Even after being heavily influenced by social change, production in many units was intermittent, and
occurred in cycles relative to demand, seasonal weather, ritual activities, the lifetime of the potter, and desires for a more attractive vocation. Potters also
practiced multi-crafting as part of these cycles to handle economic risk brought on by adverse seasonal weather, economic downturns, and other factors.
The paper concludes with some implications for archaeology rooted in insights gained by seeing the rise, fall, and persistence of pottery production units
over more than 40 years.
Arnold, Denise (Universidad Mayor de San Andrés, La Paz, Bolivia)
[47]              A View from the Weaver’s Fingertips: Gesture and Complexity in the South Central Andes
This paper traces the gradual acquisition of increasingly complex mental and haptic operations as a girl learns to weave in the Andes. She starts early with
fingertip ‘synaesthetic’ knowledge of fleece thickness and quality as she prepares raw materials and spins them, and the mental-visual knowledge of
counting herd animals in her pasturing duties. She passes on to the visual recognition of selection and counting patterns in simple crossed-warp weaves, in
belt straps, and then to the integration of digital, manual, visceral, and bodily rhythms in more complex warp-faced weaves, first in small bags, then finally
in late adolescence and adulthood in the manta and poncho. I follow the detailed systematization of these learning processes and gestures carried out with
weavers before documenting these in film. This shows how increasing complexity articulates simultaneously across gestures, haptic coordinations and
rhythms, operational sequences (sensu Leroi-Gourhan) involving the technological and technical artefacts (looms and instruments) with which the weaver
engages, the garments she makes, and the structures, techniques, and designs of the warp-faced weaves she applies. The paper locates these processes
in three major ‘ways’ (thakhi) of learning recognised in Andean communal education, and their implications in archaeological work on textiles.
Arnold, Elizabeth (Grand Valley State University), Haskel Greenfield (University of Manitoba) and Aren Maeir (Bar-Ilan University)
[134]             An Examination of Economic Specialization in the Early Bronze Age City of Tell es-Safi Using Isotopic Analysis of Ovicaprines
Early urban economies during the Early Bronze Age of the southern Levant are often treated as if they relied upon locally-available food resources that
were largely produced at the household level, such as the herding of domestic livestock around the periphery or territory of the city-state. In this paper, we
investigate whether the pastoral component of economies was a small-scale local affair or was conducted remotely, which would have involved productive
specialists such as nomadic pastoralists, through the analysis of carbon, oxygen, and strontium isotope samples of an expanded sample of ovicaprine
dental remains from the Early Bronze Age deposits of Tell-es Safi/Gath, Israel. The data are suggestive of spatial separation of animals from the settlement
as the results indicate that the animals were reared a substantial distance from the site and only brought into the local territory immediately prior to
slaughtering. Based on these data, we argue that pastoral production was a specialized feature of early urban economies in the southern Levant. Food
production within early cities was not based on local holdings or small-scale herds by family units and there was a separate pastoral component conducted
by specialists at a distance from the settlement.
Arnold, Philip (Loyola University Chicago) and Lourdes Budar (Universidad Veracruzana)
[264]             Building Power: The Teotepec Palace as Materialized Ideology
Discussions of Classic Period (ca. A.D. 300–900) architecture in southern Veracruz, Mexico generally emphasize patterning in mound-plaza arrangements,
with an array of configurations vying for preeminence across the coastal lowlands. Often lacking from these analyses, however, is a more nuanced
consideration of the built environment's ideological implications. This paper examines palaces as important reflections of power's materialization in
southern Veracruz. Specifically, we consider the palace at Teotepec, a site located along the northern shore of Lake Catemaco in the Tuxtla Mountains.
Teotepec's palace is a restricted-access complex that includes both residential and public ceremonial components. The ceremonial complex consists of a
large, 3 m-deep sunken patio-like feature that fronts an almost 20 m high pyramid. We argue that this pyramid-patio association is a materialization of the
Sacred Mountain-Primordial Water pairing that permeates ancient Mesoamerican ideologies. Moreover, we note that the Sacred Mountain-Primordial
Water combination aptly reflects the volcanic mountains and lake waters that constitute Teotepec's natural surroundings. Finally, we consider this
expression of ideology at Teotepec in light of architectural manifestations from other Classic Period sites within the Tuxtlas region.
Arnold III, Philip J. [216] see Venter, Marcie
Arroyo, Barbara (Museo Popol Vuh UFM Guatemala)
[178]             Early Ceramics, Human Mobility, and Interaction: Original Developments of the Pacific Coast in Connection with South America
Various cultural parallels have been mentioned in the past about the connections between two important regions in the Americas: South America and
Mesoamerica. The nature of how this contact took place was a research question that has interested many but is still unanswered. This paper will address
the question using information from archaeological fieldwork carried out at sites on the Pacific Coast of Guatemala. Additional information will come from
the “invisible” records including paleoecological information and ways of life that might connect both regions in different ways. Considerations of other data
sets will be included complementing arguments for the impact of human mobility and relationships between these regions.
Arroyo-Cabrales, Joaquin
[16]              New Approaches on the Mexican Quaternary Mammals Studies
The Mexican Quaternary Mammal Database (MQMD) data are focused on published mammal occurrences in paleontological localities and archaeological
sites in México, covering the last 2.6 million years and up to the early Holocene, although some unpublished data from museum collections are included,
as well as “grey” literature. More than 15,000 records have been secured from 876 documents. That large database includes records for more than 800
localities and 250 mammal species pertaining to 12 orders, 43 families, and 146 genera. Importantly the same electronic framework was employed that has
been used by FAUNMAP working group, including same field species codes; similarly, MQMD is capable to interact with the Mexican Mammals database
from CONABIO, having the field species codes for the recent Mexican mammals, too. Derived from initial data analyses, it was realized the great need to
improve the radiometric control from the excavations in order to provide detailed data for ecological studies, like those undertaken with stable isotopes or
other paleoclimate models or some ancient DNA research. Also, in the past 20 years since we created the original database, new findings have occurred,
including the actual presence of human remains. Furthermore, several collaborative endeavors are ongoing to improve the quality and quantity of the data.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 19
[16]              Chair
Arsenault, Daniel (CELAT-UQAM, Montreal, Quebec) and Serge Lemaitre (Musées Royaux d'Art et d'Histoire de Bruxelles, Be)
[131]             What's New in Canadian Shield Rock Art
The last few years of archaeological fieldwork in Eastern Canadian Shield have allowed the identification of some new figures in the graphic content of
sites already documented by other researchers in Ontario. But this context has led also to the discovery of new rock art sites in this province as well as in
Québec. These rock painting sites, but also the new engraving sites found, help more than ever to better understand the variability and complexity of the
iconographic themes privileged by the First Nations' ancestors in relation with their worldviews and the symbolic links associated with their sacred
landscape. Our paper will discuss the nature and importance of this scientific endeavour, and a few insights will be offered about the possible rock art
narratives that can be yielded by those sites.
Arthur, John [6] see Austin, Robert
Arthur, Kathryn (USF St. Petersburg)
[221]             Legacies of Ethiopian Women: Revealing Heritage through an Indigenous Animistic Ontology
This paper will focus on the importance of including women’s legacies and narratives in the heritage of southern Ethiopia. In particular, women’s memories
reveal the significance of life rituals associated with birth, marriage, and leadership, which served as reminders for illuminating their indigenous ontology
Detsa concerning animism, fertility, and prestige. Traces of their life experiences and thoughts are tangible as visible markers on the landscape at Biare
Dere, first settlements. Although these spaces and objects embody their engagement between the physical and spiritual worlds, their community action
fields and boundaries are pliable, reconfiguring their traces in spatial and material realms.
Aschero, Carlos [139] see Loyola, Rodrigo
Ashby, Leonard [230] see Hurst, Heather
Asher, Brendon (University of Kansas)
[200]             Clovis and Folsom from the Central Plains: Projectile Point Breakage, Distributions, and Material Types as Indicators of Prehistoric Land
                  use and Subsistence Strategies
Clovis and Folsom artifact distributions, particularly projectile points, are not homogenous throughout the Central Plains. Uneven artifact distributions are in
part attributed to diverse land use and hunting techniques that resulted in distinct artifact breakage patterns. Lithic material use and transportation is also
unique. These differences are partially driven by changing ecosystems during the terminal Pleistocene. Models of Clovis and Folsom land use are explored
to account for the observed spatial patterning in artifact distributions. Other factors, including site visibility and geomorphic processes, collector intensity,
recording, and recognition bias are considered.
Ashley, Michael (Center for Digital Archaeology)
[261]             Differential Access for the Ethical Stewardship of Cultural and Digital Heritage through Mukurtu.net
In July, 2015, the number of federally recognized tribes increased to 567 with the inclusion of the Pamunkey tribe in Virginia. Among other benefits, Tribal
Nations have the right to self govern, and as such, the right to determine how best to curate and manage their own heritage and histories. To put this
number into perspective, there are currently only 193 member states (countries) in the United Nations, 183 of which voted to recognize the rights of
Indigenous Peoples worldwide in 2012 (the U.S. voted against). As we consider models for the long-term curation of digital archaeological data, we take
into account the voices of tribal communities and their diverse opinions on the sharing protocols of digital cultural heritage items on the Web. To this end,
we have developed Mukurtu.net, the hosted service for Mukurtu CMS 2.0, an open source platform designed specifically to address some of the
challenges of the diversity of sharing protocols and archiving for the long-term. In this presentation we will explore how community-based agile software
development enables the long-term sustainable sharing and curation of indigenous cultural property through the active participation of the communities and
those worldwide who benefit from reciprocal knowledge exchange.
[33]              Discussant
Ashley, Keith [164] see Murray, Emily Jane
Ashmore, Wendy (University of California, Riverside)
[162]             Upstream, Downstream, Sacred Worlds
Archaeological study of ancient water management has grown tremendously in recent decades. Vern Scarborough has contributed centrally to advances in
this domain, in the Maya area of Mesoamerica, as well as in cross-cultural examinations extending to the U.S. southwest, and more distantly, south and
southeast Asia. Even his early concerns with ancient American ballcourts and ballgames link to water, with regard to the watery underworld to which the
courts were entry portals. Scarborough’s inquiries into water-related ritual landscapes are well known and often richly collaborative. While some of his and
others’ research involves standing water, such as cenotes or reservoirs, much treats flowing streams and moving water. This presentation explores some
of the inferences about ancient practices raised by that work, especially ways in which it leads to rethinking old evidence, including some in my past
research.
[53]              Discussant
Athens, J. Stephen [296] see Rieth, Timothy
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              20
Atherton, Heather [110] see Gonzalez, Albert
Atici, Levent [75] see MacIntosh, Sarah
Atkins Spivey, Ashley (College of William and Mary)
[293]             Making Pottery, Constructing Community and Engaging the Market: Colonoware Production on the Pamunkey Indian Reservation
Colonoware is an important object of the colonial era that continues to invoke debate surrounding the ethnic identity of its makers. However, attempts to tie
an “exact” ethnicity to colonoware production dismiss the deep structure of social processes tied to these objects created, used, and sold by both enslaved
African American and Indigenous communities. This paper combines archaeological, oral history and documentary research conducted on the Pamunkey
Indian Reservation located in tidewater Virginia, to contextualize colonoware as an important feature of Pamunkey life during the nineteenth century.
Importantly, in viewing colonoware through the lens of Pamunkey material culture, I argue the object of pottery, and the process of producing it, concretized
the central role landscape played in structuring the community’s appropriation of the region’s market economy. Specifically I explore Pamunkey colonoware
production in reference to: 1) The Pamunkeys’ existing systems of knowledge surrounding use of the Reservation landscape; 2) The community’s
innovative appropriation of the region’s market economy through the employment of traditional subsistence practices; 3) Contemporary tribal members’
perspectives and reflections on their past that I argue are integral to examining the role pottery making played, and continues to play in Pamunkey
engagement with the market economy.
Auf der Maur, Christian [147] see Meyer, Sabrina
Ausel, Erica [116] see Schurr, Mark
Austin, Robert (Alliance for Weedon Island Archaeological Research and Education, Inc.), John Arthur (University of South Florida), Wendy
Edwards (University of South Florida), Sharlene O'Donnell (University of Florida) and Christina Perry Sampson (University of Michigan)
[6]               Breaking New Ground: Archaeology of Domestic Life at the Weedon Island Site, Florida
The Weedo(e)n Island site is well-known among archaeologists in the southeastern U.S. as the type site of the Weeden Island culture, a mortuary complex
shared by geographically wide-spread cultures ca. A.D. 200–900. Recent research (survey, excavation, artifact and faunal analysis, radiocarbon dating) by
multiple institutions focusing on the domestic sphere have added new details about the site’s history and use during the Archaic, Woodland, and
Mississippian periods.
Austin, Haley (The College of Wooster) and Olivia Navarro-Farr (The College of Wooster)
[235]             Ritual Behavior in the Late and Terminal Classic: An Application of Ethnoarchaeology in the Southern Maya Lowlands to Terminal Deposits
In the Late and Terminal Classic periods (~750–900 B.C.) ancient Maya city centers in the southern lowlands changed in terms of population, political, and
ritual climate. These changes resulted in marked emigration, depopulation of various city centers, and the fall of divine kingship. Across the Maya region,
archaeologists have encountered heterogeneous surface deposits, many of which are associated with final occupational phases. Variously identified as
problematic or terminal, I argue these deposits may provide unique insights into ancient Late and Terminal Classic ritual behavior; as such, they may
further our understanding of the complex processes associated with collapse. In this poster, I consider ethnoarchaeology as a potential research strategy
for examining the archaeology of collapse-era ritual in the Maya Lowlands. I propose studying modern ritual engagement of ancient shrines as a potential
analogue for evaluating ancient terminal deposits. I demonstrate how applying ethnoarchaeological methodologies may help address questions about
ancient behavior and intentionality.
Austin, Tucker, Carolyn Freiwald (University of Mississippi), Melissa Quartarone (University of Mississippi), Hali Niles (University of
Mississippi) and Timothy Pugh (Queens College-CUNY)
[291]             Animal Use at Nixtun-Ch'ich': Preclassic Canids, Postclassic Crocodiles, and Contact Period Cows
A number of general trends characterize changes in Maya animal use over time. Previous studies have found that remains of dogs are most common in
Preclassic contexts, while Classic period elite deposits typically consist mainly of large game, such as whitetail deer. Native species remained important
even after the introduction of European domesticated species during the Contact and Colonial periods. Unfortunately, large faunal deposits that span
multiple time periods are absent at most Maya centers. We report changing patterns in animal use at Nixtun-Ch'ich', Guatemala based on data derived
from excavations of public locations dating from the Preclassic to the Contact periods. While dogs were used preferentially in Preclassic ritual activities,
Postclassic deposits included a wider variety of animal species, such as snakes, crocodiles, and small game, and even cows after the transition to the
Contact and Colonial periods. Reliance on lacustrine and riverine resources continued during all time periods, but preference for different species shows
participation in distinct trade networks or and catchments over time.
Aveni, Anthony (Colgate University)
[107]             Night in Day: How Mesoamerican Cultures Respond to Unanticipated (and Anticipated) Eclipse Phenomena
Effects of the sudden, dramatic inversion of day and night experienced during a total eclipse of the sun have been reported in cultures the world over. How
to find meaning in the extraordinary shading, the odd color tones in the landscape produced by the sun’s corona, and the changes in animal behavior, not
to mention the appearance of stars and planets flanking the black disk that accompanies darkness in the middle of the day? After a brief cross-cultural
survey of where eclipse myths find their place in society, we turn to the significance of eclipses in cultures that have developed the capacity to warn of the
advent of such phenomena, most notably the Maya.
Aventín Moretti, Milagros [233] see Moralejo, Reinaldo
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               21
Avila, Florencia [255] see Echenique, Ester
Avila Peltroche, Mary Claudia, Ali Altamirano-Sierra and Bryan Nuñez Aparcana
[283]             Analysis of Animal Bones in Panquilma and their Relation with Domestic and Ritual Spaces
During Late periods, the use of domestic animals as camelids and guinea pigs were part of a fiscalized economic system which allowed a better
management of faunal resource for consumption. These animal species also had a symbolic meaning in the Andean cosmovision that led them to be used
in ritual spaces, along with other animals as canids, amphibians, deers, birds, and felines. In this study, we showed the results of the analysis made on the
bone assemblage recovered from the site of Panquilma. We recorded the principal modifications, whether they are cultural as cut marks and termic
alterations, or natural as taphonomic processes. After being evaluated and discussed, these characteristics showed a tentative pattern of animal utilization,
where the camelids and guinea pigs appear as well as domestic and ritual spaces, while canids and amphibians are exclusively related to ritual and
symbolic spaces.
Awe, Jaime J. [179] see Sullivan, Kelsey
Awe, Jaime
[288]             Paying Homage to the Ancestors: The (Preclassic) Cunil Phase Maya of Cahal Pech
More than 20 years of investigations at Cahal Pech have served to establish that the site has one of the longest sequences of occupation in the Maya
Lowlands. First settled at the end of the Early Preclassic period, the settlement gradually grew in size and affluence during the Middle and Late Preclassic
periods, and eventually became one of the primary Classic period centers of the upper Belize River Valley. Cahal Pech’s rise to prominence, however, was
not a product of Classic period achievements. Rather, it developed from the solid foundation established by the site’s earliest Preclassic inhabitants.
Besides examining the origins of the first settlers of the Belize Valley, this paper also provides an updated and comprehensive description of the Cunil
Phase Maya of Cahal Pech.
[288]             Chair
Awe , Jaime [58] see Morris, John
Ayers-Rigsby, Sara (EBI Consulting)
[287]             Section 106, FCC Guidelines, and Small Project Area Archaeology: Little Footprints can Find Significant Sites
This paper explores the role of Section 106 compliance in small projects, such as telecommunications facilities, city parks, and fiber routes. Often thought
of as less significant by regulatory agencies, state historic preservation offices, and CRM firms themselves, small scale archaeology is capable of
identifying national register eligible sites, and can play a critical role in examining areas that have been heavily developed by the private sector and
therefore not previously subjected to the 106 process. This paper gathers analytical data from different states to illustrate variances in the rate of
identification of archaeological sites by small scale projects versus large scale projects. Additionally, case studies of National Register eligible sites
identified by small scale compliance projects, such as the Constance Avenue site (44JC1333) in Williamsburg, Virginia, will be examined. If National
Register eligible sites are identified regularly by consultants completing this type of compliance work, what large scale implications does this have for the
regulatory framework?
Ayres, William [125] see Levin, Maureece
Azarova, Mayya (UCSD)
[179]             Belizean Jade: Why Such a Rich Periphery?
This paper addresses the question of the place of Belizean Maya jade artifacts within a broader Mesoamerican context. More specifically, I examine the
similarities between Belizean jade and other jade finds in different Maya areas. I discuss why a significant number of major jade finds have occurred in
Belize while it is often considered to be on the periphery of Maya culture as well as examining the variations in the iconography of carved images on jade. I
draw on evidence of recent finds and research into Belizean jade which is currently in the possession of British Museum.
Baca Marroquin, Ancira Emily (University of Illinois at Chicago) and Clorinda Orbegoso (Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Peru)
[219]             Inca and Local Household Economic Interactions in the Chinchaysuyo, Asia Valley, Peru
Empires establish large scale interregional interaction networks with their provinces. Along with these large scale networks, pre-imperial small scale local
economic interaction networks may continue (endure), diminish (decrease), or intensify (increase). Within this context, Imperial and local economic
networks create a more complex web of interactions capable of being examined at the household level. In the Chinchaysuyo, the Inca conquered several
coastal groups and established a range of different economic interactions with them. My research focuses in the Asia Valley, which unlike the near Chincha
or Cañete Valleys, appears like a modest region with scant resources of political-economic interest for the state. Nevertheless, Inca-era settlements are
ubiquitous throughout the valley. Using statistical SPSS analysis, I examine the distribution and consumption of Inca and local ceramics collected from
household contexts of the Asia Valley, as a means to explore and discuss the nature of political and economic relationships established between the Inca
state and distinct social segments (elite and non-elite) of the valley communities.
Backhouse, Paul (Seminole Tribe of Florida)
[16]              A Landmark Career: The Professional Legacy of the Lubbock Lake Landmark Program
For more than 40 years, the Lubbock Lake Landmark Regional Research Program has provided an immersive participatory environment for students to
actively engage with and understand the past. The interdisciplinary nature of the investigations and rich archaeological setting of the Landmark itself have
attracted participants to the program from across the globe. From inception the program has followed an apprenticeship rather than traditional field school
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              22
model. For many of the hundreds of alumni the Landmark represents a boot camp which taught them how to work and most importantly, to think, as an
archaeologist. This paper evaluates the success of the program, its pedagogy, and impact to the profession as measured through an analysis of the career
paths of those who choose to participate.
[203]             Discussant
Badillo, Alex [176] see Burtt, Amanda
Bahuchet, Serge [295] see De Maret, Pierre
Bailey, Kassi (University of Arizona)
[184]             The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse: Emergence of Pest-Host and Commensal Relationships at Aşıklı Höyük, Turkey
The objective of this poster is to present an overview of the emergence of pest-host and commensal relationships that emerged between humans and
microfaunal species over the course of approximately 1,500 years at the Pre-Pottery Neolithic site of Aşıklı Höyük. My research is focused on the
investigation of the frequency and taphonomic contexts of microfaunal remains in a formative village setting. Co-evolution between humans and plants and
animals occurred as feedback systems developed because humans altered the environmental structure in which these microvertebrates were living or
could easily invade. Sedentism, in particular, led to the development of new habitats for small animals and fast-growing plants within and around village
sites, which had a powerful impact on the proximate biotic environment. Modifications to this environment may have contributed to the formation of micro-
habitats distinct from the surrounding area. Rodents particularly may have been attracted to the disturbed sediments of human settlements and to
concentrations of food and the presence of nesting sites. This presentation will explore the potential factors that may have attracted different microfaunal
species to inhabit human-occupied sites.
Bailey, Doug (San Francisco State)
[248]             Discussant
Bain, Allison (Université Laval, Québec, Canada), Sophia Perdikaris (CUNY Brookly), Rebecca Boger (CUNY Brooklyn), Amy Potter (Armstrong
State University) and Reginald Murphy (Antigua and Barbuda National Parks)
[100]             Provisioning Antigua and Beyond: How Herding and Farming Transformed Barbuda, West Indies
The island of Barbuda was farmed by English settlers from the 1660s onwards. The Codrington family of England held the lease to the island from the
1680s–1870, and they introduced a variety of plant and animal species, some of which continue to thrive on the island. Sugar cane was never grown on
this dry, low lying island and instead, lime and charcoal were produced along with other subsistence crops for export. Herding became an important part of
the economy and, as a result, water management transformed elements of the landscape which continue to be used by the residents of the village of
Codrington. Archaeological surveys and intermittent excavations, combined with recent environmental and palaeoecological analyses suggest the extent of
Barbuda’s transformation since the seventeenth century. Results of recent research will be discussed alongside an examination of current environmental
challenges faced by the local population.
Bain, Allison [100] see Perdikaris, Sophia
Baires, Sarah
[108]             Constructing Narratives: Archaeology's Relationship with the Ontological Turn at Cahokia
The goal of archaeology, rigorous in its method and theory, is to reconstruct past practices and events. Our pre-conceptions, knowledge, and training
channel our analyses through varying theoretical lenses. These perspectives provide context within which to hypothesize about the past, creating
narratives about human relationships with the environment, materials, places, and practices. While these theoretical perspectives add nuance and
structure to archaeological analyses they sometimes miss, ignore, or appropriate alternate perspectives and theories. In this paper, I examine the recent
ontological turn in this process of constructing archaeological narratives in the context of Native North American archaeological sites. The ontological turn,
no doubt, changed our engagement with Native North American history, but are we—as predominantly Western social scientists—claiming ownership of
theories that were (and are) realities for many of the communities we ‘study’? Using as a case study the relationships between pre-columbian Cahokians
and their landscape, I explore how ontological theories shape our interpretations of this Native North American city. In examining the status of the
ontological turn at Cahokia, I challenge my own relationship with relational theory questioning the application of a Western-derived theoretical movement to
accurately engage with a Native American past.
[108]             Chair
Baires, Sarah [112] see Laubach, Amber
Baitzel, Sarah (UC San Diego)
[172]             Color, Structure, and Society in the Tiwanaku State
In the Andes, weaving and wearing cloth are essential for shaping identity and social relations. The weavers of the south-central Andean Tiwanaku state
(Middle Horizon period A.D.500–1100) possessed knowledge of plant and animal fibers, weave techniques, dyes, and iconography which allowed them to
produce a wide range of textiles, from the monochrome cloths of daily life to the vibrantly colored tapestries. Examining textile evidence from burials at the
provincial center of Omo M10 (Moquegua, Peru), this study aims to understand how color choices and patterns related to the structure and design not only
of Tiwanaku textiles, but also society. How did the range of natural and dyed colors figure into the layout of warp-striped or tapestry garments? How did
concepts of complementarity and dualism, which were central to the structure of Tiwanaku society, influence the color and structure choices involved in the
different qualities of cloth manufacture? By integrating new data on color and structure from provenienced Tiwanaku textiles with current archaeological
models of social organization and identity in the Tiwanaku state, I hope to shed new light on the role and importance of color in the material practice of the
ancient Andes.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 23
[172]             Chair
Baker, Joe
[208]             Chair
Baker, Joe [208] see Peresolak, Katherine
Balanzario Granados, Sandra [256] see Velásquez García, Erik
Balázs, Ádám [149] see Parditka, Györgyi
Balcarcel, Beatriz [59] see Hansen, Richard
Balco, William (University of North Georgia) and Michael J. Kolb (Metropolitan State University of Denver)
[271]             Evidence for Roman Glass Production in Salemi, Sicily
Evidence for the production of Roman glass artifacts in western Sicily remains difficult to identify. The fragile nature of glass artifacts and the frequency
with which glass could be recycled into new glass artifacts contributes to a general lack of evidence concerning its ancient production. Excavation of a
Roman water cistern in Salemi, Sicily, however, preserved evidence of the local manufacture of glass artifacts. Following its abandonment, the cistern was
filled with refuse from the nearby structure, including glass fragments, droplets, and other waste glass. This paper explores the evidence for Roman glass
production at Salemi. An analysis of this evidence suggests the presence of a skilled craftsperson operating at the site and attests the wealth of the
household associated with this feature.
[271]             Chair
Balco, Jr., William [81] see Bernstetter, Jessica
Balen, Jacqueline [146] see Zavodny, Emily
Ballester, Benjamín (ICIIS. Centro Interdisciplinario de Estudios Interculturales e Indígenas. PUC), Estefanía Vidal (Department of Anthropology,
University of Chicago) and Francisco Gallardo (ICIIS. Centro Interdisciplinario de Estudios Inter)
[76]              Architecture and Monuments as Territorial Markers among the Hunter-Gatherers of the Pacific Coast, Atacama Desert (Northern Chile)
Architecture, as a material device that is perceived and experienced, involves the creation of spatial and visual signatures within a landscape, effectively
connecting social groups and territories. In this paper, we explore the role of architecture and monuments in processes of territorialization, land tenure, and
the use of space among hunter-gatherers of the Pacific coast in the Atacama Desert, Northern Chile. Between 7,000 to 1,000 B.P. these groups developed
diverse ways of making and using buildings through different modes of designing and constructing spaces, including shifts in the location of settlements,
modes of organizing labor, changes in building materials, and different burial practices. Our framework considers changes in the architectural landscape
and its monumentalization in order to address the ways in which this technology was used as a medium for establishing and reproducing social relations
and transforming ecologies through values, norms, experiences, and affects.
Balos, Angelica [24] see Osterholtz, Anna
Baltus, Melissa (University of Toledo)
[108]             Vessels of Change: Everyday Relationality in the Rise and Fall of Cahokia
By replacing representational thinking with a relational perspective, archaeologists hope to better understand the past-as-lived and experienced. Here I
seek to locate the relational in the “mundane,” with a consideration of pottery production, use, and deposition as part of the many changing relationships
associated with the urbanization and abandonment of the precolumbian city of Cahokia. These relationships include pastes as well as potters, engaging
humans and non-humans, in the shifting array of social agents throughout the life of a Cahokian vessel. New relationships are formed in deposition,
especially among vessel portions that are intentionally deposited in the wall trenches of certain buildings, in posts, or as foundation or termination deposits
in refuse pits. New vessel forms, production techniques, and paste recipes are associated with moments of transformation at Cahokia, suggesting
relationships with and through pottery were actively entangled in the broader social milieu. Simultaneously, this paper is self-critical, asking whether we
begin seeing relationality where perhaps it was not conceptualized or experienced in the past. I explore some of the problematic aspects of engaging with
a relational ontology as filtered through western archaeological theory by critically examining the utility and validity of such a project.
[108]             Chair
Bamforth, Douglas
[16]              Discovery Bias, Excavation Bias, Clovis Diet, and Archaeological Mythmaking
The myth of Paleoindian big-game specialization has deep roots in our field. None of these roots run deeper than for the Clovis Period, where the vision of
humans armed with stone-tipped spears attacking animals the size of extinct elephants has enchanted the public and professional imaginations almost
equally. But issues of differential site discovery and investigation run equally deep, and this is especially so for Clovis archaeology. Ancient archaeological
sites left by mobile hunters can be hard to find, and the bones of large animals typically attract far more attention than sparse scatters of unmodified flakes.
This paper examines the processes of discovery for the set of sites that comprise the Clovis archaeological record on the Great Plains and Southwest, with
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               24
two particular issues in mind. First, how the presence of large mammal bone has affected decisions to excavate sites and, second, how the kinds of sites
we are likely to find by excavating around large mammal bone affect our ability to generalize about Clovis ways of life.
Banks, Kimball (Metcalf Archaeological Consultants Inc. & Combined Prehistoric Expedition Fdtn), J. Signe Snortland (Combined Prehistoric
Expedition), Linda Scott Cummings (PaleoResearch Institutie), Donatella Usai (IsIAO and CSSeS-Italy) and Maria Gatto (Aswan-Kom Ombo
Archaeological Project & University)
[177]               Ye Olde Fishing Hole: A Late Paleolithic Fishing Camp, Wadi Kubbaniya, Egypt
WK26 is a Late Paleolithic occupation consisting of a sparse lithic scatter, hearths, postholes, storage features, a possible living floor, and faunal remains
in which fish predominate. The site lies on the west side of Wadi Kubbaniya, north of Aswan, Egypt, and opposite the Late Paleolithic dune field the
Combined Prehistoric Expedition investigated in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Radiocarbon dates and stratigraphic position indicate that WK26 dates to
the end of the Late Paleolithic. Few contemporaneous sites have been located along this stretch of the Nile Valley. The stratigraphic position and
composition of the cultural material, features, and faunal remains offer insight into settlement-subsistence at the end of the Late Paleolithic in Egypt, and
suggest that the site may have been a dry-season fishing camp.
Baquedano, Elizabeth (University College London, Institute of Archaeology)
[47]                Divine Hands: The Teotihuacan Great Goddess
Teotihuacan was the painted city. A key iconographic motif in the murals of residential compounds, such as Tetitla, is the Great Goddess, often shown in
the act of hand-scattering. A variety of substances such as grain, liquids, and precious, green stones are pictured falling from the Goddess' open palm. The
extensive corpus of representations of the goddess' hand-scattering identifies the hand, and in particular the female hand, as a locus for divinity.
The suggestion that the agency of the great goddess resides in her hands is based on the observation that the hand is the one part of the Goddess' body
which performs actions. The repeat border design of Mural 1, Tetitla, shows the disembodied hand of the Goddess scattering grain and in between each
hand is a Flat Two-Dimensional Knot. This knot is an important Classic Period Maya motif found on Maya monuments, architecture, and ceramics. The
juxtaposition of the motifs, hand and knot, is proposed as deliberate and therefore meaningful. Absent from the repertoire of Teotihuacan motifs, this knot
motif offers a unique opportunity to re-evaluate the meaning of hand-scattering at Teotihuacan but also the presence of important Maya iconographic
motifs at this great city.
[15]                Discussant
[47]                Chair
Bar Yosef, Ofer [173] see Wu, Xiaohong
Baram, Uzi (New College of Florida)
[10]                Heritage Tourism and the Global Economy: The Values of Archaeology in the Experience Economy
Recognizing the intellectual, social, and political economic terrain for archaeology is crucial for effective and meaningful work in the present, archaeologists
have reflected on the colonial, imperialist, and nationalist context for research and representations of the material past. Since the 1990s tourism has grown
as a concern, particularly as heritage tourism has expanded greatly, offering opportunities for preservation and representation of the past. Through multiple
examples, this poster includes the dynamics between economic development and historic preservation. The term value is explored in terms of the financial
and the educational.
For talented story-tellers, the past can be conjured up and presented through thrilling narrative arcs and vivid imagery. The result can make the listener feel
like they are in an ancient place. But the audience listens, with only awe as the result. With expanding digital technologies, the archaeological past can be
animated. Students can immerse themselves in reconstructed buildings and landscapes and move through ancient places, examine material culture from
multiple angles, and even engage in games that educate on the lives of past peoples. The active learning facilitates innovative interpretations even while
stressing the significance of rigorous detail-oriented analysis of archaeological and archival/ethnographic data. Examples come from programs for primary
school aged children based on historical archaeology projects on Florida’s Gulf Coast. The digital presentations for the Cuban fishing rancho industry and
early nineteenth-century marronage offer a past in a part of Florida often assumed to have little or no history. The goal of these digital avenues meets the
ethic of communicate archaeological interpretations of the past, introducing children and adults to a cosmopolitan past.
Barba, Luis [129] see Mejia Ramon, Andres
Barber, Sarah (University of Central Florida) and Arthur Joyce (University of Colorado Boulder)
[53]                Gathered for the Feast: Community and Polity Ceremony in the Lower Río Verde Valley
Among Payson Sheets’ many contributions to archaeological method and theory is a long-term commitment to examining the actions and relationships of
commoners. Taking inspiration from his work at Cerén on community ceremony, in this paper we examine collective ceremonial practices at two Terminal
Formative period (C.E. 100–250) sites in the lower Río Verde valley of Pacific coastal Oaxaca, Mexico. The site of Yugüe, like Cerén, was a small site that
was located only four kilometers away from a regional political center—in this case, the site of Río Viejo. Middens located in public spaces at both Yugüe
and Río Viejo attest to collective food consumption in conjunction with ceremonial activity. While lacking in the remarkable preservation that characterizes
Cerén, the Yugüe and Río Viejo middens offer an opportunity to compare the community ceremony of commoners with that of the inhabitants of an urban
center. Our results incorporate contextual, ceramic, faunal, and botanical remains to explore the degree to which commoner ceremony at Yugüe was
entangled with more encompassing ritual practices at Rio Viejo and consider the implications of these entanglements for the constitution of regional
political affiliations.
Barber, Sarah [117] see Joyce, Arthur
Barber, John (University of Edinburgh)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                25
[119]            Use of Raw Energy Data in the Estimation of the 'Cost' of Building Iron Age Brochs in Scotland
Iron Age brochs, drystone-built towers unique to Scotland, are typically 18 m in external diameter, 9 m internally, and 12 m to 14 m high. Calculation of the
volume of stone required for the construction is relatively simple. Calculation of its standard bulk density, only marginally more difficult so that the mass of
stone involved can be calculated with confidence. The calculation of the number of kWhs of energy required to quarry, lift move, horizontally and vertically
and place into the monument can similarly be measured. The continuous power rating of a fit human being is a mere 0.6 kWh per diem—its ‘living cost,’
just less than three times as much, is not available for labour. From these data, a minimum energy cost of construction can be calculated based only on
physical parameters, and the labour force size/duration-of-build ratio can be derived, assuming 100 percent efficiency in the human agents. This approach
is less subjective than, for example, guessing the person-hours and length of a standard working day, albeit that it is not totally free from the potential for
such biases. At the very least, its uniform methodology facilitates comparison between brochs in terms of their energy costs and thus of their social
cost/values.
Barbery, Ennis [191] see Hambrecht, George
Barbier, Brian (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[110]            Bit by Bit: Olivella Bead Production during the Middle Period on Santa Cruz Island
Beads made from the Olivella biplicata shell were used as both decoration and a form of currency by the Chumash living in the Santa Barbara Channel
region, and large quantities have been recovered from many prehistoric sites throughout western North America. Many of the bead types were made from
different portions of the shell and conform to standardized shapes and sizes. A number of these types have distinctive spatial and temporal distributions in
the archaeological record, and based on quantities and associations, present an opportunity to understand wealth, status, and regional exchange patterns.
Despite extensive research into shell bead production and exchange during the Late Period, less attention has been given to the role of Olivella bead
manufacturing during earlier times. This study assesses bead production evidence, including shell detritus, drills, and other tools to better understand the
methods and intensity of Olivella bead manufacturing during the Middle Period. By applying a bead detritus typology to the production remains at several
Middle Period sites on Santa Cruz Island along with supporting experimental studies, I seek to quantify the intensity of bead production occurring at this
time, and compare these findings to studies of Late Period bead manufacturing sites.
Barbosa, Antonia (PPGA / Universidade Federal do Pará - Brasil)
[263]            Arqueoastronomy and Built Landscape: The Spatial Orientation of Geometric Enclosures in Western Amazonia
Geometric enclosures found over a 400 sq km area in western Amazonia were built in patterned ways that involved depth, width, and morphology of
monumental ditches excavated in a clay soil matrix. Pattern eventually included care for solar orientation. A study of 419 geometric enclosures showed that
around 60 percent of them were clearly oriented according to the sun’s trajectory and its maximum distance from the Ecuador, e.g., the solstice. One of the
working hypotheses is that the agricultural calendar guided yearly festivities, therefore, the geometric enclosures were mostly used for ritual activities. This
research shows new interpretive possibilities for the study of such sites which functionality remains not completely understood.
Bardolph, Dana (University of California Santa Barbara), Brian Billman (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill) and Jesus Briceno (Ministerio
de Cultura, Peru)
[122]            Food in the Contact Zone: Reimagining Highland-Coastal Contact in the Prehispanic Moche Valley of North Coastal Peru
In this paper, we explore migration and culture contact in the prehispanic Moche Valley of north coastal Peru, specifically through the lens of domestic
foodways. During the Early Intermediate Period (EIP, 400 B.C. to A.D. 800), serrano groups from the neighboring highlands colonized many principal river
valleys along the Peruvian north coast; however, the nature of highland colonization remains poorly understood. Scholars have envisioned diverse
interactions between locals and nonlocals, from trade and exchange of marriage partners to warfare, coercion, and slavery. Recent analysis of excavated
materials from EIP highland and coastal domestic habitation sites in the Moche Valley affords a closer look at this historical process. By employing
paleoethnobotanical data to examine the organization of foodways, we have the potential to shed light on myriad social processes related to the
negotiation of ethnic identities, gender relations, and domestic labor in the more distant as well as recent Andean past.
Barfod, Gry [13] see Van Gijseghem, Hendrik
Barker, Andrea [40] see Kamp-Whittaker, April
Barker, Alex (University of Missouri)
[58]             Discussant
Barker, Claire (University of Arizona) and Samantha Fladd (University of Arizona)
[64]             Miniature in Everything but Meaning: A Contextual Analysis of Miniature Vessels at Homol’ovi
Within the archaeological literature there are several studies of miniature vessels that have attempted to explain the presence of these unique artifacts in
prehistoric Puebloan society. The two most common hypotheses are that these pots were made by inexperienced potters while learning their craft, or they
were produced by expert ceramic artisans and served a ritual function. These analyses have largely depended on assessing the skill with which miniature
vessels were produced. The results of these studies have been inconclusive, finding evidence of both skilled and inexpert production of miniature vessels.
This research attempts to further our understanding of the role miniature vessels played in Puebloan culture through a synthetic analysis which considers
both craft mastery and depositional context. An expert in the art of ceramic manufacture may make a vessel for utilitarian purposes; similarly, a vessel
produced by an amateur may be used for ritual. Thus, it is crucial to understand the ways in which use and discard also imbued an object with meaning.
For this reason, we suggest that considering the context in which a miniature vessel was deposited may provide a more refined understanding of the
function(s) these artifacts served in prehistoric Puebloan society.
Barnard, Hans (Cotsen Institute of Archaeology at UCLA) and Ran Boytner (Institute for Field Research)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              26
[92]             The Development of Andean Textile Dying Technology
Textiles have always had great social significance in the Andes. They were used to expressed identity and power as well as position and function within
society. Intensive investment in textile technologies yielded some of the best such artifacts of the ancient world. While spinning and weaving produced fine
garments, it was colors—achieved primarily through the use of brilliant organic dyes—that constituted the major visual qualities of Andean textiles. A
limited number of studies exist that investigate Andean dye technology, its development and the changes that resulted from the domestication of dye plants
and insects, new trade networks and the subsequent exchange of designs and ideas. We present data from hundreds of textiles to cover a broad temporal
and geographical range. Some of the data summarize published analytical work on Andean dyes, but most result from our work in the past two decades.
We use the entire dataset to explore changes in dying preferences and technologies, and their relationships to general cultural and technological traits
across the ancient Andes.
Barnard, Hans [177] see Wendrich, Willeke
Barnes, Ben [266] see Sievert, April
Barnett, Kristen (The University Of Montana), Anna Prentiss ( The University of Montana ), Sarah Nowell (The University of Montana) and Ethan
Ryan
[124]            Community Archaeology on the South West Coast of Alaska:TAPP
The Togiak archaeology and Paleo archaeology project is a combined effort between the Togiak community and the University of Montana to renegotiate
the pre-colonial and historic understanding of the Old Togiak site in southwest Alaska. Preliminary results from the first field season challenge our current
understanding of the site incorporating community driven research and knowledge. This paper serves to expand our knowledge and understanding of the
region and propose a new baseline in community indigenous research.
[186]            Discussant
Barnett, Kristen [171] see Prentiss, Anna
Baron, Joanne [88] see Freedline, Joshua
Barreto, Cristiana (Museu de Arqueologia e Etnologia)
[23]             Fractal and Extended Identities: The Dynamics of Ceramic Styles from Monte Alegre, Lower Amazon.
This paper presents the initial results from analysis of ceramic materials from open air sites in Monte Alegre, a region that has long been known for
abundant and impressive rock art sites, and for the very early human occupation at Pedra Pintada cave excavated by Ana Roosevelt 20 years ago. A new
research project in the area with a broader regional approach so as to explain the enormous diversity of sites, has included now sites from a more recent
occupation beginning around the twelfth century A.D. Despite the proximity of the large Santarém chiefdom, and influences from Santarem ceramic styles,
Monte Alegre ceramics nonetheless exhibit a particular local pattern permeated by elements from both Santarém (and Konduri) styles but, more
importantly, by what seems to be a unique cross-cultural stylistic complex in the Lower Amazon and Guianas, now being identified as the Koriabo complex.
Based on analysis of ceramics from this more recent period, we discuss relations between the longevity of human occupation in the area, the emergence
of persistent ceramic traditions, and the dynamics of stylistic flows and interaction spheres suggested by studies of materials since the twelfth century A.D.
across the Lower Amazon region.
[23]             Chair
Barrett, Linda R [197] see Matney, Timothy
Barrientos, Gustavo [207] see Belardi, Juan
Barrios, Edy (CUDEP-USAC)
[212]            Friends, Foes, or Uneasy Acquaintances? Copan's Relationship with its Neighbors
A recent mapping and excavation project in the Copan Valley is taking a second view of communities outside of the Copan Pocket. The goal of this project
is two-fold, one, to understand the environmental context of these sites, and two, to understand the relationship between them and the powerful leaders of
the Copan Acropolis. It is unlikely that the kingdom of Copan could have reached its apogee without the support and subordination of its closest neighbors,
a diversity of towns, villages, and small groups spread throughout the fluvial pockets surrounding Copan. This talk specifically discusses Rio Amarillo,
Quebrada Piedras Negras, Agua Sucia, and the sites of Finca del Cisne.
[212]            Chair
Barrios, Edy [212] see McNeil, Cameron
Barse, William (Smithsonian Institution)
[279]            Nericagua, Corobal, and the Upper Orinoco Ceramic Sequence
This presentation reviews the relatively unknown ceramic complexes of Nericagua and Corobal defined in the late 1950s by Clifford Evans and Betty
Meggers, currently housed in the Smithsonian Institution curation facilities. The range of variation in ceramic vessel shapes and their decorative motifs of
these two complexes will be compared to neighboring ceramic assemblages in the northern Tropical Lowlands to assess broader stylistic correlations, e.g.,
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                27
between Arauquin phases in the Llanos of Venezuela and the Monou-teri ceramic complex in the Upper Orinoco River drainage originally defined by Erika
Wagner. Evidence for paleosol correlations with late ceramic assemblages further downstream will also be explored. Seriation data from test pit
excavations suggest that many of the Nericagua sites and several of the Corobal sites were excavated from buried paleosol contexts. Potentially, such
buried paleosols can be linked to well-dated allogenic paleosol contexts with Arauquin ceramics located downstream from the Atures Rapids that are
present in a number of sites along the Orinoco River.
Barton, C. Michael (Arizona State University)
[95]               Discussant
Barton, Loukas [180] see Morgan, Christopher
Barton, Loukas (University of Pittsburgh), Christopher Morgan (University of Nevada, Reno) and Bayarsaikhan Jamsranjav (National Museum of
Mongolia)
[180]              Stone Tool Typology and Chronology from Late Pleistocene to Middle Holocene Northwest Mongolia
Understanding hunter-gatherer adaptations to northern latitude marginal environments such as the Uvs Lake Basin of northern Mongolia is crucial for
understanding social historical processes such as the transition to herding and pastoralism. To date, however, the archaeological patterns of hunter-
gatherer life in this part of the world are notoriously ill-defined, on the one hand because so little attention has been given to them, and on the other
because buried, stratified sites have been so elusive. Here we report a preliminary account of stone tool typology from the late Pleistocene to the middle
Holocene of the Uvs Lake Basin, northwest Mongolia, derived from systematic regional surface survey anchored to an absolute chronology from two
stratified sites at Bayaan Nuur, a small, spring-fed lake on the southern margin of the world’s northernmost dune desert.
Bar-Yosef, Ofer (Harvard University)
[211]              Making Stone Tools Ignoring Environmental Changes
The common assumption that environmental shifts force humans to change the technology or types of their stone tools is examined on the basis of the
Paleolithic of mainland China. During long periods of time humans made core and flake industries from local hard rocks whether various types of quartz
and even flint. This presentation will summarize the Pleistocene sequence of China stressing the traditions of producing the same lithic industries. Rare
examples of bifacial assemblages will demonstrate that there was no 'Movius line,' as suggested already by several scholars. Instead, the question of why
the same core and flake industries prevail over long periods, including the early millennia of the Upper Paleolithic, are rarely questioned. Stable
demographic aspects are examined and are tested against the better known sequence of prehistoric cultures in western Eurasia.
Basanti, Dil (Northwestern University)
[215]              Stone Bodies and Second Lives: Preserving the Person in Ancient Ethiopia
Aksum, the capital of an ancient northern Ethiopian kingdom (50–700 A.D.), is well known for its elaborate funerary stelae, the largest of which were carved
in the impression of multi-storied “houses.” Prior to a widespread conversion to Christianity, the Aksumites buried their dead in kin-groups either in tombs
or in shafts that cluster around the stelae. Human remains are often burned, fragmentary, disarticulated, and jumbled, creating an impression of
ephemeralness that contrasts with the permanence of the elaborate stelae and tombs. Bowls at the bases of stelae indicate the performance of ancestor
veneration rites that gave deceased family members a continued presence in memory. This suggests a personhood rooted in the family, and this
personhood was codified through the house symbolism as a second “body” for the family in death—one that may have had its own life-span. In this way,
the Aksumites focused their burial practices around those rituals and symbolisms that allowed families to preserve their relationships with each other past
the boundaries of life and death.
Basiran, Alper and Cevdet Merih EREK (Gazi University)
[184]              The Prehistoric Cultures in the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
The Cyprus Island is the third largest mainland in the Medditerranean, and it should have been connected by near lands in prehistoric times. Some
evidences of this situation obtained from a few prehistoric settlements and geomorphological proof. The new researches have been started by assistant
prof. Cevdet Merit Erek behalf of Gazi University in Ankara, from Turkish Republic. The new researches were carried out by permission of The Turkish
Republic Government of Northern Cyprus. Major assistance of our researches was provided by Fuat Azimli, Director of the Department of Antiquities. We
should like to note that the cooperation extended to us by Turkish Government officials and all Northern Cyprisian.
Bassett, Hayden (Department of Anthropology, College of William & Mary)
[126]              Housing Occupation and Constructing Race in Plantation Jamaica: A Comparative Archaeology between Two Slave Villages at Good Hope
                   Estate
The “slave village” occupies an important place in Caribbean archaeology, though one in which the internal variation and dynamics of a village have yet to
be thoroughly addressed. This has resulted in an essentialized picture of the "enslaved community” as a single entity. However, recent excavations at
Good Hope estate, an eighteenth/nineteenth-century sugar plantation in Jamaica, have demonstrated greater internal variation of experience, revealing
that the plantation's enslaved community was divided amongst two village sites. While most of the 490-person enslaved labor force lived in a central
primary village, a second smaller village housed the plantation’s 22 enslaved domestic servants. For the house domestics of Good Hope, and their small
dedicated village, this represented the majority of the plantation’s so-called “mulatto” population, segregated from what was categorized as the “negroe”
population by the eighteenth and nineteenth-century planter class. In this paper, I compare archaeological and architectural evidence from the two village
sites to test if a material-basis for social inequality existed in relation to occupational and racial grouping within Good Hope’s enslaved community.
Ultimately, these findings illustrate the significant role of built environments in constructing and sustaining difference and distance between enslaved
people.
Bates, Lynsey (DAACS), Elizabeth Bollwerk (DAACS), Leslie Cooper (DAACS) and Jillian Galle (DAACS)
[7]                Ceramic Investment by the Enslaved Community at The Hermitage, TN
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 28
For the first time, archaeological data from excavations at The Hermitage, Andrew Jackson’s nineteenth-century cotton plantation near Nashville,
Tennessee, are being made available to researchers through the Digital Archaeological Archive of Comparative Slavery (DAACS). These assemblages are
associated primarily with enslaved laborers who lived in three Antebellum quartering areas on the plantation. Building on previous research about slaves’
acquisition of non-provisioned goods, this poster interrogates one subset of these data, imported ceramics, to assess the distribution of goods across the
spatially-divided enslaved community. First, we establish a plantation-wide chronology using correspondence analysis to date deposits from the mansion
backyard, outlying field quarters, and the First Hermitage, the earliest settled area of the plantation. We then review how specialized forms and decorated
vessels varied across time and space between the three domestic areas, and whether this variation reflects relative investment in market goods.
Bates, Brian (Longwood University) and Mary Farrell (Longwood University)
[8]               The In-Crowd: Implications of Notable Village Features at 44CH62—The Randy K. Wade Site
Located in the southern region of the Virginia Piedmont, the Late Woodland Randy K. Wade site (44CH62) was initially identified as a community
influenced by Tidewater culture groups. In recent years, the discovery and analysis of a boundary ditch feature, fence line, and three large central post
features have impacted the interpretation of the site. It is now believed that the Wade Site exhibits characteristics influenced by Mississippian culture
groups in addition to a Tidewater influence. This poster investigates the archaeological evidence that indicates a conscious choice by the Wade site’s
prehistoric occupants to integrate two different cultures in their village layout and material culture.
Batista Barbosa, Jordana [167] see Silva, Rosicler
Battillo, Jenna (Southern Methodist University), Karen Lupo (Southern Methodist University), Jaime Mata-Miguez (University of Texas at Austin
), Rick W.A. Smith (University of Texas at Austin) and Deborah A. Bolnick (University of Texas at Austin)
[64]              Botanical and aDNA Analysis of the Dietary Contents of Human Paleofeces from Turkey Pen Ruin, Utah
Over the last few decades archaeologists and paleontologists have made great strides in paleofecal analysis, not the least of which was the application of
aDNA testing. However, most aDNA analyses of paleofeces have focused exclusively on studying human populations and researchers have largely
ignored the potential for using this tool to study dietary constituents themselves. In this study, we present analyses of aDNA from both the faunal and floral
dietary constituents of 20 Basketmaker II (BMII) paleofecal samples from Turkey Pen Ruin, Cedar Mesa, Utah. Palynological data in concert with animal
and plant aDNA, yields insights into seasonal resource use and the individual diets of the ancient inhabitants of Turkey Pen Ruin. Importantly these data
show that BMII populations were consuming animal protein from a wide variety of large animals (including turkey), which conflicts with previous ideas about
BMII diet at this site. We hope that with this data we will be able to paint a more comprehensive picture of Basketmaker II diet at Cedar Mesa, and in
particular help to form a better understanding of the ways in which people in the Southwest supplemented the incomplete nutrition in maize prior to bean
horticulture.
Battle-Baptiste, Whitney, Elizabeth Chilton (University of Massachusetts Amherst) and Elena Sesma (University of Massachusetts Amherst)
[10]              "Back to the Soil": Community Archaeology and Heritage Tourism in Eleuthera, Bahamas
In 1994, UNESCO launched their “Slave Route” project, with the aim of “contributing to a better understanding of the causes, forms of operation, issues
and consequences of slavery,” and to “highlight the global transformation and interactions that resulted from this history.” Although the past several
decades have seen a great deal of study around both U.S. and Caribbean plantations, many of these research projects are designed to address
archaeological research questions rather than some of the pressing problems faced by descendant communities concerning their heritage, or the critical,
global questions suggested by UNESCO. This poster outlines a research project that was initiated in collaboration with descendants of slaves of the
nineteenth C Millars. Descendants of enslaved families occupied the plantation area well after the post-emancipation period and many contemporary
southern Eleutheran communities trace their lineage to the slave population of the Millars Plantation. The archaeological project emerges out of sustained
community collaboration of several years, ethnographic data, oral histories, and interviews regarding the nineteenth century plantation landscape. Under
the auspices of the Center for Heritage & Society at UMass Amherst, this will be an important centerpiece for the ongoing project on heritage and
sustainable development on the island.
[221]             Discussant
Bauer, Brian, Javier Fonseca Santa Cruz and Miriam Araoz Silva
[198]             Excavations at Vilcabamba
After the Incas failed to regain control of their capital city from the Spaniards in 1536, many Inca loyalists withdrew into the Vilcabamba region. Over the
next 40 years of organized indigenous resistance to Spanish rule, much of the Inca royal court was centered in the town of Vilcabamba and a host of
critical events occurred in the region. Despite the important role that the city of Vilcabamba held in the final years of the Inca Empire, there have been few
archaeological projects aimed at understanding its layout or the activities that occurred within its boundaries. This paper presents the results of recent
excavations in the city and the recovery of new information concerning the final decades of Inca rule in the Andes.
Bauer-Clapp, Heidi (University of Massachusetts Amherst)
[10]              Heritage Values and Violent Pasts: A Case Study to Evaluate Resources to Promote Ethical Treatment of the Dead
Increasing interest in a heritage of violence and dark tourism raises new questions about social, political, ethical, or economic dimensions of heritage
values. In this poster I present a case study of St. Helena to examine diverse interests in violent heritage, in this case the island’s little-known use as a
refuge for captive Africans liberated from illegal slave vessels. I evaluate the efficacy of existing resources such as codes of ethics and heritage policies in
balancing potentially competing interests, with particular attention to complex agendas and consequences that arise when human remains become the
object of heritage projects.
Baumann, Timothy (University of Tennessee) and Gary Crites (McClung Museum, University of Tennessee)
[225]             The Age and Distribution of the Common Bean (Phaseolus vulgaris ) in Tennessee and the Southeastern U.S.
Arriving after A.D. 1000, the common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) was the last domesticated plant to be adopted in the prehistoric eastern Woodlands.
Beans were combined with corn and squash to create the “three sisters” agricultural system. Recent scholarship has argued that the earliest beans entered
the eastern U.S. from the lower Plains and through the Great Lakes. When and how beans entered into the southeastern U.S. is not clearly understood
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  29
because very few beans have been directly dated. New radiocarbon dates of beans from Tennessee and neighboring states are presented that may
provide new evidence of multiple trade/migration paths.
Bautista, Giovanni (National Museum of the Philippines) and Belinda Mollard
[254]            Cultural Resource Management in the Philippines: Current Practices, Trends and Challenges
The protection, preservation and conservation of archaeological resources has been a challenge in the Philippines all throughout the years given that there
are various threats that endanger their scientific, cultural, and educational value.
As there are programs and measures the Philippine government carry on including state-enacted cultural/archaeological laws all throughout the country in
order to safeguard these valuable resources, it is still the great task and effort to make the general public appreciate and value archaeology—to further
educate the public and instill among them the value of these archaeological resources.
This paper presents the current practices and trends on how Cultural Resource Management is being undertaken in the Philippines which have a meager
number of practicing archaeologists, with the National Museum of the Philippines at the forefront and central authority on matters concerning archaeology.
This paper also presents the realities, problems, and challenges that are encountered in dealing with these finite, nonrenewable and irreplaceable
archaeological resources in our country.
Baxter, Jane (DePaul University)
[107]            The Freedom that Nighttime Brings: Privacy and Cultural Persistence among Enslaved Peoples at Bahamian Plantations
When Bahamian scholar and educator Arlene Nash Ferguson wrote about the history of the famous Bahamian festival of Junkanoo, she began her story
with enslaved people taking action under cover of darkness. Freed from labor for the two-day Christmas holiday, the enslaved went into “the bush” at night
time, adorned their bodies with decorations found in the natural world, and reenacted, recreated, and created dances, songs, and traditions reflecting their
African heritage. Nighttime afforded privacy, not just for activities that were forbidden by their owners, but also for activities that held a place of cultural
significance that they did not want to share with people outside their community. This paper considers the landscapes of Bahamian plantations on the
island of San Salvador, and the opportunities and affordances created when those landscapes were experienced and encountered after dark. By
comparing diurnal and nocturnal landscapes of the plantation, it is possible to think about space and place making in ways that consider the role of privacy
as an essential element in practices of resistance and in the perpetuation and generation of cultural knowledge.
[25]             Discussant
Baxter, Erin (University of Colorado, Boulder)
[63]             Gone but Not Forgotten: Perishable Artifacts from Aztec Ruins (NM) Preserved in Photographs, 1916–1923
When excavated 100 years ago, many of the perishable items found at Aztec Ruins did not long survive the process. Fortunately, chief archaeologist Earl
Morris was an avid shutterbug and modern researchers are treated to dozens of curated photos of in situ perishable objects that include architectural
features, basketry, fibers, etc. When (re-)placed into context with other archaeological data, these items are helping to tell new stories about Aztec Ruins.
[201]            Moderator
Bazaliiskii, Vladimir [52] see Weber, Andrzej
Beach, Sheryl [26] see Beach, Timothy
Beach, Timothy (University of Texas at Austin), Sheryl Beach (University of Texas at Austin) and Nicholas Dunning (University of Cincinnati)
[26]             Equifinalities and the Limits of Soil, Ecology, and Climate Knowledge in Maya History
We read history to understand the present and possible future worlds, but each situation that arises in time is unique. This paradox of history also fits
natural science brought to bear on archaeology because often equifinality prevails, meaning there are several paths to the same ends we see in
landscapes. These complicate our interpretations, both delightfully and disturbingly. Here, we address both the agronomic and climatic capriciousness of
the variegated Maya puzzle. We consider terrace, wetland, and the other types of agriculture in diachronic and regional unevenness. We know most of
these features from slow, exhaustive, small scale archaeology, but the patchy LIDAR we have suggests a much more complicated picture that imagery
alone will not answer. We also address the limits of climate records both in terms of growing resolution on drought trends and its regional information. For
example, scientists have used speleothem records both to show less and more tropical storms and high and low rainfall variability. In both climate and
agronomy, we consider the overall limits and possibilities of their implications to the Maya archaeological record.
Bean, Daniel [113] see Davis, Loren
Beasley, Melanie (University of California, San Diego), Ian Orland (University of Wisconsin, Madison), John Valley (University of Wisconsin,
Madison) and Margaret Schoeninger (University of California, San Diego)
[176]            SIMS Reveals Diagenesis and Seasonal Paleoprecipitation: A New Method for Reconstructing Past Environments
One goal of zooarchaeological inquiry is to reconstruct past environments. This presentation will highlight a new method to identify paleoprecipitation
records from the stable oxygen isotope values (δ18Oen) recorded in tooth enamel. Seasonal rainfall patterns are reconstructed using a secondary ion
mass spectrometer (SIMS) to generate high-resolution serial spot analyses (13 µm spots) of δ18Oen. Additionally, this presentation will address the
specific issue of identifying diagenesis (post-depositional alteration) in tooth enamel, a material that has long been assumed to be resistant to diagenesis.
Previous research identified chemical changes the tooth enamel crystal structure using cathodoluminescence (CL). It is unclear whether changes identified
by CL correspond to altered isotope ratios in the enamel. It was not until technological advancements with instrumentation, such as the SIMS, that the
question of diagenesis in enamel could be addressed directly because oxygen isotope values could not be measured at a high enough resolution to test
this question. The aim of this research project is to identify areas of enamel diagenesis, clarify previous notions about enamel preservation in the fields of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   30
paleoanthropology and archaeology, and use the data from unaltered enamel regions to reconstruct the seasonal patterns of rainfall at an early hominin
site.
Beat, Alicia [165] see Walker, Jeff
Beaubien, Harriet 'Rae' (Smithsonian/Museum Conservation Institute)
[32]              In the Beginning was the Codex
During excavations at Cerén in the summer of 1989, a flattened expanse of paint—roughly the size of a book, with several colors visible and possibly
multiple layers—was found on the floor of a niche located at the base of a bench within one of the domestic buildings (Structure 2). The archaeologists'
response was both elation at the prospect that these constituted the remains of a codex (painted bark paper or animal skin "book," depicted on elite Maya
ceramics, with only a very few examples surviving from the time of Contact), and deep concern, given their very deteriorated and vulnerable state thanks to
long-term archaeological burial in subtropical conditions. The serendipitous events that led me in my first foray south of the U.S. border to this artifact and
its remarkable context have resulted in career-long involvement with archaeological conservation in Central America. The development of field recovery
techniques for, and the technical elucidation and preservation of artifacts made from illusive craft technologies remain a special focus, including hoped-for
painted codices—first at Cerén, subsequently at Copán (Honduras), Baking Pot (Belize), and Waka'-El Perú (Guatemala)—the outcomes of which will be
presented in this paper.
Beaudoin, Ella (American University), Russell Cutts (University of Georgia ), David Braun (George Washington University) and J.W.K. Harris
(Rutgers University )
[181]             Evidence of Early Fire? Spatial Patterning and Stratigraphic Anomalies at FxJj20 Main-Extension-0
Recent reviews have identified the control of fire as an important innovation in the history of human adaptation. The FxJj20 Main-Extension-0 locality, an
oxidized sediment feature, may be associated with hominin-controlled fire. This locality was recovered from sediments in the Okote Member, of the Koobi
Fora Formation, Kenya. Radiometric age estimates on associated tephra indicate that the locality is likely 1.5-1.64 Ma. This locality is associated with
multiple sedimentary anomalies that were excavated in the 1970s (at the nearby FxJj20Main/East localities). These features have previously been
described as indicative of combustion. Most recently, excavations recovered a similar feature at FxJj 20 Main-Extension-0 using innovative methods.
Three-dimensional reconstructions of the excavation were developed in combination with micro-morphological analysis, thermoluminescence analysis, and
the identification of “thermal curved-fractures” that indicate the exposure of artifacts to high temperatures. Initial analyses of spatial associations suggest
hominins may have had an influence on these combustion features. Particularly, we investigate the spatial relationship of potentially fired sediment and
other indications of combustion. Further analysis of thermoluminescence, micromorphology, and petrographic analysis of sediments and potentially heat
fractured stone may clarify the role of hominins in the control of fire in the Koobi Fora Fm. over 1.5 mya.
Becerra, Gibránn
[264]             Poder, autoridad y paisaje político en la zona costera de la sierra de Santa Marta, Los Tuxtlas, Ver.
En este trabajo se intenta reconocer los fundamentos, las condiciones y los posibles componentes del poder político vigentes en el último periodo de
ocupación prehispánica (Clásico Tardío, 600–1000 D.C.) de la zona costera de la sierra de Santa Marta, Los Tuxtlas, Veracruz. Con base en el análisis
del espacio, la arquitectura y la variabilidad de los restos materiales de las actividades humanas se evalúan dos asentamientos prehispánicos: Piedra
Labrada y La Perla del Golfo, con el objetivo de dar un acercamiento a los procesos de control, uso y despliegue del trabajo en los programas
arquitectónicos, los posibles conflictos y los mecanismos de dominación existentes entre estos asentamientos.
Becerra Alvarez, Marimar (Universidad Veracruzana)
[216]             360 grados. Uso y función de las estructuras circulares de la zona costera de la sierra de Santa Marta, Los Tuxtlas, Ver.
La arquitectura es una forma de expresión cultural producto de la abstracción humana, a través de ella el hombre materializa ciertas ideas y va
modificando su entorno para construir paisajes que son determinados por los procesos históricos y que responden a sus necesidades funcionales,
prácticas y estéticas. En la zona costera de la Sierra de Santa Marta se tiene el registro de pequeñas estructuras arquitectónicas superficiales de forma
circular asociadas a los sitios portuarios de la costa. En esta ponencia se pretende explicar a través del análisis de las evidencias arqueológicas de uno de
estos elementos, la secuencia constructiva y deposicional que presentan, para determinar su función, así como los procesos y necesidades sociales a los
que se circunscriben.
Bechis, Florencia [272] see Lanata, Jose
Beck, Jess (University of Michigan - Museum of Anthropology)
[116]             Mortuary Multiplicity: Variability in Mortuary Treatment at a Late Prehistoric Matrix Village from Spain
At 113 ha, Marroquíes Bajos (Jaén, Spain) is one of the largest villages known for the Iberian Copper Age. Attention was first focused on the site in the
1960s after construction work underneath the modern city of Jaén unearthed a series of elaborate artificial burial caves. However, over the past several
decades salvage excavations revealed even more mortuary areas at the site, including commingled depositions in enclosure ditches, primary and
secondary inhumations in discrete subterranean mortuary areas, and clusters of poorly defined, fragmentary, and commingled deposits. Bioarchaeological
analysis of this variability in mortuary treatment is key to reconstructing the social organization and historical trajectory of this early matrix village, and is
particularly important for understanding the development of social inequalities that may have contributed to the settlement’s eventual decline. Here, I
discuss the multiple lines of evidence that can be used to unpack the variability in mortuary behavior at this Late Prehistoric village, ranging from
quantitative dental and skeletal approaches, assessments of age and MNI, consideration of contextual evidence from the Spanish gray literature,
biochemical approaches to diet and mobility, and radiocarbon dating of remains.
Beck, Margaret [123] see Trabert, Sarah
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  31
Becker, Sara [25] see Blom, Deborah
Becker, Sara (University of California, Riverside)
[204]            Did Potters Urn? Potential Skeletal Evidence of Ceramic Production from the Ch’iji Jawira Site in Tiwanaku, Bolivia
The city of Tiwanaku (A.D. 500–1100) in the Bolivian altiplano was comprised of multiethnic neighborhoods, with some of these barrios being home to
“guild-like” specialists laboring at differing jobs. Ch’iji Jawira, one site within this community, is often described in the archaeological record as containing
both a manufacturing center for pottery and a residential area home to these ceramic manufacturers. Prior bioarchaeological research has also shown that
the people who were buried at the Ch’iji Jawira site show statistically significant differences in labor and activity from others who lived in the Tiwanaku
capital. This study further explores the idea that Ch’iji Jawira was home to ceramic specialists using a life-history approach and describing one individual
from this community, a 30-39 year old female. This person has evidence of osteoarthritis in her arms, wrists, hands, fingers, and lumbar spine.
Furthermore, the bones of her wrists, hands, and fingers show extensive skeletal changes at tendon and muscle attachment areas. While it cannot be
definitely determined that she was a potter, her bones do suggest she worked at tasks different from other Tiwanaku citizens involving repetitive joint
movement as well as heavy arm and hand musculature.
Becker, Hilary (University of Mississippi)
[271]            Roman Pigments and The Trade in Naturally Sourced Products
Pigments were used to decorate both wealthy and common houses in ancient Rome but the mechanisms by which raw pigments were collected, traded,
and sold have never been studied. A network developed to facilitate the importation of pigments from across a wide expanse of the Roman empire. While
the ochres present in a shop in Rome might be locally and regionally sourced, the presence of pigments like madder lake or cinnabar are the result of long
chains of commercial transactions, which served to transport these materials to central Italy from across the empire. This extensive network provided
consumers of pigments with the choice of a range of colors. Artists in Roman Egypt used Spanish red lead on certain “red shroud mummies” rather than
local red pigments. Various white pigments were imported and used, and while the differences between each were not necessarily detectable with the
naked eye, tradesmen kept careful track of them since their qualitative differences (e.g., luminosity) translated to differences in price. An exploration of the
pigment trade establishes a cross-section of the larger Roman economy at work. Ultimately the colors chosen for a Roman fresco reflect the vital trade of
the larger Roman empire on one’s walls.
Beekman, Christopher (University of Colorado Denver)
[101]            The Early Chronological Sequence at Los Guachimontones-Loma Alta, Jalisco
The site of Los Guachimontones-Loma Alta is the largest political center of the Late Formative/Early Classic periods in central Jalisco, with an occupation
extending from the late Middle Formative through to the end of the Postclassic period. This spans more than 1,500 years and includes three major material
culture complexes already defined in other locations—Tequila II, III, and IV, El Grillo, and Atemajac I and II. The primary ceremonial architecture of the site
pertains to the Tequila complex. Radiocarbon dates define the Tequila occupation at the site, but a finer grained chronology is necessary for research into
social questions. Recent analysis of the ceramics and hollow figures from the different architectural groups allows the recognition of markers from three
phases of the Tequila occupation. This part of the sequence is based in radiocarbon dates, architectural stratigraphy, wares, types, and modes of the
ceramic vessels and hollow figures, offerings, and burials, and short stratigraphic snippets in different areas of the site. I describe the sequence, and the
complex pattern of site growth over a period of 700/800 years.
Beier, Zachary (The University of the West Indies Mona)
[126]            Dwelling Practices at the Cabrits Garrison Laborer Village
Colonial military sites in the Caribbean have traditionally been considered as dominant monuments of European expansion, technology, control, and
competition. Missing from these narratives are the diverse communities that came together within the walls of fortifications. At the Cabrits Garrison,
Dominica, occupied by the British military between 1763 and 1854, the policy of incorporating enslaved laborers into auxiliary roles and later into soldiers
serving in the West India Regiments is a part of the extensive archival record of the site. The dynamics of this changing military labor regime are also
evident in spatial and material practices at the household level. This paper compares how administrators in the British Army conceived of domestic areas
at the Cabrits Garrison with how they were actually lived in by enslaved and other lower status inhabitants. It relies on archival and archaeological
evidence regarding residential quarters occupied by military laborers to document the architectural character of these dwellings as well as their social and
cultural content. This household-level analysis provides a vantage point linking Caribbean fortifications to wider trends in the study of enslaved
environments throughout the region.
[126]            Chair
Beirnat, Maryse [181] see Himes, Sarah
Beisaw, April (Vassar College)
[128]            Taking Their Water for Our City: Archaeology and Water Rights in New York and Beyond
Water rights is a social issue of growing importance. Recently, the United Nations declared access to clean drinking water to be a basic human right. Yet
financial groups are predicting that water is the next major commodity, to be bought and sold like oil. What few are talking about is the long history of water
flowing towards political and social centers, and away from rural populations. As Leith Mullings stated in her presidential address, anthropology pays
attention to not only that which is manifest, but also to that which is concealed. A social archaeology of New York City’s water system reminds us all of the
long-standing nature of urban water crises and provides a way of critiquing past decisions to inform future ones. For approximately 200 years, the city’s
growth necessitated the acquisition of water from more and more distant sources. But places rich in water are inhabited places. Taking water from rural
communities reshaped them and continues to restrict their development. Documenting the materiality of water struggles over time and space provides
opportunities to ask what (and who) we are willing to sacrifice to ensure the future of our cities.
Beiter, Gary and Monica Oyola-Coeur
[253]            Perry Pines Sites: A Cultural Resources Phase I Survey Report
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                32
A Phase I survey was conducted in Perry Pines, Taylor County, Florida for an expansion of limestone mining of the area. The research aimed at locating
and assessing potential archaeological and historical resources within the project area. Six archaeological resources were identified: a habitational site, a
camp site, a bridge site and three quarry sites for stone tool making. Located in the North Peninsula Gulf Coast archaeological region, the Perry Pines
sites appear to have been intermittently used and their resources extracted for over 2,000 years, spanning from the Archaic to the present. Cultural
artifacts and features ranging from ancient lithic tools, to early twentieth century timber operations, provided insight on past human activity, site function,
and use of the project area’s natural resources over time.
Belardi, Juan Bautista [205] see Nuevo Delaunay, Amalia
Belardi, Juan (Univ Nac de la Patagonia Austral), Flavia Carballo Marina (Universidad Nacional de la Patagonia Austral ), Gustavo Barrientos
(Universidad Nacional de La Plata / CONICET) and Patricia Campan (Universidad Nacional de la Patagonia Austral )
[207]             Hunters in the Viedma Lake Basin (Southern Patagonia, Argentina): Differences and Continuities in Landscape use during the Late
                  Holocene
The Viedma lake basin—connected to the Patagonian Southern Ice Field—has been recently incorporated to the discussion about the human occupation
of southern Patagonia. The distribution of artifacts in different sectors of steppe: 1) plateaus (950–1000 masl), 2) plateaus basis (750 masl), 3) intermediate
pampas (300–700 masl), large open spaces formed by glacial deposits, and 4) the north coast of the lake (255–300 masl) has been surveyed. The study
was complemented with technological artifact analysis, surveys of rock art sites, hunting blinds, and excavations. Chronologies (mainly in relation to the
last 3,500 years B.P.) and archaeofaunal samples of guanaco (Lama guanicoe) were obtained. The archaeological landscape shows variability in logistic
and residential components related to the different landscape sectors. A remarkable reduction of the residential mobility is registered in the archaeological
record of the Cerro Índice Tehuelche-Aonikenk reserve (structures and rubbish areas with high frequency of glass scrapers) during historical times.
Belcher, William (Division of Social Sciences (Anthropology))
[143]             Fish Remains in an Early Village Context: Provisioning during the Ravi Phase of the Indus Valley Tradition (Pakistan)
Fish remains from the earliest deposits at the Indus Valley site of Harappa (Punjab Province, Pakistan) appear to have skeletal element distribution and cut
mark patterns that are different from later deposits associated with a more complex social organization related to an urban setting. The earliest village-
level fish assemblages (Ravi Phase) appear to be representative of the types of provisioning associated with direct access to either the fish resources or
the fish mongers; later assemblages (Kot Diji through Harappan Phases) appear to be representative of a combined direct and indirect access to fish
resources. This change is thought to be representative of political changes as villages became larger urban entities and/or were tied into changing
economic associations, moving from more local to a more regional focus in trade and food resources.
Belfer-Cohen, Anna [52] see Goring-Morris, Nigel
Bélisle, Véronique (Millsaps College)
[198]             The Development of Inequality in Middle Horizon Cusco: Entheogens and Ritual Ceremonies to the Rescue
The Andean and Amazonian regions are home to numerous plants that can be prepared to induce altered states of consciousness. During the pre-Inka
period in the Cusco area, evidence from the village of Ak'awillay indicates the consumption of alcohol, coca, and hallucinogens in public ceremonies. Some
of the rituals involving entheogens could have corresponded to healing sessions, but the paraphernalia uncovered at the site suggests that most
hallucinogens were consumed to communicate with the supernatural. These activities provided key individuals with a privileged access to followers, spirits,
and deities that could have set them apart from the rest of the population, contributing to increasing inequality in the region during the Middle Horizon (A.D.
600–1000). The procurement of psychoactive substances and other ritual items from the jungle and elsewhere further indicates access to long-distance
trade networks that could have been used to support, display, and justify status at Ak'awillay. Despite the presence of Wari colonists in the region, select
individuals living at Ak'awillay were able to connect to a larger network that not only exchanged goods but also shared beliefs and ritual practices during the
Middle Horizon.
Belknap, Daniel [118] see Kelley, Alice
Bellia, Angela (New York University - University of Bologna)
[271]             Musics, Cults and Rites of a Greek City in the West: The Case of Selinus
Studies on Ancient Greek music often concentrate on evidence from Athens or Sparta. However, Athenian or Spartan musical activity may not be typical of
other areas of the Greek world, particularly the western Greeks, as indeed is evident from other areas of social, artistic, and political activity. This paper will
combine the methods of musicology and archaeology towards the study of the archaeological remains of musical interest, considering their findspot and
context of use, in order to place musical activities in a well-defined space and occasion and to interpret the cultural, religious, and social meaning of
musical performances. The research will bring out a particular musical tradition of the western Greeks and will reconstruct the role of music in the specific
context of Selinus, was one of the most important western Greek settlements during the Archaic and Classical periods, as regards both private and public,
especially religious, life. The survey aims to analyze the musical activities in sacred places, where male and female oriented rituals were performed. Based
on our approach, this paper will provide the opportunity for a reflection on the way in which the western Greeks reworked the musical heritage of the
motherland, and reinforced their cultural identity.
Bello, Charles [159] see Dillian, Carolyn
Bellomia, Valeria (Sapienza, Università di Roma), Ricardo Higelin Ponce de León (Indiana University Bloomington) and Alex Elvis Badillo
(Indiana University Bloomington)
[236]             Omichicahuaztli: Production, Use, and Transformation Over Space and Time in Mesoamerica
How can changes in production and use of a single class of ancient artifact allow us to understand changes in their meaning through time and space? We
address the reasons behind the cultural practice of making the Omichicahuaztli, or notched human bones, in Mesoamerica, studying the unique histories of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              33
each object in correlation with the geographic area in which they were found and the social group that produced them. We studied over 100
Omichicahuaztlis from central, southern, and western Mexico across the Classic (200–900 A.D.) and Postclassic (900–1521 A.D.) periods. We analyzed 1)
which anatomical human bone was chosen as raw material, 2) the preparation process, 3) the number of notches and 4) the way it was used in its social
context. Using GIS we mapped the location and examined the spatial distribution of the Omichicahuaztli in Mesoamerica by time period and manufacture
technique. Our results will explore transformations of the meaning of notched human bones in Mesoamerica, within the frame of the indigenous perception
of body and bones. This study will allow us to identify any similarities and differences in the use of Omichicahuaztlis through both diachronic and
synchronic views.
Bellorado, Benjamin [17] see Peeples, Matt
Bellorado, Benjamin (University of Arizona)
[209]             Clothing the World in a Social Skin: Recognizing the Role of Materialities of Dressing and Metaphor in the Ancient North American
                  Southwest
Scholars have suggested that the process of dressing both animates and ascribes identities to inanimate things. During the thirteenth century, people in
the Mesa Verde region of the North American Southwest conceptually dressed special structures, pottery, baskets, and even cotton garments in similar
ways. These diverse media were often adorned with clothing depictions and woven textile designs, painted on a white clay-coated background. Grounded
both physically and conceptually in bodily experiences, these dressings covered the raw forms of containers with substances of transformation and
concealment, and painted with similar stylistic decorations as found in each of the other media, all of which were ultimately grounded metaphorically in
cotton textile and basketry decorative cannons. Through conceptual metaphor, ideas about human bodies and appropriate ways to clothe them were
transferred onto, and blended with, other material domains. These materials were connected by action of practice—the act of being dressed, and
connected in materialities of metaphor and clothing. As clothing did for people, dressing buildings and other containers allowed them to become socially
embodied persons, and to be linked conceptually to containers in other media. This presentation discusses recent research mapping networks of
materialities of clothing and ritual practice across time and space.
Belmaker, Miriam (The University of Tulsa)
[214]             Dental Microwear Texture Analysis (DMTA): Paleodietary and Paleoecological Aspects
Microwear is based on the correlation between function, form, and behavior. 3D Dental Microwear Texture Analysis (3D-DMTA) combines the use of high-
resolution white light scanning confocal microscope (Sensofar) with the analysis of the data using scale-sensitive fractal analysis (Sfrax, Surfract,
www.surfract.com) for a new analytical tool to study dental microwear texture patterns. This method allows for statistical characterization of dental
microwear features and resulted in the reduction of inter and intra observer variability, increased accuracy, and repeatability of the results. It has been
demonstrated that 3D- DMTA has the potential to distinguish among diets of species that inhabit different habitats such as primates, bovids, and carnivores
and it allows for a more refine distinction of diet that the distributions of pits and scratches size, commonly used in two-dimensional studies. Recently, novel
research has focused on applying 3D-DMTA on micromammal (mammals smaller than 3 kg live weight). Despite the ubiquity and high quantities in
archaeological sites, micromammals were not readily studied using 3D-DMTA. Here we present a review of the use of 3D-DMTA in paleodietary and
paleoecological studies in large mammals and the novel use of 3D-DMTA in micromammals as paleoecological indicators and suggest new directions for
future studies.
Belmar, Carolina [139] see Méndez, César
Belmar, Carolina (Depto. Antropologia, Universidad de Chile), Silvia Alfaro (Independent Researcher) and Luciana Quiroz (Independent
Researcher)
[207]             Tranquilla Site (PTF MLP 13): A Critical Evaluation of the Early Ceramic Tradition Life Style in the Choapa Valley (IVth Region, Chile)
It has been stated the groups ascribed to the Early Ceramic Traditions of the Choapa Valley had a mobile hunter-gatherer life style, representative of the
archaic period. This is reinforced by the absence of permanent and long term occupations in the valley.
This scenario suffered an interesting shift with the discovery PTF MLP 13, a domestic site associated to a cemetery that counts with an important
stratigraphic deposit, great amount of ceramic sherds, and milling stones. These findings question the manner these early ceramists were conceived, and
have opened the discussion regarding the processes these groups experimented related to progressive social complexity and lead to a sedentary life.
The characterization of the diversity and potentiality of the archaeological record of PTF MLP 13 offers the possibility to reconsider the actual concept the
life style carried out by the inhabitants of the Choapa Valley through the determination and conditions of the use of the plant resources and its production.
We will specifically study the carpological and plant microfossil evidence of the domestic and/or funerary use contexts, focusing on the artefact associated
to the domestic-productive areas of cultivated plants.
Belt, Tom [131] see Carroll, Beau
Beltrán Malagón, María Bertilla (UNAM)
[136]             Evidencias prehispánicas y dinamismo cultural en el Centro de Veracruz: el caso de la región de Córdoba
El Centro de Veracruz, localizado dentro del territorio que comprende el área geográfico-cultural de la Costa del Golfo, es una zona que presentó un
marcado dinamismo dentro del desarrollo prehispánico mesoamericano. En este espacio se localiza la región de Córdoba, la cual posee una extensión de
                                 2
aproximadamente 935.51 km y cuyo estudio es analizado a través de la lógica del asentamiento a lo largo de un valle por donde transitan los ríos Blanco
y Seco-Atoyac. Hasta el momento se tienen identificados noventa y dos asentamientos prehispánicos, de diferentes temporalidades que incluyen desde el
Preclásico hasta el Posclásico, siendo el Clásico el periodo de mayor ocupación. Las evidencias que se han localizado comprenden rasgos compartidos
por zonas vecinas a la de Córdoba, tal es el caso de Maltrata, la cuenca baja del río Cotaxtla, La Mixtequilla y algunas más distantes, lo que conlleva a
resaltar su importancia como una lugar de paso entre el Altiplano Central y la Costa del Golfo, y su papel dinámico dentro de diferentes tradiciones
culturales del Centro de Veracruz.
Belz, Anthony (Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 34
[217]            The J. Louis Giddings Archive at the Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology
As the Haffenreffer Museum approaches the 60th anniversary of J. Louis Giddings' arrival as its first director, a concerted effort has been undertaken—
over the past two years—to rehouse, organize, and describe the vast and rich archive that Giddings created during his long career. Giddings was a
dedicated and organized record keeper, who left a great amount and variety of material at the Haffenreffer Museum upon his untimely death in late 1964.
This collection in its entirely is related to Giddings' professional career and is extensive in its scope–covering the years 1937–1967, it includes, but is not
limited to: dendrochronological data; hundreds of photographic prints from publications, artifacts, sites, and ethnographic fieldwork; correspondence;
expense reports; research notes; draft manuscripts; off-prints; and films, all of which are related to his work in the north. This presentation will discuss the
scope of the collection, highlighting some of the most interesting and useful materials available for further research. The contents of the collection can be
accessed online via the Rhode Island Collections and Manuscripts Online (RIAMCO).
Bement, Leland (Oklahoma Archeological Survey, OU) and Kirsten Carlson (Augustana College)
[16]             Characterizing Cut Marks: A Comparison of Cooper and Badger Hole Butchery Patterns
By describing tool cut marks on bones, Eileen Johnson elevated such incisions to the status of artifact. The size, shape, and morphology provided more
than just details of cutting but also came with controversy as to whether these marks alone indicated a human presence. Building on the procedures
employed by Johnson on the Southern Plains Cooper site bison bones, the Badger Hole kill assemblage is analyzed to provide a comparison of Folsom
bison butchery at sites separated by only 0.7 km spatially and less than 250 years temporally.
Bement, Leland [123] see Marcum-Heiman, Alesha
Benchley, Elizabeth (University of West Florida) and Norine Carroll (University of West Florida)
[265]            Archaeological Collections at the University of West Florida
The Archaeology Institute at the University of West Florida in Pensacola includes a regional archaeological museum and curation facility. Approximately
450 archeological collections and associated project archives from terrestrial and underwater sites are available to researchers and students. Projects
conducted by the Institute along the northern Gulf Coast since the 1980s, and more recently by the Department of Anthropology, include Prehistoric
through Industrial era archaeological sites including settlements, mills, forts, cemeteries, and shipwrecks. Collections of note come from excavations at
three First Spanish presidios (1698–1763), one Spanish mission (1750s), and a British (1763–1781) and Second Spanish town (1781–1821). Shipwrecks
include several First Spanish examples (1559, 1705), and ships from the American era used in the fishing, lumbering, brick-making, and transportation
industries. The Institute also curates collections from other parts of Florida and Alabama. Collections are regularly accessed by UWF and outside
researchers and students for reanalysis and reinterpretation. Public access to collections is available through exhibits and hands-on volunteer opportunities
in the laboratory.
Bennett, Gwen (McGill University, Depts. of Anthropology & EAS)
[106]            The Archaeological Study of an Inner Asian Empire: Using New Perspectives and Methods to Study the Medieval Liao Polity
Archaeological and historical data, combined with GIS analysis gives us new perspectives on eleventh c. medieval period envoy missions from the Song
Dynasty (960–1279) to the Liao Empire (907–1125) Middle Capital in Chifeng Inner Mongolia, China. The envoys’ routes can be recreated on maps, and
optimal route and viewshed analyses give us insight into the Liao’s concerns about these foreign missions crossing their territory and how they addressed
them. Furthermore, population estimates can be made from envoy information that can be used to extrapolate population density estimates from
archaeological data for other areas in Chifeng.
Bennett, Lianne [260] see Bennett, Sarah
Bennett, Sarah (Florida Public Archaeology Network), Sarah E. Miller (Florida Public Archaeology Network), Amber J. Grafft-Weiss (University of
Florida), Lianne Bennett (Deland High School) and Emily Jane Murray (Florida Public Archaeology Network)
[260]            My Best Day at FPAN was Teaching Teachers: Celebrating 10 Years of Project Archaeology in Florida
The Florida Public Archaeology Network was established in 2005 and within a year hosted its first Project Archaeology: Intrigue of the Past workshop. As a
proud sponsor of Project Archaeology in Florida, regional center staff partnered with the National Park Service and University of Florida to publish the first
Investigating Shelter investigation in the southeast. It was also the first in the Investigating Shelter series to feature a National Park site. Investigating a
Tabby Slave Cabin teacher guide and student handbook were produced through an internal NPS grant that combined the efforts of Teacher-Ranger-
Teachers, Park Service interpreters, FPAN staff, and cooperating archaeologist Dr. James Davidson from University of Florida. By investigating a Kingsley
tabby cabin through a series of lessons (geography, history, archaeology, preservation), we hope teachers and students will better understand slavery and
the families who occupied the cabins. In June 2016, the new Lighthouse Shelter curriculum will launch at the St. Augustine Lighthouse and Museum.
Experience gained from the drafting, piloting, and publishing of the program will be discussed. Finally, this paper will highlight past, present, and future
partnerships with Florida teachers.
Benton, Susan (Southern Methodist University)
[30]             Complex Journeys: The Repatriation Experience and Tribal-Museum Relations
Tribes and museums have experienced a paradigm shift in their relationships during the twenty-five years of the NAGPRA era. The experiences of each
group have been multi-faceted and complex, driven by new legal mandates and opportunities and shaped by differing viewpoints as to what must, should,
and could emerge from the repatriation journey. This paper will explore some of the assumptions, experiences, and future expectations that NAGPRA has
engendered in various tribal and museum representatives who have, by choice or obligation, participated in this journey.
Bergh, Sarah [28] see Hadden, Carla
Bergh, Susan (Cleveland Museum of Art)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 35
[172]             Dress Codes: Color Patterning in Wari Tapestry-Woven Tunics
Artistically elaborate tapestry-woven tunics were the raiment of rulers and other esteemed elites of the ancient Andean Wari civilization (A.D. 600–1000).
The tunics’ figurative iconography is well known: drawn from a limited repertoire that often relates to the Wari state’s official religious cult, it almost always
comprises a single type of motif that repeats many times in different orientations and color combinations (color blocks) across each tunic’s gridded body.
Less legible and recognized today are the tunics’ complex color patterns, which may have formed one of the garments’ most important subject matters, on
a par with figurative imagery. These standardized geometric patterns, which fall into about six categories, are generated by the diagonal alignment of four
conventionalized colors blocks that were used to weave the motifs. This paper will explore the canons of color and its organization in the tunics, including
systems of color equivalence implied by regular color substitutions that seem to have served as enhancements related to value, wealth, and prestige.
Bergin, Sean (School of Human Evolution and Social Change, ASU)
[72]              Neolithic Spread Models, Agricultural Islands and Pivotal Parameters: Impressions Gleaned from Simulating the Spread of Agriculture in
                  the West Mediterranean
The significance of the spread of agriculture cannot be overstated and for this reason strong disagreement continues to arise over the processes
responsible for the shift from the Mesolithic to the Neolithic. Four influential models have been proposed for the spread of agriculture in the west
Mediterranean and can be applied to the circumstances of the Impresso-Cardial spread: the Wave of Advance Model, the Capillary Model, the Maritime
Pioneer Colonization Model, and the Dual Model. All four models have been tested against the available archaeological evidence, including the available
radiocarbon chronology, site locations, and artifact styles. As is so often the case in archaeology, not enough evidence is truly available to conclusively
prove or disprove any one model. It is in this context that computational modeling can be best applied—to make existing models explicit, to evaluate the
models of Neolithic spread, and to approach the spread of agriculture from an exploratory perspective. This research examines four well known models for
the spread of agriculture by comparing the chronology generated by an agent-based model of each spread type to the chronological record for the arrival of
the Neolithic.
[72]              Chair
Bergmann, Christine (University of South Florida), Robert Tykot (University of South Florida) and Robert Bowers (University of South Florida)
[204]             Elemental Analysis of Human Bone using a Non-Destructive Portable X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer
Peru is commonly known for having the largest empire in precolumbian America but relatively less is known about the subsistence and migratory patterns
of the pre-Inca communities that existed from the Initial Period through the Early Intermediate Period. During the Initial Period, interaction and trade was
prevalent among coastal, inland, and highland populations with trade interactions intensifying later in time with peoples from the highlands. Our research
tests the hypothesis that increased reliance on exchange networks among highland, coastal, and valley communities resulted in increased migration of
highland populations into the coastal valleys. In support of our hypothesis, a portable X-ray fluorescence spectrometer was used to measure strontium,
barium, calcium, and other elements in human bone from three archaeological sites in Peru, from varying and overlapping time periods, to elucidate dietary
practices. Although the use of a non-destructive pXRF has become a very beneficial tool for the analysis of archaeological materials, relatively little has
been done on human bone, due to limitations of surface analysis and issues regarding contamination and degradation. In addition, newly created bone
standards are used to calibrate and enhance the validity of our data, as we apply this technique to other skeletal collections in the future.
Bergstrom, Velicia
[165]             Partnering Louisiana Style
We are not unique in this agency called USDA Forest Service. Kisatchie National Forest’s Heritage Program does not get handed tons of money to perform
archaeological survey to insure that the NHPA is accorded due process before the vegetation is managed and wildlife ponds are built. And sure, some of
our colleagues still ask, why do we spend money on archaeology! As a manager, we look for least expensive, as archaeologists we look for great quality,
and as tribal liaison we look to work with our tribes. One of the many assets that the Forest Service has is the Heritage Paraprofessional Qualification and
Training manual. Initially designed to offer training for good folks that work in fire or timber on the forest to aid the lonely archaeologist has blossomed.
Through various agreements that the Southern Region now has with our Federally Recognized Tribes, we have offered Heritage Paraprofessional Training
to those who wish. And with this, heritage paraprofessional crews have formed. The Kisatchie National Forest has had the good fortune to work closely
with several of these crews. This paper foci on cost effectiveness, the great quality of the work performed, and the satisfaction of working with our tribal
partners.
Berman, Mary Jane (Center for American and World Cultures), Perry L. Gnivecki (Department of Anthropology, Miami University ), Lisa Park
Boush (Center for Integrative Geosciences, University of ) and Erik Kjellmark (Department of Biology, Florida Southern College )
[222]             Exploring Records of Prehistoric Anthropogenic and Climate Change in the Bahama Archipelago
The peopling of the Bahama archipelago during the eighth through eleventh centuries A.D. occurred at a rapid pace. In this study, we examine several
data sets to understand this fast-moving expansion. Sedimentological and geochemical data derived from cores from inland ponds and lakes from several
islands in the Bahama archipelago indicate that migration took place during periods of hurricane hyperactivity, sea level changes, and hydrological
variability. Settlement data and material culture indicate small-sized communities, short-term occupations, and high residential mobility. Archaeobotanical
data are used to understand land-use practices and how the landscape was modified and managed. We explore the relationships among the
archaeological, climate, and environmental records.
Berna, Francesco [177] see Hlubik, Sarah
Bernal, Marcela, Lucero Aristizábal (Universidad de los Andes ), Carl Langebaek (Universidad de los Andes ), Freddy Rodríguez (Universidad de
los Andes ) and Luz Pérez (Universidad de los Andes )
[122]             Vivir y morir en tibanica, reflexiones sobre el poder y el espacio en una aldea muisca tardía de la sabana de bogotá
This paper studies the relation between feasts and other issues that are traditionally related to the power of Muisca chiefs in their communities. The
research question deals with the linkage between different dimensions of the social stratification in the Muisca site of Tibanica, including: feasting itself,
health, kinship, and nutrition. It is argued that there is no lineal relation between such variables, and that Muisca social organization is best understood
from a multidimensional and comparative analysis, recognizing the complexity of the issue at hand.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                    36
Bernal Rodriguez, Vanessa (Ecole du Louvre)
[102]             Henry Reichlen: La trayectoria americanista a través de su colección y de sus archivos
Pensar en la cultura Cajamarca nos lleva enseguida a pensar en Henry Reichlen. Indudablemente él fue el gran precursor y fundador de todo estudio
científico sobre esta cultura. Su trabajo de campo en diferentes sitios de Cajamarca, sus diversos análisis de materiales arqueológicos y sobre todo la
cronología que estableció continúan siendo grandes aportes para las investigaciones actuales. Sin embargo, ¿quién fue realmente Henry Reichlen? ¿A
qué institución académica pertenecía y para quién trabajaba? ¿Cuáles eran sus objetivos? ¿Cuáles eran sus herramientas y prácticas de estudio?
¿Quienes formaban parte de su entorno? ¿Quién o quiénes fueron sus mentores? ¿En qué contexto histórico realizó sus investigaciones arqueológicas y
etnográficas? Muchas de estas interrogantes sobre su vida y obra han podido ser resueltas gracias al análisis del “Legado Reichlen”, conservado
actualmente en el Museo del Quai Branly. Estos archivos, documentos personales y la inmensa colección de objetos arqueológicos y etnográficos que
Reichlen pudo reunir a lo largo de su vida nos han permitido revelar el importante trabajo de este investigador, arqueólogo y americanista que ha
contribuido no sólo al conocimiento de la cultura Cajamarca en el Perú, sino también al descubrimiento de las culturas peruanas por el resto del mundo.
Bernard, Henri (Université Paris 1 Panthéon Sorbonne) and Emiliano Melgar (INAH Museo del Templo Mayor)
[44]              Manufacturing Techniques of Olmec Art Sculptures from Arroyo Pesquero in the MAX (Museo de Antropología de Xalapa)
 Since its discovery in 1969, the site of Arroyo Pesquero, in southern Veracruz, has been an emblematic town with an Olmec offering that guards some
similarities with the sites of Manatí and La Merced, related to the divinities of water and fertility. In the bed of the river were deposited masks, axes, and
other objects in jade with an excellent manufacturing and beauty. The sculptures of this site with an archaeological context are now stored at the Museum
of Anthropology in Xalapa. In this paper, we present the analysis of the technological manufacture of these objects, following the methodology used by the
laboratory of experimental archaeology in lapidary objects at Templo Mayor, which has an extensive reference in experimental techniques of abrading,
burnishing, polishing, and prehispanic incisions. The results allowed us to understand the craft of these materials in this important site from Southern
Veracruz during the Formative period.
Bernstetter, Jessica (University of Missouri - Columbia), Michael Kolb (Metropolitan University of Denver) and William Balco, Jr. (University of
North Georgia)
[81]              Uncovering the Local Economy: A Ceramic Analysis of Exotic and Local Amphorae at Salemi, Sicily
Sicily has long been a hotbed of archaeological activity. During the Late Iron Age, Greek, Roman, Punic, and indigenous Elymi groups were involved in a
complex network of trade and exchange. At the site of Salemi in western Sicily, there is evidence of participation in a widespread Mediterranean sphere of
exchange. For this research, sourcing studies were conducted on transport amphorae to measure the degree of foreign influence on the local economy of
Salemi. Preliminary data collected in the summer of 2013 from multiple units suggested that the amphorae were produced locally. Initial pXRF analysis
revealed that there was no statistically significant difference in the chemical composition across samples. These preliminary results will be used as a pilot
study for dissertation research which will aim to identify the technology used to construct the amphorae in hopes of identifying the groups responsible for
manufacturing the vessels. Identifying the technology and production groups is both valuable and necessary in determining whether or not the Elymi were
playing an active role in the local economy or if the economy was being controlled by the much larger Greek, Roman, or Punic groups.
Bertolino, Silvana [91] see Giesso, Martin
Bethard, Jonathan (Boston University), Anna J. Osterholtz (University of Nevada Las Vegas), Zsolt Zyaradi (Haaz Reszo Museum) and Andre
Gonciar (ArcheoTek Canada)
[24]              Marginalized Motherhood: Infant Burial in 17th Century Transylvania
During the last four decades bioarchaeologists have enriched what we know about the lives of past people; however, many questions remain unexplored
and understudied. Among these, the lived experiences of expectant mothers and their newborn infants have not received much attention in the
bioarchaeological literature. Moreover, few scholars have attempted to understand how women who experienced a failed pregnancy or loss of a newborn
infant have dealt with this reality, particularly in terms of belief systems about salvation and the afterlife. In this paper, we utilize a seventeenth century
bioarchaeological context from eastern Transylvania to explore these questions in further detail. In 2007, archaeologists performed a salvage excavation
in the Reform Church in the village of Telekfalva, located in present-day Romania. They recovered remains of 70 individuals, the majority of which were
perinatal infants. The skeletons presented marked signs of physiological stress and offer some insight into the health and stress loads of the women who
carried them. In addition, the careful placement of these infants under the floor of the community’s Reform Church offers powerful evidence about the
importance of burial for even the youngest, and in some instances, never viable community members.
Bethke, Brandi (University of Arizona)
[82]              Dog Days to Horse Days: Evaluating the Rise of Nomadic Pastoralism among the Blackfoot
This paper will examine the extent to which the adoption of the horse created a transition in Blackfoot modes of production from hunting and gathering to
incipient nomadic pastoralism by tracing the horse’s effect on Blackfoot settlement patterns and landscape uses during the protohistoric and historic
periods in the northwestern Plains. While the socio-economic consequences of the horse’s introduction have been studied from a historical perspective, the
archaeology of this transition remains ambiguous. This paper seeks to explore the dynamics of the Blackfoot equestrian transition by incorporating data
from archaeological site records, archival collections, and contemporary ethnography into a broad, comparative Geographical Information Systems (GIS)
analysis of the horse’s influenced on Blackfoot landscape utilization. Understanding where the Blackfoot were situated before and after acquiring the horse
by tracing their archaeological footprints will add a material dimension to the story of the horse in the Plains and further test the claim that there was a
transformation in settlement strategies by historic Blackfoot groups in response to the needs of their horses.
[82]              Chair
Betts, Matthew (Canadian Museum of Civilization), David Black (University of New Brunswick), Brian Robinson (University of Maine) and Arthur
Spiess (Maine Historic Preservation Commission)
[157]             Prehistoric Coastal Adaptations to the Northern Gulf of Maine and its Watershed
The northern Gulf of Maine (GOM) and its watershed have attracted humans for the last 12,500 years (cal B.P.), and evidence of marine economies is well
established in adjacent regions by ca. 8000 cal B.P. Sea level rise (SLR) has obscured our understanding of early coastal adaptations, though underwater
research and some near-shore sites are providing important insights. The earliest evidence from shell middens dates to ca. 5000 cal B.P., and reveals that
bivalve collecting and the seasonal exploitation of benthopelagic fish (such as cod) were important, though varied in intensity, throughout the Late Archaic
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  37
and Woodland periods. However, significant economic shifts have occurred. In particular, a Late Archaic focus on marine swordfish hunting was replaced
by a dramatic increase in inshore seal hunting in the Woodland Period. After ca. 3100 cal B.P., inshore fishing for cod, flounder, sculpin, sturgeon, and
other species intensified. During the Late Woodland Period, shellfish exploitation declined somewhat and the hunting of small seals, and in some areas,
white-tailed deer, increased sharply. The extent and nature of coastal economies in the northern GOM was controlled, in part, by SLR, increasing tidal
amplitude, and concomitant changes in surface-water temperatures, in tandem with broad regional cultural shifts.
Betzenhauser, Alleen (Illinois State Archaeological Survey)
[171]            Measures of Inequality in the Mississippian Heartland
Cahokia, the earliest and largest Mississippian (A.D. 1050–1400) mound complex, is situated in the American Bottom of Illinois. It is widely considered to
be the center of a regionally integrated polity complete with subsidiary centers, specialized settlements, and rural farmsteads. Investigations at Cahokia
proper and in the surrounding countryside over the past 50 years have provided a wealth of data concerning settlement layout, structure size, and shape,
and the differential distribution of material remains. In this paper, I calculate Gini indices for Cahokia and outlying settlements based on data reported in
recent analyses of extensive excavations at Cahokia (e.g., Pauketat 1998, 2013) and the wide range of sites included in the FAI–270 project (see Porter
and Bareis 1984). The indices are compared both within sites and between sites for the various Mississippian phases to investigate inequality as indicated
by differences in structure size. I then situate these new measures of inequality within the body of data already available for the Mississippian period in the
American Bottom in order to further assess the degree of centralization and inequality.
[137]            Chair
Betzenhauser, Alleen [137] see Watts Malouchos, Elizabeth
Bevan, Andrew [173] see Li, Xiuzhen
Bey, George (Millsaps College)
[109]            Discussant
Bey III, George [127] see Parker, Evan
Beyene, Yonas [22] see Sahle, Yonatan
Beyer, Morgan (University of Nebraska - Lincoln)
[115]            Differentiating History: Criteria to Distinguish Between Historic Euro and Native American Sites in Wind Cave National Park
Wind Cave National Park, just north of Hot Springs, South Dakota, became a National Park in 1903. Because of its location in the heart of the Black Hills,
the land now protected by the National Park System has been a hotbed of human activity for thousands of years and is the location of many archaeological
sites, both prehistoric and historic. However, some of the most intriguing sites that can be found within the park’s boundaries are those of indeterminate
origin. Sites with both historic (ie., Metal) and prehistoric artifacts (ie., Lithics) raise many questions about exactly how archaeologists determine the
difference not between historic and prehistoric sites, but between historic Native American and historic Euro American sites. Using both a known Euro
American site and a known Native American camp as controls, criteria have been created that will allow testing not only of multiple other sites within Wind
Cave, but across the American West. By conducting pedestrian survey and metal detecting at indeterminate sites in Wind Cave and comparing the
assemblages found there, it has been possible to test the validity of the criteria in regards to the identification of historic sites as Euro or Native American in
origin.
Beyin, Amanuel (University of Louisville)
[22]             The Relevance of the Abdur and Asfet Middle Stone Age Sites from the Red Sea Coast of Eritrea
The Red Sea Basin is emerging as an important region for testing current hypotheses concerning early human dispersal routes out of Africa. However, the
immediate peripheries of the basin, especially the African side had seen little prior Paleolithic research, hindering well informed assessment of the temporal
and cultural contexts of hominin adaptation along the Red Sea. Owing to its strategic geographic position along the African side of the Red Sea, Eritrea
(with ~1300 km of coastline) represents an ideal place to look for prehistoric sites associated with hominin dispersals out of Africa. Two separate field
projects carried out between 1999 and 2005 along the Gulf of Zula region of Eritrea have documented evidence of Middle Stone Age occupations at two
sites, namely Abdur and Asfet. The two sites are situated ~20 km apart, but lie broadly within the same landscape setting—coastal periphery of the Gulf of
Zula. This paper will discuss the relevance of the Abdur and Asfet archaeological finds in assessing the potential role of the African side of the Red Sea
Basin as a refugium and dispersal corridor for Late Pleistocene humans.
Bezerra, Marcia (PPGA/UFPA)
[167]            Living Things: Fishermen, Archaeologists and Fish-Traps in Amazon, Brazil.
This presentation deals with the use of ancient fish-traps by fishermen of Vila de Joanes, Ilha do Marajó, Amazon, concerning the status of these sites as a
living thing and their role in the constitution of memorial narratives about fishing. Based on research conducted with a group of fishermen I suggest that: a)
the contemporary use of the fish-traps is not an act of destruction, but a memorial engagement with the past; b) the continuous process of decay and
reconstruction of the fish-traps by fishermen are part of the social life of these structures; c) there is a gap between the official discourse of conservation
and the sensible relationships of these communities with the things of the past. Aiming at these reflections, I consider the discussions proposed by Smith
(2011) and Holtorf (2005), in particular, the ideas that "heritage does not exist" and that "preservation destroys the living memories," respectively.
Bicho, Nuno [49] see Umbelino, Cláudia
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 38
Bicho, Nuno (Universidade do Algarve), João Marreiros (Universidade do Algarve), João Cascalheira (Universidade do Algarve) and Mussa Raja
(Universidade Eduardo Mondlane)
[170]              An Early Gravettian Point Cache from Vale Boi: Implications for the Arrival of Anatomically Modern Humans to Southern Iberia
During the 2014 and 2015 field season, we have excavated a new loci with an early Gravettian horizon in the Rock Shelter area of the site of Vale Boi,
Southern Portugal. The loci is marked by a unique cache composed of close to 20 artifacts, most of which are pristine backed points in non-local chert.
Due to typological characteristics, that includes points identical to those found in Pego do Diabo cave near Lisbon, and to those found in Vale Boi dated to
32.5 ka cal BP, as well as to the stratigraphical position and absolute depth of the finds, this cache is likely to be one of the earliest Gravettian occupations
in southern Iberia. A series of AMS samples will be dated to confirm the estimated chronology of the cache.
In this paper, we will discuss the importance of such a find, including technology, typology, raw material, and use wear studies in addition to
zooarchaeological and geoarchaeological analyses, for the arrival of first Anatomically Modern Humans to southern Iberia just prior to the H3 event.
[211]              Chair
Bickle, Penny (University of York) and Linda Fibiger (University of Edinburgh)
[25]               Ageing, Childhood and Social Identity in the Early Neolithic of Central Europe
Identity is an embodied experience and, as such, it has the capacity to change over a lifetime as the body grows, goes through puberty, suffers illness, and
becomes inscribed with habitual movements from daily tasks. Understanding the process of maturation is therefore an important facet of investigating
identity. In this paper, we focus on ageing and childhood in the early Neolithic of central Europe, the Linearbandkeramik (LBK) culture (5500–4900 cal
B.C.), with particular reference to osteological data, isotopic analysis, and funerary practices. LBK identity is often characterised as static and fixed
representations of sex or identities based on subsistence strategies pervade. Childhood figures less often in discussions about LBK identity and only then
as a separate topic of study. This paper will address the experience of childhood, noting the evidence for illness and violence, the presence of any key life-
stages and whether children were treated differently on death. We consider how embodied experiences differed between children and adults, and changed
over the life-course. Finally, we ask to what extent bodily engagement in everyday tasks and activities, such as subsistence practices and mobility, led to
the kinds of statements and rites which took place in the funerary context.
Biehl, Peter [95] see Willett, Patrick
Biehl, Peter (SUNY Buffalo)
[95]               Chair
Biella, Jan
[267]              Partnerships between the USFS and New Mexico SiteWatch
In 2002, the New Mexico Historic Preservation Division (SHPO) established a statewide site stewardship program, New Mexico SiteWatch, that works with
federal and state agencies to help preserve archaeological sites. The program is organized into local chapters and has integrated two established
programs—one for the Santa Fe National Forest and the Bureau of Land Management in northwest New Mexico. The USFS has been a partner from the
beginning. In addition to monitoring threatened sites, SiteWatch volunteers have provided additional support. The poster features one very successful
partnership to remove extensive graffiti at Sandia Cave NHL, an important early Paleoindian site that remains important to nearby Pueblos.
Bies, Michael (OW Heritage Research L. C.)
[115]              Wyoming Dinwoody Tradition Rock Art Superimpositions
This poster presents superimposition sequences of Dinwoody Tradition Rock Art. The sites discussed are located in west central Wyoming. The
superimpositions include those of styles within the Dinwoody Tradition and with styles that predate and postdate the Dinwoody Tradition. The poster also
addresses difficulties associated with the evaluations of superimpositions within the Dinwoody Tradition. The sequences establish a relative chronology for
the images.
Bigelow, Nancy [124] see Crawford, Laura
Bikoulis, Peter [205] see Gonzalez-Macqueen, Felipe
Billeck, William
[266]              Repatriation to Lineal Descendants of Sitting Bull
Despite numerous books and historical accounts of the 1890 death of Sitting Bull, only one obscure 1893 magazine article mentions that a U.S. Army
surgeon cut off a lock of Sitting Bull’s hair and took leggings from his body. These items were loaned to the Smithsonian’s National Museum of Natural
History back in 1896 and were recently evaluated for repatriation and were returned to Sitting Bull’s family. This poster reviews the research that
determined which descendants had the highest standing under the law, describes the return of these items to Sitting Bull’s descendants, and discusses
how the repatriation has affected the family.
Billman, Brian [122] see Bardolph, Dana
Binning, Jeanne (California Department of Transportation)
[232]              Determination of the Size of a Percussion Biface from the Resulting Flakes
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 39
The mechanics of successful biface reduction dictates the size and morphology of the generated flakes. Given these constraints, the ensuing flakes can
be used to determine the size of the original biface. Using experimental data, an algorithm was developed that allows the estimation of biface size from
reduction debitage.
Birakis, Tiffany [92] see Neville, Holly
Birch, Jennifer [137] see Brannan, Stefan
Birch, Jennifer (University of Georgia) and Sturt Manning (Cornell University )
[144]             Bayesian Modelling and Refinement of Iroquoian Regional Settlement Histories
An oft-cited problem in Iroquoian archaeology is that radiocarbon dating offers weak support for chronological estimates. These concerns focus on short
durations of site occupation and multiple intercepts in the radiocarbon calibration curve. This logic has led researchers to rely on relative dating methods
such as ceramic seriation—overlooking the assumptions and unverified step-wise logic transfers involved in these methods. Refinement in laboratory
procedures and the application of Bayesian chronological modeling methods to archaeologically sequenced datasets promises to resolve previous
limitations for radiocarbon dating—and has transformed the archaeological record of other cases such as the Neolithic of southern Britain or the Bronze
Age Aegean. Our research demonstrates that reservations about absolute dating in Iroquoian archaeology are no longer legitimate and contributes to a
growing body of literature which explores how high-precision dating is essential for resolving theoretically-informed and problem-oriented questions about
cultural change. To that end, we present a model using previously published and newly acquired dates to inform the historical development of Iroquoian
societies in the late pre- and early-contact periods. In particular, our results bear new insights into patterns of coalescence, conflict, and confederacy
formation in the fifteenth through seventeenth centuries A.D.
[144]             Chair
Birchall, Joshua (Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi)
[23]              Long-term Social Interaction is Reflected in Parallel Linguistic Structures among the Languages of the Lower Amazon
A central concept in historical linguistics is that of the sprachbund, or linguistic area, where languages of different families show shared structural traits as a
result of long-term social interaction rather than shared inheritance. Through language contact phenomena such as bilingualism, calquing, the formation of
trade languages, etc., this process of linguistic diffusion and convergence sometimes flies under the scientific radar, especially in regions such as
Amazonia where there tend to be cultural restrictions against widespread lexical borrowing. In this talk, I examine the validity of the lower Amazon as a
sprachbund by comparing the structural patterns found in a sample of 20 languages from 8 different languages families of the lower Amazon with those
found in a continent-wide sample of over 90 languages from across more than 40 different language families (cf. www.sails.clld.org). Statistical testing of
the geographic distribution of linguistic traits is used to delineate possible zones of sociolinguistic interaction, which can then be compared with other
reflexes of regional integration from an ethnological and archaeological perspective.
Bird, Douglas [180] see Price, Michael
Birge, Adam (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[281]             The Creation of Colonial Sacred Space and Landscapes around Nevado Sajama, Bolivia
Around the mountain of Sajama in western Bolivia exists a network of pre-Hispanic linear pathways that connect villages, chapels, churches, and hilltop
altars. These pathways were primarily used in the Colonial era (1532–1825) but are still used by the local Aymara people for fiestas and rituals. The
creation and transformation of this space demonstrates a changing ritual practice that occasionally reused pre-Hispanic places to combine Catholic and
Andean sacred elements. Through this negotiation of practice, the local Aymara people were able to integrate Spanish colonial strategies into local
understandings of the landscape, space, and ritual. In order to examine the nature of this transformation, I combine informal ethnographic data concerning
the modern-day use of these pathways along with the material remains of rituals around nine pathways, five chapels, and 13 altars located primarily around
the pueblo of Sajama.
Bishop, Katelyn [27] see Kovacevich, Brigitte
Bishop, Ronald (Smithsonian Institution)
[216]             Discussant
Bissett, Thaddeus [49] see Carmody, Stephen
Bissett, Thaddeus (Cultural Resource Analysts, Inc.), David Anderson (University of Tennessee, Knoxville) and Martin Walker (University of
Tennessee, Knoxville)
[218]             Creating a Discovery Model for Submerged Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene Sites on the Northern Gulf Coast
Between 13,000 and 12,300 B.P., sea levels in the Gulf of Mexico increased rapidly. For the next 2,300 years, however, sea levels both rose and fell by
centimeters per year, producing significant shoreline movement observable within a human lifetime. Because of continental shelf’s topography, however,
shorelines in different areas did not shift at the same rate. Areas with minimal movement would have seemed more stable and attractive for repeated
occupations over generations. This paper models of shoreline movement on a decadal scale in the Gulf of Mexico to identify areas in which future
submerged prehistoric archaeological surveys should focus.
Bissonnette, Ashley (Salve Regina & Mashantucket Pequot Museum and Research Center)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 40
[61]              Pestilences of the Just War: An Epidemiologic Investigation of the Pequot War
The Pequot War (1636–1637) destroyed infrastructure, resources and production, mobility, lines of communication, and social networks that comprised a
complex preventative health system for both native and colonial peoples. The destruction and change in physical and social environments and the
disproportionate burden of conflict, for the purposes of this paper, is defined as colonial trauma. Physical and social stressors exacerbated disease that
changed the course of colonial battles and heightened the effect of conflict on military and civilian populations.
A process of historical epidemiology is applied to explain the toll of colonial trauma and its gateway effect on disease and people’s preventative health
strategies. Historical epidemiology facilitates an understanding into the social and natural history of disease and the pathways and patterns that are unique
to war-torn communities. Due to the nature of fragmentary seventeenth century records, a variety of health approaches, and historical and archaeological
evidences will be applied. Together, these will provide deeper insight into the Pequot War, and new ways of organizing and understanding the
archaeological and historical records.
Bittencourt Fernandes, Glenda [23] see Pinto Lima, Helena
Blaauw, Maarten [95] see Armit, Ian
Blaber, Thomas
[286]             Exploring Mica in Mortuary Contexts at Fallen Tree (9Li8) on St. Catherines Island, Georgia
Recent excavations at the Fallen Tree Mortuary Complex (9Li8) on St. Catherines Island, GA, have recovered over 20 shaped mica artifacts and dozens of
fragments associated within three Late Mississippian adult male burials. This non-local material was purposely shaped and interred with the individuals. In
this paper, I present the results of recent analysis and explore mortuary mica use at this site. I examine the location and orientation of the mica discs to
help determine spatial patterns and if these pieces were attached to the body at the time of interment. In addition, I examine several unfired clay artifacts
that were associated with several mica pieces and may have been used as a method of adhering the mica to the body or a garment. More broadly, these
data will help our understanding of Late Mississippian trade networks and mortuary mica use.
Black, Rachel
[6]               The Bioarchaeology of None: Recovery and Analysis of an Historic Coffin from Fort McAllister State Park, Georgia
In the spring of 2013, the office of the Georgia State Archaeologist was contacted by personnel from Fort McAllister State Park in Richmond Hill, GA,
concerning what appeared to be an historic coffin eroding out of the marsh edge. Emergency salvage excavation was conducted to recover the remaining
portions of the coffin. Initial field analysis indicated a sharp shouldered, hexagonal style coffin. Neither the lid nor any mortuary hardware was recovered.
The coffin’s location is within the McAllister Plantation site (9BN22), an antebellum rice and cotton plantation. However, archival research indicates post-
Civil War occupations and that the area was used as an historic dump site. This location is consistent with other coastal Georgia cemeteries such as the
Butler Island slave cemetery, the slave cemetery at Wormsloe Historic Site, and DuBignon cemetery on Jekyll Island, suggesting the marsh edge as a
preferred location for intentional interment. Additional analysis further explored coffin construction to aid in determination of time period and archival
research to determine whether this was a single burial, part of a larger cemetery, or an unused, discarded coffin.
Black, David [157] see Betts, Matthew
Blackman, Paul [267] see Smith, Lindsey
Blackmore, Chelsea (University of California, Santa Cruz)
[128]             Queering the Narrative: Diverse Pasts and Political Futures
This paper explores the impact of queer theory in destabilizing heteronormative and other fixed discourses in archaeological method, practice, and
interpretation. By challenging the very idea of what constitutes “normal’ in archaeology, queer theory provides new ways of thinking about and engaging
with change, process, and difference. These discussions become important and necessary interventions in political debates around modern queer
identities as well as social diversity at a much larger scale. Debates around sexuality, race, gender, and class remain at the forefront of political and social
life in the United States. Yet the past, even the recent past, is rarely invoked in these conversations. By understanding the cultural and temporal
situatedness of these categories, archaeology can and should contribute to these conversations. How can we incorporate queer theory into our classrooms
in such a way that expands archaeological possibilities but also opens the discipline to a more diverse array of voices and identities? By deconstructing the
very essence of “normal,” whether we speak of the past or the present, we bridge these spaces and times in very real and substantive ways.
[5]               Discussant
Blair, Susan [85] see Holyoke, Kenneth
Blair, Elliot (University of Alabama)
[213]             Population Aggregation and Ceramic Communities of Practice at 17th Century Mission Santa Catalina
Native made ceramics are, without question, the most abundant and intensively studied artifact type recovered at southeastern Spanish colonial mission
sites. In the mission province of Guale, located on the northern Georgia coast, these ceramics consist of Irene and Altamaha series wares—primarily
stamped and incised grit-tempered—related to the broader Lamar ceramics of the South Appalachian Mississippian region. Many studies have thoroughly
established the broad contours and temporal patterns of these ceramics, examining stylistic changes over time and elucidating the colonial transformation
from the Irene to the Altamaha ceramic series.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               41
In this paper, rather than working from a framework in which I classify this pottery into either morphological or temporal types, I examine variation in
individual ceramic attributes using a situated learning/communities of practice framework, exploring micro-scale patterns of social relationships within the
Santa Catalina community. Working with a sample of ceramics recovered from five distinct neighborhoods within the Mission Santa Catalina pueblo, I
identify distinct differences in the practices of ceramic production and consumption between these neighborhoods. I interpret these results in terms of the
complicated patterns of population relocation and aggregation within the missions of La Florida.
Blake, Michael (University of British Columbia)
[178]             Eating and Drinking Maize: Diverging Roles for a Staple Crop in the Formative Americas
Increasing reliance on staple crop agriculture has long been a cornerstone of most archaeological theorizing about emerging complex society—and
especially early state formation. Comparisons of Formative Mesoamerica and Andean South America reveal the very different roles that the New World’s
most important grain crop—maize—played in Formative Period and subsequent economies. In Mesoamerica, where maize was first domesticated, it
became an increasingly important, and symbolically laden, source of food after about 3,000 years ago. Beginning around the same time in the Andean
region, long after maize had spread to South America, it became an ever more important source of carbohydrates for producing chicha—a sacred alcoholic
beverage. Reviewing recent work on this topic, this paper explores the economic, political, symbolic, and nutritional implications of these two different
histories of maize use in early complex societies—in particular during the Olmec and Chavín Horizons.
Blanton, Dennis (James Madison University)
[240]             Hummingbird Imagery and Smoking Pipes in the Mississippian World
Smoking ritual was highly elaborated among late prehistoric Mississippian societies in the southeastern United States. Their smoking pipes were
embellished with particular kinds of symbolism, not least among them avian themes. During one interval hummingbird imagery was prominent and this
presentation will outline an explanation for it ultimately based on the symbiotic plant-pollinator relationship of tobacco and hummingbirds. The
archaeological, ethnohistorical, and ecological bases for the interpretation will be described, and cross-cultural analogies will be explored.
Blanton , Richard E. [27] see Antorcha Pedemonte, Ricardo
Blasco, Ruth [278] see Rosell, Jordi
Blench, Roger [46] see Cheong, Kong
Blessing, Meggan [7] see Rock, Carolyn
Blessing, Meggan (University of Florida), Michelle LeFebvre (Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University, The Net) and Neill Wallis (Florida
Museum of Natural History)
[133]             Eat Local, Think Global? The Intersections of Knowledge, Culture, and Subsistence at Woodland Coastal Sites in the Southeastern USA
Along the northern parts of the Gulf and Atlantic coasts of Florida and southern Georgia, coastal sites of the Deptford and Swift Creek archaeological
cultures (circa A.D. 1 to 600) map onto the distinctive estuarine and salt marsh ecological zones of the region. Beyond their similar environments,
inhabitants within this region seem to have been united by a cultural milieu characterized by commonalities in village life, material culture, ritual practices,
and ostensibly, patterns of subsistence. This paper presents a comparative synthesis of zooarchaeological data from Middle and Late Woodland contexts
on the Atlantic and Gulf coasts in order to investigate the interplay of animal use and consumption with traditional ecological knowledge, social interactions,
and the localized ecologies of the region. With attention to the nuances of depositional context at each site in our study, we ask whether Woodland Period
faunal assemblages along these coastlines only reflect the similarities and differences among local environments or whether they are also indicative of a
more integrated pattern of traditional ecological knowledge and cultural preference that transcends the local.
Bletzer, Michael
[130]             To the Four Winds—Identities and Destinies on New Spain’s Far Northern Frontier: The Piro and Tiwa Provinces of New Mexico, c. 1540–
                  1740
The roughly 200 years from the Coronado expedition to the reoccupation of the Tiwa pueblo of Sandia (Na-fiat, Tuf Shur Tia) in the 1740s brought
unprecedented challenges on two of the largest Puebloan groups, the southern Tiwas and their neighbors, the Piros. Although impact from Spanish
encounters and other stressors varied, Piro and Tiwa pueblos were dramatically reduced in number at the time of the Pueblo Revolt of 1680. Decades after
the Revolt, the Tiwa pueblos of Isleta (Tue-I) and Sandia were resettled by people of Tiwa and other native ancestry. The Piro pueblos remained
abandoned, however, despite several Spanish schemes to revive them.
 Using a series of archival and archaeological data, I aim to track some of the processes that affected Piros and Tiwas before and after the Pueblo Revolt,
when the continued occupation of both their homelands hung in the balance. The question is: how did the Tiwas manage to save at least two of their
pueblos while the Piros were permanently scattered? The repercussions of these processes are still felt by the descendant communities today—especially
Piro descendants whose organizational structure lacks official recognition and whose collective memory of their Ancestral pueblos is tenuous.
Bliege Bird, Rebecca [180] see Price, Michael
Bloch, Lindsay (UNC-Chapel Hill) and Erik Bolling (UNC-Chapel Hill)
[153]             Improving pXRF Estimates of Elemental Composition for Lead-Glazed Earthenware
Lead glazing was a significant technological innovation to pottery production, increasing the strength and imperviousness of earthenwares. These ceramics
are common components of archaeological assemblages in many parts of the world. They are known to have traveled long distances, thus determining
their provenience has great interpretive potential. While studies analyzing archaeological ceramics with non-destructive X-ray fluorescence spectrometry
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  42
(XRF) have multiplied rapidly in recent years, lead-glazed ceramics have posed a particular challenge, as lead acts a shield for X-rays. This paper reports
on the pXRF analysis of over 400 lead-glazed earthenware sherds recovered from historic earthenware production sites across the mid-Atlantic U.S. and in
Great Britain. In particular, we investigated whether pXRF results could independently reproduce compositional groups determined using analytical
methods less sensitive to lead concentration, such as laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS). XRF data were
calibrated to produce quantitative results that made a variety of data analyses possible, and further facilitated the development of a correction function for
lead. We demonstrate the potential of this method for compositional studies of lead-glazed wares, while offering best practices for sample selection and
preparation to minimize lead contamination.
[153]             Chair
Block, Dorothy (Palm Beach State / Broward College)
[246]             Prehistoric Ceramics From the Boyer Survey of Lake Okeechobee in the Northern Everglades
In 2007, severe drought conditions at Lake Okeechobee, in the northern Everglades, revealed 6 prehistoric archaeological sites. These were the Caleb
Boyer, Ritta Island, Kreamer Island, and three sites referred to as the Pelican Bay series. Since Phase 1 investigations failed to yield intact strata or
datable carbon, it became necessary to assign each site’s temporal position based on their artifact assemblages. This paper presents a detailed summary
of the sites’ ceramics and concludes that they range in date from 500 B.C. to approximately A.D. 1450 and thus can be assigned to the Glades I–Glades
III periods.
Blom, Deborah (University of Vermont), Kelly Knudson (Arizona State University), John Janusek (Vanderbilt University), Sara Becker (University
of California-Riverside) and Corey Bowen (Vanderbilt University)
[25]              Formation and Transformation of Identities in the Andes: The Constructions of Childhood among the Tiwanaku
Despite their importance, little attention has been paid to childhood and the roles of children in the ancient Andes. Here, we focus our case study on the
Tiwanaku polity of the South Central Andes, which expanded through migration and culture contact across parts of Bolivia, Peru, Chile, and Argentina
between ca. 500–1100 A.D. The way the lives of children are structured and shaped are fundamental to understanding the formation and maintenance of
states and their impact on the life experiences of children and adults. Using multiple lines of evidence, we focus particularly on the formation and
transformation of social identities, the lived childhood experience, and constructions of childhood in the Tiwanaku state. Our data include ethnographic and
ethnohistoric sources, bioarchaeological data on cranial modification, paleopathology, and funerary patterns, as well as biogeochemical indicators of
paleodiet and paleomobility. This research on Tiwanaku shifts the debate from the traditional questions about the manifestations of state power in the
public sphere to considerations of the state in the private sphere, through the perspective of childhood.
Blomster, Jeffrey (George Washington University)
[179]             Production, Consumption, and Multicrafting in the Formative Mixteca Alta, Mexico
The importance of the household in domestic production and consumption has been demonstrated throughout Formative Mesoamerica. It is the success of
the household’s domestic economy that determines its survival. Focusing primarily on lithic artifacts, we explore locations in Formative Etlatongo, in the
Mixteca Alta of Oaxaca, Mexico, that represent production and consumption of lithic tools and objects. Using ratios that compare lithic frequencies with
ceramic frequencies from the same contexts, we examine several sites with especially high lithic frequencies, and consider the possibilities that these loci
may represent specialized craft production in the sense that craft goods were produced for exchange and consumption outside of the producing household.
Using a more fine-tuned analysis, we consider the kinds of raw materials and nature of lithic artifacts (type of debitage versus type of tool) to interpret
possible production loci at Etlatongo, exploring diachronic change from the Early Formative (Cruz B phase) to the end of the Middle Formative (the Yucuita
phase). To better understand the domestic economies of these dynamic social units, these loci are placed in larger crafting contexts, looking for evidence
of other types of household production activities, reflective of multicrafting and larger subsistence activities and household interdependence.
[56]              Discussant
Blong, John (Texas A&M University)
[62]              Late Glacial Hunter-Gatherers in the Central Alaska Range
The earliest evidence for human occupation of eastern Beringia comes from the Tanana and Nenana river basin lowlands 14,000–13,000 calendar years
ago, linked to the spread of shrub-tundra vegetation and associated resources as climate ameliorated during the Bølling-Allerød Interstadial. The earliest
evidence for human activity in the adjacent uplands of the central Alaska Range is during the Younger Dryas interval, more than a thousand years after the
initial colonization of the region. Following this, there is little evidence for sustained use of upland resources until the early-mid Holocene, when upland
landscapes took on a central role in seasonal subsistence-settlement rounds. This paper reviews archaeological, geomorphic, and paleoecological data to
present the timing, environmental context, and nature of initial human use of upland landscapes in the central Alaska Range, and evaluates the role of the
uplands in land-use strategies during the initial peopling of eastern Beringia.
Blot, Jean-Yves [145] see Wagner, Ursel
Blouet, Helen (Utica College)
[287]             Think Inside the Box: Teaching Archaeological Methods and Interdisciplinary Problem Solving in the Classroom
As a professor at Utica College in New York, I am faced with a challenge. I teach archaeological field methods, but I only have room to do so in the spring
semester, a time dominated by cold and snowy weather. While a large-scale summer field school would be ideal, many UC students have summer work
commitments or otherwise cannot afford to participate. So I have decided to bring the digging into the classroom. In this presentation, I will show how
students learn and practice archaeological field methods in a classroom or lab setting through the use of an archaeology "sand box" or excavation
simulation. Students engage in typical field work methods, excavation, lab analysis, report writing, and information dissemination. They also enhance
critical analysis, teamwork, and leadership skills as they excavate, document, and synthesize observations, and present findings in a public setting. This
spring, a new venture in this project will challenge students to combine the archaeology project with other academic and professional interests, such as
business, marketing, education, and construction management, to create new information and perspectives. Not only will this create new knowledge, but
the synergy developed across disciplines will provide innovations in problem solving.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  43
Boaventura, Rui [103] see Grimes, Vaughan
Bobolinski, Kathryn (University of Montana), Anna Prentiss (University of Montana) and Matthew Walsh (University of Montana)
[244]             Cache and Trash: Variability in Storage Pits found at the Bridge River Site, Middle Fraser B.C.
Prehistoric households living within Housepit 54 at the Bridge River winter village in south-central British Columbia participated in complex strategies of
food acquisition, storage, and food waste disposal. The storage of wind-dried salmon, smoked- and dried- meat from terrestrial animals, as well as dried
and preserved roots, berries, and other plant materials were all integral to over-wintering subsistence strategies. Pits dug into the interior floors and those
located at the exterior of pithouses provided vital storage areas for preserved foodstuffs. James Teit, an ethnographer of the Upper Lillooet, suggested that
food was stored “in two kinds of cellars” –one, presumably an interior, bark-lined cache and another, situated “near the house, and made with less care.”
To what degree do interior cache pits and exterior cache pits differ in size, shape, content, and perhaps inferably, function? At Housepit 54 interior pits are
commonly found filled, not only with faunal remains, but with FCR, lithic debitage, and other detritus, including biological waste. This study examines what
formation processes likely contributed to variability in cache pit materials at the household level and what difference (if any) was there between the use-life
of interior vs. exterior caches?
Bocherens, Herve [139] see Rademaker, Kurt
Bocinsky, R. Kyle (Washington State University)
[261]             SKOPE: Bringing Continent-scale, Local Paleoenvironmental Data to Researchers and the Public
Interest in the impacts of environmental change on human societies is increasing—and, given the latest IPCC projections, without a moment to spare.
Archaeologists are engaging this interest by interpreting past human experiences with environmental change, often by reconstructing environments at local
spatial and temporal resolutions most relevant to humans. Crucial tasks ahead include generalizing the plethora of reconstruction methods thus far
created, comparing their skill and utility, and rendering them useful for researchers, policymakers, and the interested public. We discuss an ongoing
initiative—SKOPE: Synthesized Knowledge of Past Environments—that seeks to (1) present state-of-the-art paleoenvironmental reconstructions in an
intuitive, map-based web tool, and (2) generalize legacy paleoenvironmental reconstruction methods and extend them to novel landscapes. A prototype of
the tool is now live at EnviRecon.org, and includes 2,000-year reconstructions of agriculturally-important climate variables across the entire U.S. southwest
at roughly kilometer-scale resolution. Current efforts seek to scale the reconstructions to cover North America. Results from SKOPE research in the
southwest are already demonstrating the promise of such large, high-resolution reconstructions for understanding past human behavior, and perhaps
informing the future.
[5]               Moderator
Bocinsky, R. Kyle [65] see Ellyson, Laura
Boczkiewicz, Roberta (University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee)
[244]             Rules for Fishy Trash?
Analysis of intrasite spatial variation can improve our understanding of the dynamics of daily living of past populations. Fish remains are a special type of
trash with distinctive aspects of capture, transport, preparation, and discard when compared to other fauna. This paper focuses on the analysis of fish
remains from the Chimu site of Cerro La Virgen (A.D. 1000–1470) on the north coast of Peru. Cerro La Virgen is a rural town of mixed economy, including
both fishing and agriculture, linked by road to the Chimu capitol at Chan Chan. The sample reported in this paper comes from recent salvage excavations
by Brian Billman and Jesus Briceño at a residential compound and an associated secondary midden. I use the result of my analysis to evaluate the
variation in fish taxa and body parts from these contexts.
Boero, Michael (San Jose State University)
[110]             Traditional Resource Management in the Sierra Nevada of California
There is general agreement that past Native American populations significantly modified Sierra Nevada landscapes in California leading to a variety of
beneficial resource outcomes. Further, many argue that through their lengthy history in the region, Native peoples initiated cascading regional effects on
forest composition and structure in the Sierra Nevada. With this in mind, agencies and researchers are turning to the past to develop more effective
resource management protocols. Concordantly, archaeologists are recognizing an opportunity to inform these protocols through multidisciplinary research
projects that aim to more accurately represent the historical extent and impact of traditional resource management on Sierra Nevada forest structure.
Collaborative programs involving Native groups and government agencies are occurring throughout the state, ostensibly providing diverse perspectives,
labor, and restoration goals towards more effective resource management. Here, I present my ongoing research in the southern Sierra Nevada that
explores if, how, and in what capacity traditional ecological knowledge is being utilized in public land management, with special regards to fire management
and water resources. In addition to archaeological implications, critical attention is paid to the political and ecological interplay between federal agencies
and local communities.
Bogaard, Amy (School of Archaeology, University of Oxford), Valasia Isaakidou (School of Archaeology, University of Oxford), Erika Nitsch
(School of Archaeology, University of Oxford) and Amy Styring (School of Archaeology, University of Oxford)
[171]             The Agroecology of Inequality: Novel Bioarchaeological Approaches to Early Urbanization in Western Asia and Europe
In this talk we use case studies to compare the agroecology of relatively egalitarian Neolithic communities (low ginis) with that of early urban societies
featuring high levels of inequality (high ginis). We use a combination of novel archaeobotanical and zoological approaches to investigate arable land
management. Neolithic sequences in western Asia, the Aegean and central Europe present contrasting settings in which early farmers developed labour-
intensive cropping strategies that buffered households from risk but also fostered potential inequalities. Alongside ‘high-input’ crops demanding
supplementary watering and/or manuring, it is increasingly clear that such regimes also included relatively stress-tolerant crops. The latter were crucial for
the staggered emergence of stratified urban societies dependent on extensive, land-limited systems. We present new archaeobotanical evidence to show
that an expanding scale of production (‘extensification’)—not intensification per se—can be discerned in disparate regions and may be a widespread
feature of pronounced, long-term social inequality in grain-based urban societies.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              44
Bogaard, Amy [189] see Vaiglova, Petra
Boger, Rebecca [100] see Bain, Allison
Boi, Valeria (University of Sassari (Italy))
[4]               Open Access, Data Reuse and the "Democratization Of Knowledge": The Case of Italy
Open Access (OA) data publication can widen the quantity of data available to researchers and scholars and thus can increase possibilities for cross-
cultural comparisons. Low cost and ease of access to data can make possible a “democratization of knowledge.” This paper examines the archaeological
community in Italy from the perspective of OA data publication in archaeology. OA data publication in Italian archaeology is not widespread and it currently
lacks standards on data sharing that can enable reuse. Most crucially, however, licenses for data reuse strongly influence opportunities for using data
available through Web-based OA portals and information from different Web sources. This situation is considered through a framework of actors involved
in the production of archaeological knowledge, namely, the Ministry of Culture, entrusted with the protection and valorization of Cultural Heritage,
universities which are charged with research, and professional archaeologists including freelancers and those employed in private companies. Professional
archaeologists carry out the bulk of fieldwork in Italy, yet unlike Ministry archaeologists and those
at Universities, professional archaeologists cannot publish their work without authorization from the Scientific Director, usually a Ministry Officer. Interest is
growing in publishing field reports but publication of data and its reuse remains limited.
Boileau, Arianne (University of Florida)
[270]             Creatures from the Lagoon: Maya Turtle Exploitation at Lamanai, Belize
Archaeological excavations at the Maya site of Lamanai, Belize, have resulted in the recovery of more than 10,000 remains of turtles dating from the Late
Postclassic to the Early Colonial periods. This abundance of turtle specimens represents a unique opportunity to study Maya turtle exploitation at an
unprecedented scale. Preliminary analyses of a sample of 2,400 bones recovered from domestic structures provide information on subsistence practices.
The Maya primarily exploited river turtles, with a strong preference for the Central American river turtle (Dermatemys mawii) and, to a lesser extent, the
Meso-American slider (Trachemys venusta) and Mexican musk turtle (Staurotypus triporcatus). The practice of dismembering turtles at the junction of the
carapace and plastron is attested by the presence of hack and cut marks on the bridge of these two elements. Frequent burning of the exterior of the
carapace and plastron also suggests that turtles were roasted and, perhaps, smoked over fire. As proposed by zooarchaeologist Norbert Stanchly, the
Lamanai Maya may have practiced turtle husbandry to allow for a study supply of this resource. Future stable isotopic and ancient DNA analyses may
inform this hypothesis.
Boivin, Nicole [223] see Crowther, Alison
Boivin, Nicole (University of Oxford)
[223]             Genetic Insights into Commensal Small Mammal Invasions of Madagascar in Prehistory
A number of invasive small mammal species, including various commensal rodents, have achieved significant range expansion as a result of accidental
transportation by humans. In the Indian Ocean, this is true of the black rat, Rattus rattus, the house mouse, Mus musculus, and the Asian house shrew,
Suncus murinus. The spread of these species across the Indian Ocean appears to have been facilitated by the emergence of trading networks beginning
thousands of years ago. We conducted molecular phylogeographic investigations of all three species, sampling widely across the Indian Ocean to explore
patterns of ancient human colonisation, contact, and trade. Here we focus on data from Madagascar, which suggest that all three species can trace their
mitochondrial ancestry to the Middle East. The implications of these findings for our understanding of Madagascar’s ecological and cultural history, as well
as broader patterns of early Indian Ocean trade and connectivity, are explored.
[223]             Discussant
[223]             Chair
Bolhofner, Katelyn (Arizona State University)
[161]             Beyond Trauma and Disease: Examining the Growth and Potential of Bioarchaeological Research in Iberian Medieval Archaeology
With the advancement of inter-disciplinary research in medieval archaeology in recent decades, much progress has been made in the integration of
bioarchaeological data into larger archaeological and historical questions. This growth may be seen in the increase in publications, professional
associations, and programs of study focusing upon bioarchaeological research of the medieval period. Yet, particularly in Iberian medieval studies, the
contribution of bioarchaeological research largely has remained focused upon diagnoses of pathological conditions and traumatic injury. While this
research provides valuable insight into activity and health in the medieval period, there is much room for further contextual analysis and the development of
inter-disciplinary research agendas.
    This presentation will review recent advances made in the integration of bioarchaeological data sets in Iberian archaeology and will highlight the great
potential for growth beyond reports of trauma and disease. As an example of this potential, this presentation will introduce a contextually-specific research
framework developed to advance the integration and application of methods from specialized fields in the pursuit of anthropologically driven questions in
medieval archaeology.
Bolling, Erik [153] see Bloch, Lindsay
Bollwerk, Elizabeth [7] see Bates, Lynsey
Bollwerk, Elizabeth (The Thomas Jefferson Foundation - Monticello)
[293]             Revisiting Variation in Colonoware Manufacture and Use
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                45
Previous analyses (Cooper and Smith 2007, Smith and Cooper 2011) of Colonoware from 33 sites occupied during the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries by enslaved peoples in South Carolina and Virginia have revealed significant inter-regional variation in vessel abundance over time. Additionally,
analyses of attributes such as soot residue and vessel thickness identified intra-regional homogeneity and heterogeneity in use and manufacturing
techniques. This study tests whether these trends continue when the dataset is expanded to include five additional archaeological assemblages from South
Carolina and two assemblages from Virginia. The patterns are then compared with geographic data on historic period exchange routes (over land and
water), locations of Colonial and early American market centers, and variation in size of plantations and their enslaved populations to examine how the
availability of wares and proximity to production hubs impacted the manufacture and use of Colonoware.
[293]            Chair
Bolnick, Deborah A. [64] see Battillo, Jenna
Bolte, Christina (University of West Florida), Jay D. Franklin (East Tennessee State University), Nathan K. Shreve (University of Mississippi) and
S.D. Dean (East Tennessee State University)
[292]            Luminescence Dates, Archaeological Survey, and Ancestral Overhill Cherokee Towns in Upper East Tennessee
We have conducted shoreline surveys of archaeological sites on major streams in upper East Tennessee for several years. In 2011, we added
luminescence dating to this work. We discuss how luminescence dating has added robust chronological resolution to our work and how it has informed our
hypothesis-building efforts. We address the protohistory of the region and the identification of early Cherokee towns here. Before adding luminescence
dating as an integral facet of our work, we believed these towns dated no earlier than the seventeenth century. We now know they were in existence by the
fifteenth century at the latest.
Bon, François [22] see Ménard, Clément
Bond, Stanley
[33]             Discussant
Bond, Julie [210] see Mainland, Ingrid
Bond, Julie (AGES, University of Bradford, UK), Julie Gibson (Archaeology Institute, Orkney College, UK), Stephen Dockrill (Archaeological
Sciences, University of Bradford, U), Ruth Maher (William Paterson University, USA) and Robert Friel (Archaeological Sciences, University of
Bradford, U)
[210]            Understanding Damage Due to Sea Level Rise in Orkney: The Results of Recent Work
Orkney is a Scottish archipelago, with a maritime cultural landscape spanning some 6,000 years. The archaeological evidence related to this long
habitation is amongst the most complete in northwest Europe. Three-dimensional stone architecture and frequently benign soil conditions contribute to
very good preservation of individual sites in their landscapes and the UNESCO inscription of The Heart of Neolithic Orkney World Heritage Site recognizes
this. A few sites were protected in the last century against marine erosion but more than 900 others remain vulnerable or actually are eroding. How can we
mitigate this trend?
Sea level rise since the Neolithic has slowed but is still present, contributing to local inundation. The observable and dramatic increase in erosion resulting
from the effects of a steady upward trend in wind speeds in the North Atlantic is discussed at two scales. The first is an archipelago-wide view of current
changes and the second discusses the complexities of an individual site and the processes of erosion. Innovative methodologies, including laser scanning
the foreshore before and after the winter months, are combined with intensive excavation and recording of the beach and its buried deposits.
Bongers, Jacob [205] see Jones, Terrah
Bongers, Jacob (UCLA Cotsen Institute of Archaeology), Brittany Jackson (UCLA Department of Anthropology), Susanna Seidensticker (UCLA),
Terrah Jones (UCLA Cotsen Institute of Archaeology) and Colleen O'Shea (SUNY Buffalo)
[215]            Postmortem Human Body Manipulation in the Mid-Chincha Valley, Peru
This paper investigates postmortem human body manipulation associated with above-ground and semi-subterranean tombs known as chullpas, which date
from the Late Intermediate Period (A.D. 1000–1476) to the Late Horizon (A.D. 1476–1532) in the mid-Chincha Valley, Peru. Mortuary processes involve
groups interacting with the dead to negotiate sociopolitical relationships. Groups commonly manipulated human corpses as part of mortuary processes
performed cross-culturally. In the Andes, groups culturally transformed biologically dead bodies into socially viable artifacts. Fieldwork performed in the
mid-Chincha Valley reveals a large number of chullpas, many of which exhibit evidence of intentional manipulation of human remains including bones with
red pigment and reed posts put through vertebrae. Recent analyses of red pigment and over 40 samples of reeds with vertebrae yield new insights into late
prehispanic funerary practices and relationships between the living and the dead in the mid-Chincha Valley. Here, we present these data and characterize
postmortem human body manipulation performed in this key coastal valley. These funerary practices suggest dynamic, protracted interactions between the
living and the dead that played significant roles in the construction of space, place, and sociopolitical relationships during late prehispanic times in this
coastal valley.
Bongiovanni, Roseanne [288] see Green, Kirsten
Bonnissent, Dominique (Ministry of culture), Nathalie Serrand (Inrap), Laurent Bruxelles (Inrap), Pierrick Fouéré (Inrap) and Sandrine Grouard
(MNHN)
[220]            Island Societies during the Archaic Age in the Lesser Antilles : The Issue of Resources in Saint-Martin
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              46
During the fourth millennium before Christ, the Lesser Antilles archipelago witnessed the development of insular societies. These communities which
combined shellfish collection, fishing, submarine and terrestrial hunting, a proto-agriculture and gathering, developed a culture there rather specific to the
tropical insular context. A diachronic and detailed study of the settlements over close to four millennia allows detecting an evolution in the human practices,
although they appear quite homogeneous at first sight. The social structure of these communities seems to be based on a sophisticated cyclic system of
resources exploitation, shaped according to their availability and to socio-economic necessities as well as to the needs of their symbolic world. The concept
of archaeoecology is used in this work in order to examine the passed interactions between the maritime hunter-gatherers of the Lesser Antilles, their
activities and their environment.
BONNISSENT, Dominique [222] see Serrand, Nathalie
Bonogofsky, Michelle (UC, Berkeley)
[52]              Post-Mortem Manipulation of the Human Skull in the Middle East during the Neolithic Period
The Neolithic Near Eastern inhabitants of the Levant and Anatolia removed the skulls or crania of females, males, and children after decomposition of the
body, ca. 8,500–5,000 B.C. They modeled facial or other features over the disembodied skulls and crania of adults and children using substances such as
plaster, marl, or collagen, and then generally painted them, while others were only painted. Many of the skulls and crania, however, display no apparent
post-mortem decoration. Some skulls of both types appear grouped according to genetic relatedness and/or show evidence of in-vivo cranial modification.
Whether modeled, painted, or plain, the skulls and crania are typically found archaeologically either individually or grouped together without their
corresponding postcranial skeletons and in diverse locations regardless of age or sex. This inclusive treatment supports an interpretation of the removal of
the skulls and crania as evidence of a complex mortuary ritual that may reflect alternative identities as well as usage and function. This paper discusses the
sex, age, cultural treatment, and context of 88+ modeled skulls, as well as other skulls and crania, recovered from 10 sites in Turkey, Jordan, Syria,
Palestine, and Israel.
Bonsall, James [80] see Napora, Katharine
Boomert, Arie
[220]             From Foraging to Incipient Horticulture: The Archaic Era in the Coastal Zone and Offshore Islands of Northeast South America
At the onset of the Holocene scattered small-game hunters, fishers, and foragers occupied the northern South America. Such residentially and logistically
mobile groups also traversed occasionally the relatively open landscape of Trinidad, judging from the individual find of a Lithic spearhead of
Canaima/Atures type in this island. By then movement from the mainland to Trinidad was still easy due to the existence of a land bridge. Following its
flooding as a result of the post-Pleistocene sea level rise, ca. 6000 cal B.C. the island was settled permanently by Amerindians of the Ortoiroid series for
whom seafaring and navigating using large dugouts formed part of their cultural heritage. Related groups of hunter-fisher-collector populations are known
from Guyana and eastern Venezuela. Starch grain analyses have shown the growing of maize and other probably domesticated food crops by these
Archaic communities, the processing of which took place using lithic implements of the ‘edge-ground cobble/millingstone complex’. This was the stone
toolkit which was to be introduced to the Lesser Antilles by groups of Ortoiroid voyagers about 3500/3000 cal B.C. It is probably no coincidence that
simultaneously the Margarita archipelago was settled for the first time by Archaic groups originating on the mainland.
Boomgarden, Shannon (University of Utah)
[104]             Experimental Maize Farming in Range Creek Canyon, Utah
This paper examines the economic trade-offs between dry farming maize vs. maize farming using simple surface irrigation for Fremont farmers occupying
Range Creek Canyon, Utah, from A.D. 900 to 1200. A maize farming experiment was conducted focusing on changes in edible grain yield as irrigation
water was varied between farm plots. The benefits of irrigation were clear; higher yields. Experiments designed to construct irrigation ditches and dams,
using only technology available to the Fremont, showed unexpectedly low costs. The results of farming under modern environmental constraints were then
compared to the Fremont occupation using a tree-ring sequence to reconstruct water availability in the past. The reconstruction showed that dry farming
would have been extremely difficult. Archaeological evidence indicates that the Fremont were farming during this period, suggesting irrigation was used to
supplement precipitation shortfalls. Large amounts of contiguous arable land, highly suitable for irrigation farming, were identified along the valley bottom.
The distribution of residential surface rock alignment features were analyzed to determine whether the Fremont located themselves in close proximity to
those areas identified as highly suitable for irrigation farming based on environmental and social constraints.
Booton, Ross [80] see Goldfield, Anna
Borck, Lewis [66] see Swarts, Kelly
Borejsza, Aleksander [55] see Lohse, Jon
Bormann, Edward (Quinnipiac University), Matthew Capece (Quinnipiac University), László Paja (University of Szeged) and Julia Giblin
(Quinnipiac University)
[149]             Munsell vs. Hounsfield? A Methodological Comparison in Assessing Cremation Temperatures of Human Bone
The identification of the temperature at which bone was burned is an important technique for both archaeological and forensic applications that deal with
cremated skeletal material. Known color changes in burned bone can be systematically quantified using a Munsell Soil Color Book and associated with
known temperature ranges at which the material was burned. Non-invasive techniques, such as computed tomography (CT) scanning may be able to
provide analogous information for archaeological material prior to excavation. In this study, we compare Munsell data with “Hounsfield Units” (a
measurement of density) from CT scans of cremated human bone from the Bronze Age cemetery Békés 103, located in Eastern Hungary. Preliminary
results indicate that the “Hounsfield Unit” values increase with bone that was fired at higher temperatures (as identified using the Munsell technique).
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                47
Borrero, Luis (CONICET)
[139]             Discussant
Bos, Kirsten (MPI, Science of Human History), Alexander Herbig (MPI, Science of Human History), Daniel H. Huson (University of Tuebingen),
Noreen Tuross (Department of Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard ) and Johannes Krause (MPI, Science of Human History)
[223]             Searching for Pathogens in a New World Colonial Epidemic Burial
While methodological advancements in ancient DNA research have permitted the reconstruction of ancient bacterial genomes, pathogen detection has
thus far been limited to capture-based approaches that carry with them a strong ascertainment bias. Such biases are reduced when historical or
archaeological contexts implicate a particular disease, but examples of this are rare in the archaeological record. Ancient DNA could serve as an important
tool for elucidating the biological consequences of contact between Old and New World populations, though few clues exist to identify infectious diseases
thought to have contributed to high mortality in New World populations in the colonial period. Here we apply an approach for the analysis of non-enriched
sequencing data that permits a fast and precise assignment of DNA reads to microbial taxa. This circumvents known biases common to capture-based
screening techniques. Our experimental design will be discussed with reference to material from the project Pueblo Viejo de Teposcolula Yucundaa, which
involves excavations at one of the oldest securely dated post-colonial epidemic cemeteries thus far identified in Mexico. This collection could be
instrumental in our ultimate goal of understanding disease exchange in the colonial period, and subsequent genetic adaptation in New World populations.
Bos, Kirsten I. [223] see Krause, Johannes
Boschetto, Kristian [237] see Medina, Paulo
Boswijk, Gretel [56] see Ghezzi, Ivan
Boudreaux, Sarah [27] see Levi, Laura
Boudreaux, Edmond
[137]             The Mississippian Community at Town Creek
Archaeological uses of the term “community” incorporate elements of the physical environment, which often include a particular place on the landscape,
and elements of the built environment, such as the structures and spaces that people created there. In addition to being a place, the concept of
“community” also entails the social, economic, and political relationships that existed among the individuals and groups that lived there. This paper
presents an overview of the Mississippian community at the Town Creek site in central North Carolina. Architectural elements of the Town Creek
community—which include several public buildings, a platform mound, a central plaza, and a domestic area containing a number of houses—have been
fairly well established based on the distribution of archaeological features across the site. This paper will explore the Town Creek community regarding the
social groups that created and used these spaces. In particular, individual households appear to have been important groups that persisted throughout the
existence of this community, even though the community itself changed significantly throughout its history.
Boulanger, Matt [57] see Correa Girrulat, Itaci
Bourdely, Mylène (MNHN)
[96]              Animal Resource Use and Management by Naachtun's Elite
The Naachtun Project has collected a large faunal assemblage since the first field campaign. This material is analyzed as part of doctoral research
focusing on the site's subsistence economy. The analysis is based on specific archaeozoological methods, through which it is possible to identify the
different animal remains and draw up a list of the species that were used by the site's ancient inhabitants. Many preliminary issues must be resolved:
Which were the acquisition strategies of these different species? What hunting and slaughter practices were used on the most consumed species? Did the
people of Naachtun select species and individuals according to their age?
Then, more complex questions can be approached, such as the specific use of certain animal species in the ritual and funerary activities, or the existence
of a regional organized trade of animal resources. Indirectly, the issue is to evaluate whether the use of certain species is the privilege of a specific
powerful group of the society: Naachtun elite. The perspective of the elite will be in fact the main concern of this paper: Which were the main features of the
management of animal resources used by the elites of Naachtun?
Bouwman, Abigail [103] see Viganò, Claudia
Bouwman, Abigail (Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, University of Zurich), Michael Habicht (IEM, University of Zurich), Thomas Krämer
(Forensics Institute, University of Zurich), Karl Link (IEM, University of ) and Frank Rühli (IEM, University of )
[224]             Divining the Past: The Canopic Jar Project is using Genetics, Chemistry and Imaging to Illuminate Ancient Egyptian Health and Culture
Whilst ancient Egyptian mummies have been the main focus of research for centuries, ancient Egyptian canopic jars, and their intestinal contents, have
been widely neglected. The aim of the Canopic Jar Project is to establish novel research procedures and to examine a larger series of ancient Egyptian
human soft tissues samples with a range of medical, genetic, chemical, and Egyptological techniques. In the pilot phase of the project, canopics from
different time periods were studied Egyptologically, radiologically (by portable X-ray, Examion PX 60 HF; or by computed tomography, Somatom Definition
Flash), and by standard histological techniques such as Hematoxylin and Eosin or Masson-Goldner staining. Mitochondrial DNA consistent with a western
Eurasian/northern-African maternal ancestry was successfully amplified, and real-time PCR amplification to assign sex using polymorphisms in the
amelogenin genes have been undertaken. In addition, samples underwent high-throughput sequencing (Illumina HiSeq 2500 v4 sequencing). Some
pathogenic species were found (e.g., MTBC and Leishmania infantum). Samples were also investigated by gas-chromatography-mass spectrometry and
liquid chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry. The extracts from different canopics showed different chemical compositions, and different
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                48
(methylated) fatty acids were also identified.
Here I shall present the data from the pilot study of this interdisciplinary project.
Bow, Sierra (University of Tennessee, Knoxville), Jan Simek (University of Tennessee, Knoxville) and Alan Cressler (United State Geological
Survey)
[131]             Non-Destructive Analysis of Pictographs at Painted Bluff: Understanding Prehistoric Paint Recipes in the Southeastern United States
Analytic methods for prehistoric pigment analyses, especially for rock art, have seen important enhancements over the past decade. In particular, the
development of non-destructive, field-portable instrumentation has been transformational. Painted Bluff in Alabama is one of the richest rock art localities in
the Southeastern U.S. Initial SEM-EDS analyses there yielded results consistent with prehistoric technology, but this method is destructive and only a
limited number of pictographs were therefore analyzed. Here, we report on the in-situ use of several non-destructive techniques on over 30 pictographs to
comprehensively characterize the pigment recipes used to produce the pictographs at Painted Bluff.
Bowen, Corey [25] see Blom, Deborah
Bowen, Corey (Vanderbilt University) and John W. Janusek (Vanderbilt University)
[105]             Hydrologic Power: A GIS Approach to Tiwanaku's Constructed Water Landscape
The conceptual division of urban and rural, like the parallel division of society and nature, consistently dogs attempts to understand the significance of cities
in the highland Andes. Critical approaches to this divide, in fields from geography to literature, have had little impact in reformulating assumptions about
the character of urbanism in this world region. This paper examines the Middle Horizon city of Tiwanaku, located in the southern Lake Titicaca Basin of the
south-central Andes. It emphasizes Tiwanaku’s agropastoral and cosmological production as fundamental elements of the city’s importance as a center of
nucleated residence, recurring ritual, and political influence. Employing GIS analyses of regional hydrology and the city’s engineered water features, the
paper examines the role of water in the city of Tiwanaku itself. Like stone drawn from local mountains, water was not just iconically or ‘symbolically’
important, but its dynamic presence, seasonal flow, and immediate materiality formed a critical foundation for Tiwanaku ritual-political power. The paper
draws on parallels with other highland cities, notably the Late Horizon imperial Inka center of Cuzco.
Bowers, Jordan
[145]             Calculating Moment of Inertia of Spindle Whorls as a Method for Understanding Iron Age Textile Production
Excavations of Iron Age hillfort's in Northwestern Portugal, known as castros, have yielded many spindle whorls, but no extant fabrics due to the nature of
preservation in the region. This leaves the question "what types of textile were produced?" In an attempt to answer this question, I calculate the moment of
inertia (MI) for spindle whorls collected from three different sites in the Ave River Valley. MI represents the angular momentum of a whorl, allowing for the
whorls various characteristics, such as diameter and density, to be considered as a single value. Comparing the calculated MI of each whorl in comparison
with the shape of each whorl, I attempt to establish clear differentiation between the average values for each type of whorl and connect this with different
types of fibers used during the Iron Age in Northwestern Portugal.
Bowers, Kate [187] see DuBois, Erin
Bowman, Robert (University of Alaska Fairbanks; Northern Land Use Research Alaska) and Joshua Reuther (University of Alaska Museum of
the North)
[124]             Environmental Changes in Archaeologically Significant Sand Dunes in Subarctic Interior Alaska
Environmental changes, presently and prehistorically, are important factors which influence the expression of the archaeological record in subarctic sand
dune environments. Current environmental changes (e.g., vegetation loss, shifts in aridity) affect preservation and associative contexts of the
archaeological and paleoenvironmental records. Prehistoric environmental factors and post-depositional changes in these geological settings also played a
role in how humans decided to use dune fields, as well as disturbance to the archaeological record, throughout different local and global climatological
oscillations. This paper will present data collected from several archaeological and non-archaeological locations among dune fields located within the
middle Tanana valley area of interior Alaska. Several stratigraphic records in this region indicate that environmental changes over the last 10,000 years
have influenced both dunal landscapes and the site building processes through vegetation loss, sediment depletion, and other site disturbances. We
discuss how our interpretations and reconstructions of local paleoenvironments and human behaviors are influenced, even distorted, by time and space
scalar issues and geomorphic change within these types of subarctic dunal environments.
Bowman, R Doyle, Thomas Gruber (Open Range Archaeology) and Sonya Beach (Open Range Archaeology)
[140]             UAS Vehicles (Drones) and the Documentation Rock Art Effigies on the Great Plains
The identification and documentation of anthropomorphic rock art effigies on the Great Plains of North America has long been a compelling yet
understudied area of research for archaeologists and anthropologists. The recent advent of new technologies, like UAS vehicles (Drones) have enabled
new ways for researchers to gather data on such sites and identify locations adapting photogrammetric and remote sensing techniques alongside
traditional site documentation practices. The research presented here examines both practical benefits and potential limitations encountered with the use of
a UAS vehicle to document on particular site, the “Penokee Man” horizontal rock art effigy site in northern Kansas. This initial research also explores the
connections between and among similar rock art effigy sites and the relationship of such sites to greater themes of cultural identity and sacred landscapes
on the Great Plains of North America.
Bowser, Brenda [292] see Ozorio De Almeida, Fernando
Boyd, Carolyn [131] see Roberts, Jerod
Boyd, Carolyn (Shumla/Texas State University) and Timothy J. Murphy IV (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                49
[131]             Strat is Where its at: Analyzing and Managing Complex Mural Stratigraphy at Rattlesnake Canyon, TX
Pecos River style murals are highly-ordered, complex compositions of layered figures composed of different pigments. Through analysis of sequential
ordering and stratigraphic relationships of these figures, researchers can gain insights into the technical history of a mural and the artistic and cognitive
processes that led to its creation. The Pecos River style mural in Rattlesnake Canyon spans 32 meters and contains more than 250 finely-executed,
polychromatic figures. Shumla is investigating the technical history of this mural by capturing stratigraphic data through digital field microscopy and
development of Harris Matrices. Using these tools, Shumla is not only developing new standards for identifying and managing layered pigments in complex
rock art murals, it is revealing a sophisticated network of relationships within and among rock art figures. The larger context of mural stratigraphy provides
evidence for a greater complexity of painting style and deliberately executed compositions planned by Archaic hunter-gatherers.
Boyd, Charles (Radford University) and Donna Boyd (Dept. of Anthropological Sciences, Radford Univers)
[247]             Archaeological Inference and the Concept of Culture
To anthropologists (as most North American archaeologists consider themselves to be), the ultimate goal of anthropology is the understanding of human
cultures. Archaeologists define past cultures through the repeated clustering of specific sets and types of material objects and features in space and time.
However, are archaeologists (and cultural anthropologists, for that matter) truly able to reconstruct and “see” that “complex whole” that Edward Tylor
defined as culture in the nineteenth century? In this paper, we describe “culture” as a supranatural concept that is not easily explained or defined through
inferences derived from the observation of material objects or remains. Instead, what archaeologists and other observers of humans are seeing is human
behavior—something that can be observed and quantified to derive patterns. For archaeologists, this behavior can only be modeled by moving through
several levels of inference and cannot be used to define a “culture,” except in a very limited and perhaps stereotypical sense. The term “culture” should
therefore be considered an abstract concept, not an objective reality. We illustrate this point by discussing several archaeological examples of behavioral
change and variability within “cultures” from the southeastern United States.
Boyd , Carolyn [131] see Vermillion, Lindsay
Boyle, Tristan [35] see Webster, Chris
Boytner, Ran [92] see Barnard, Hans
Bracken, Justin (CUNY Graduate Center)
[291]             Ramparts and Channels: Defensive and Hydraulic Architecture at Muralla de León
The ongoing project at Muralla de León is investigating the relationship between defensibility, water control, and emergent social complexity in the Petén
Lakes Region. Located on the shores of Lake Macanché, recent excavations at the site have zeroed in on the imposing rampart which encircles it,
providing evidence for the chronology, as well as the nature, of its construction. Mapping of the site has turned up strong indications of hydraulic
architecture both within and outside of the rampart. Though a relatively small site in terms of area, these constructions represent a massive contribution of
labor, much of which appears to date as far back as the Late Preclassic period. Thus, this work addresses a series of questions: What was the role of
warfare in this era of incipient urbanism among the Maya? How did water control factor in to their spatial planning decisions? What kind of labor budget
was needed to complete the job, and who were these workers and under what arrangement were they laboring in this time of increasing social inequality?
Finally, how were people living in and using the site?
Brad, Chase (Albion College), Brad Chase (Albion College), David Meiggs (Rochester Institute of Technology) and P. Ajithprasad
[134]             Land-use and Social Networking of the Indus Civilization Explored with Stable Isotopes in Faunal Remains
The region of Gujarat was the southernmost extension of the Indus Civilization (2600–1900 B.C.), south Asia’s first experiment with urban society. In this
region, distinctively Indus material culture was made and used at a series of small, monumentally walled manufacturing and trading centers situated along
coastal trade and travel corridors that have often been interpreted as colonies established to facilitate the exploitation of the region’s rich natural resources.
With the decline of Indus urbanism, these centers were largely abandoned, and settlement in the region came to be reorganized around inland towns.
Here, we present stable isotopic data from faunal remains at a series of settlements spanning this period of momentous social change. Providing rich
information on continuity and change land-use and social networking strategies through time, our findings lead to a powerful new perspective on the
socioenvironmental dynamics of the Indus Civilization in this important region.
Braden, Elizabeth (University of Oklahoma)
[145]             Coins of the McGhee Collection
Coins in the ancient world provided a medium for the propaganda of rulers and other influential individuals. Analysis of coins alongside an understanding of
their historical context can reveal their significance. In 2014, the Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History received a donation of assorted Greek,
Roman, and Byzantine coins from Ambassador George C. McGhee. This project analyzes and catalogues these coins by translating their inscriptions and
interpreting their images to determine their age and significance. Presented here is a selection of these coins with their translations, historical context, and
the propagandistic messages they intended to convey.
Brady, James [93] see Poister, Nicholas
Brady, James (Cal State L.A.)
[294]             Reconsidering Sacred Landscape in a Small Depression at Dos Hombres, Belize
Dos Hombres, a Maya site in the Programme for Belize (PfB) conservation area of northern Belize, consists of three large architectural groups aligned in a
north-south direction along a series of knolls. Where the southern end of Group C meets the surrounding bajo, a depression in small knoll protruding from
the bajo yielded evidence of Maya utilization from the Late Preclassic through the Late Classic. The underlying bedrock was modified to create an
amphitheater shape focused on a small cave at the eastern end of the depression. It appears that a termination/desecrations event ended the utilization of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                50
the feature during the Late Classic with the roof of the cave being partially collapsed.
[294]            Chair
Braje, Todd (San Diego State University), Jon Erlandson (University of Oregon), Kristina Gill (University of California, Santa Barbara),
Christopher Jazwa (The Pennsylvania State University) and Nicholas Jew (University of Oregon)
[55]             Social-Ecological Resilience on California’s Northern Channel Islands: The Trans-Holocene Record from Paleocoastal Mariners to
                 Complex Hunter-Gatherers
For more than 12,000 years, the Chumash and their ancestors thrived in a maritime hunting and gathering existence on California’s Northern Channel
Islands. Despite a dearth of terrestrial game, growing populations, and major changes in climate and geography, the resilience of these maritime hunter-
gatherers across the Holocene is remarkable, with only limited evidence for long-term human impacts, extinctions, or abandonment until the arrival of
Europeans. Trans-Holocene archaeological sequences from the islands, coupled with paleoecological records of sea level change, sea surface
temperature fluctuations, and precipitation changes, suggest that the Chumash employed a variety of adaptive strategies, including mobility, resource
switching, socio-political reorganizations, technological innovations, and long-distance trade networks to promote socio-ecological resilience in delicate
island ecosystems. The Holocene history of their relatively sustainable occupation of the islands stands in contrast to the dramatic and rapid collapse of
post-colonial land and seascapes in southern California.
Braje, Todd [296] see Rick, Torben
Brandt, Steven (University of Florida)
[22]             Parting the Late Pleistocene Red Sea: An Introduction to the Session and Region
The Late Pleistocene dispersal of Homo sapiens and “modern human behaviour” through and out of Africa has become a key issue in human evolutionary
studies, largely as a result of intensive archaeological research in southern, and to a lesser extent east and northern Africa. In spite of its remarkably
diverse environments, earliest Homo sapiens fossils and strategic location straddling the postulated “Northern” and “Southern” dispersal routes, the Horn of
Africa (Djibouti/Eritrea/Ethiopia/Somalia) has contributed little to understanding how, where, when, and why Late Pleistocene hunter-gatherer groups left
(and returned to) Africa. Arabia has also suffered from a dearth of archaeological research, in spite of a postulated major conduit (and barrier) to Late
Pleistocene Homo sapiens movements from Africa into Eurasia. Recent surveys/excavations have dramatically altered the region’s Late Pleistocene
archaeological map, and have revealed extensive and surprisingly diverse MSA-LSA/MP-UP lithic assemblages. Here we provide an introduction to the
region and major theoretical/methodological issues the session draws upon to study this lithic variability as a means of reconstructing Late Pleistocene
hunter-gatherer dispersals and demographic changes. We conclude by using lithic variability at Mochena Borago rockshelter to test a theory that SW
Ethiopia was a major environmental/social refugium during OIS 4~72-59 ka.
[22]             Chair
Brannan, Stefan (University of Georgia) and Jennifer Birch (University of Georgia)
[137]            Multiscalar Community Histories: A Tale of Migration, Aggregation, and Integration in the Lower Chattahoochee River Valley
Mississippian archaeology has benefited from historicized approaches which situate communities and their constituent parts within larger socio-political
landscapes, rather than treating them as bounded or normative entities. In this paper, we explore historical and socio-political dynamics within the
community centered upon Singer-Moye, a large (30+ ha) mound center located in the lower Chattahoochee River valley. Our analyses combine
archaeological and geophysical data from mound and off-mound contexts to generate an occupational history for Singer-Moye. This history included initial
occupation at discrete locations, integrative activities, the demarcation of restricted and public spaces, defined residential loci, and episodes of population
aggregation and dispersal. When situated in meso- and macro-regional histories of interaction and exchange, a narrative emerges which illustrates how the
Singer-Moye community contributed to and was influenced by larger processes of socio-political change.
Brantingham, P. Jeffrey (UCLA) and Charles Perreault (Arizona State University)
[69]             Where is the Evidence for Selection?
Few dispute that the Tibetan Plateau represents one of the harshest environments on the planet. It is reasonable to expect that human colonization of the
Plateau entailed exposure to strong selective pressures. Successful colonization of the Plateau therefore implies the development of adaptations in
response to these selective pressures. Genetic, physiological, and morphological data from Plateau populations are consistent with a general model for
biological adaptation under strong selective pressures. By contrast, archaeological data collected over the last two decades is remarkable for the paucity of
evidence suggesting major shifts in behavior and technology accompanied the colonization of the Plateau. With few exceptions, Plateau behavioral
adaptations appear to be close variants of those common in low-elevation settings. Why is there so little evidence for cultural selection? Here we examine
several alternative hypotheses explaining this perplexing problem.
Bratten, John (University of West Florida)
[83]             From Excavation to the Laboratory: A Multi-faceted Analysis of the Emanuel Point Shipwrecks
The first Emanuel Point Shipwreck was discovered in 1992 and the second, Emanuel Point 2, was discovered in 2006. Both of these vessels have been
firmly associated with a 1559 colonization attempt of what we know today as Pensacola, Florida. In addition to the archaeological excavation and historical
research given to both vessels, many specialized types of analyses have been undertaken to paint a more complete image of this sixteenth-century
Spanish endeavor to gain a foothold in La Florida. These have included lead isotope analysis, artifact chemical characterization (NAA, XRF, CIMS, and
GC/MS), ballast characterization (multi-element geochemical analysis and Ar-Ar dating), macro- and micro-botanical identifications, and zooarchaeological
analysis. This paper will present a synthesis of this work, much of it undertaken by graduate students from the University of West Florida.
Braun, David [177] see Hlubik, Sarah
Bravo, Jorge [57] see Delgado, Mercedes
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                51
Bray, Tamara (Wayne State University)
[99]             Partnering with Pots: The Work of Materials in the Imperial Inca Project
New understandings of matter and materiality are being driven by recent theoretical developments in the realm of science, particularly physics and ecology.
These evolving orientations are, in turn, contributing to new philosophical thinking on the nature of being and reality. The trickle-down effects of these
developments are, in part, responsible for what has been termed “the ontological turn,” a trend that is clearly visible in recent archaeological discourse. The
new materialist ontology, in combination with relational and symmetrical approaches to analyzing the social, open the door for imagining ontologies
different from our own. Focusing on the kinds of world-making and world-sustaining practices potentially discernible in the archaeological record may point
us in the direction of alternative ontologies. In this paper, I work from the basis of the imperial Inca ceramic assemblage to consider whether and how such
material entities may have been deployed in the task of empire-building and what insights they may provide into native Andean ontology during the late
precolumbian period.
Breiter, Sarah (University of Sheffield)
[145]            After the Dissolution: The Second Life of Monastic Stones
One of the more dramatic results of the English Reformation was the Dissolution of the Monasteries. Once these institutions were closed and sold off, they
often had a secondary purpose for the new landholders, such as working farms, personal residences, and colleges. In spite of this, much of the
architecture of the original monastery was destroyed, with stone, brick, and metal carted off. This paper focuses on how the stone from monasteries
became a resource in the immediate vicinity of the former monasteries. Using Thornton Abbey in North Lincolnshire as a case study, the displaced
monastic stones were recorded and analyzed based on: their current use, the type of property where the stones were found on, and, if possible, the
original architectural function of the stone.
The study reveals that the stone’s reuse was linked to property type. For example, older, agricultural properties had the largest quantity and variety of
reused stone. This study determines that monastic architectural stone did not go to waste, and was an important resource for the local populations in the
area.
Brennan, Candice
[110]            Prehistoric Subsistence and Settlement Patterns in the Los Alamitos Bay Region of Southern California
The prehistoric population of the Los Alamitos Bay area made significant use of local shell fish resources. Using records of shellfish species found in shell
middens, information about habitats for shell fish species, sea level records for the Holocene, and a detailed topographic model of the region, one can
examine how prehistoric use of the landscape changed as a function of the post-Pleistocene environment.
Brennan, Tamira
[137]            Making Mounds, Making Communities in the Mississippian Period Midwest
Community is an expandable concept, at once representing social groups from scales as small as the household to those as broad as pathways of
communication. This paper highlights the importance of examining archaeological data at these multiple spatial scales, but also at various scales of time, in
order to more fully explore the social and historical processes that directed community development along their varied courses. Examples from several
Mississippian period mound centers in the American and Black Bottoms of southern Illinois (ca. A.D. 1050–1450) illustrate how daily and repeated
engagements between people, places, and things actively made, maintained, or re-forged communities.
Brenner, Mark (University of Florida)
[55]             Discussant
Bretzke, Knut (University of Tuebingen)
[22]             What does the Paleolithic Record of Southeast Arabia Tell us about Hominin Dispersals Out of Africa?
The southern route for human dispersal out of Africa has moved from being a hypothetical idea to being considered a plausible path of human expansion.
Fundamental for this development is the intensified field work in Arabia over the past decade. The stratified Paleolithic assemblages from Jebel Faya in the
Emirate of Sharjah, U.A.E. play a critical role in this context. Given that Jebel Faya is separated from the African coast of the Red Sea by about 2,000 km,
the questions arise: What Jebel Faya can tell us about hominin dispersals out of Africa? Will comparisons of archaeological materials over such distances
allow us to draw conclusions about connections between East Africa and SE Arabia? Using assemblages from my excavations at Jebel Faya as a case
study, I argue in this talk that diachronic studies about hominin behavior, including land use, raw material economy, and intrasite organization,
contextualized within the regional paleoenvironmenal setting provide a promising set of data for the identification of periods of population influx, continuity,
and extinction in the studied region. Building such models for multiple regions along the hypothetical expansion paths would allow us to gain a better
understanding of the complexity associated with hominin expansion processes.
Brewer, Katherine
[65]             Tiles, Tourism, and Museums: Changes in Historic Ceramic Tiles in the Southwest since the Late 19th Century
From the late nineteenth century to the present, Pueblo potters created ceramic tiles for sale to museums, tourists, and trading posts. Analysis of historic
ceramic tiles from collections at the School for Advanced Research and the Museum of Indian Arts and Culture, both in Santa Fe, show a pattern for the
tiles based on comparisons of tile dimensions, including length, width, and diameter, and tile decorations with the cultural affiliation of the artist, the artist
themselves, and the decade in which the tiles were made. The tiles are thus a reflection of change over time and between groups as the demands of Euro-
Americans and museums changed.
Brewer, Jeffrey (University of Cincinnati) and Chris Carr (University of Cincinnati)
[121]            Preliminary LiDAR Analysis and Excavation of Residential Water Features at the Ancient Maya Site of Yaxnohcah, Central Yucatan
The collection, storage, and management of water was an ongoing challenge—and necessary focus—for the ancient Maya, who occupied a physical
environment with a pronounced annual dry season and a general lack of perennial surface water necessary to support and sustain an expansive
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               52
population. The urban center of Yaxnohcah, located within the central lowlands of the Yucatan Peninsula, provides an ideal test case for studying how the
residents of this important Maya center managed their crucial, and ephemeral, water resources. We employ an interdisciplinary approach combining LiDAR
analysis and excavation data to examine the spatial characteristics, cultural modifications, and functional nature of residential-scale water tanks—a little-
investigated component of Maya water management. Small reservoirs were an adaptive component of expanding Middle Preclassic to Classic period
urbanization at the site, and appear to have played a significant role in the unified hydraulic system linking hinterland settlement to the urban core of
Yaxnohcah.
Brewer, Jeffrey [162] see Dunning, Nicholas
Bria, Rebecca (Vanderbilt University)
[56]             Local Ritual and Social Change in the Andean Formative Period at Hualcayán, Peru
Research in the Andes has long focused on how early complex societies performed elaborate rituals in monumental spaces to both organize communities
and establish authority. In pursuing this research for the Formative Period (1800–1 B.C.), comparisons between local ritual practices and the regional
traditions of Kotosh and Chavín have overshadowed the study of how and why communities selectively altered and replaced ritual practices over the long
term. For example, how did different generations modify local rituals to address or enact social change in their community?
This paper explores this question by examining how the people of Hualcayán—a Formative village and temple in highland Ancash, Peru—performed their
rituals over nearly two millennia. It focuses attention on the particular moments in which they modified their ritual spaces and practices, weaving together
evidence from architectural, material, and food analyses. These data are used to illuminate how and why the people of Hualcayán transformed the way
they interacted through ritual, and in consequence, reconstituted their community to emphasize at certain times social integration and at other times
exclusivity and group membership. In so doing, the paper highlights the dynamic relationship between local ritual practice and social change during the
Andean Formative Period.
Briceno, Jesus [122] see Bardolph, Dana
Bridgman Sweeney, Kara [243] see Sweeney, Alex
Briggs, Rachel (University of Alabama)
[225]            The Everyday of the Hominy Foodway: Changing Lifeways During Early Moundville
Between A.D. 1120–1260, in the Black Warrior River Valley of west-central Alabama, a Mississippian identity first began to take shape that ultimately led to
the materialization of the civic-ceremonial center of Moundville. While traditional models hold that feasting played an important role in this process, in this
presentation, I propose that the adoption of an ancestral hominy foodway during this formative period restructured everyday household activities, seasonal
procurement strategies, and other lifeways, many of which are hallmarks of the Mississippian expression made manifest throughout Moundville's history.
To demonstrate this, I draw principally on the results of an experimental archaeological component designed to articulate the everyday experience of
hominy making by utilizing replica materials, as well as the results from a recent ceramic analysis of Late Woodland and Early Mississippian sites within the
Black Warrior River Valley.
Brilliant, Brooke [293] see Young, Stacey
Brin, Adam and Leigh Anne Ellison (Center for Digital Antiquity)
[9]              Beyond Archiving: Synthesizing Data with tDAR
The future of archaeological research is dependent on our ability to synthesize data across sites and leverage both current and legacy data. Asking
questions of regions or clusters of sites where data was recovered over decades or centuries and by multiple researchers becomes difficult without
significant, manually-performed normalization and standardization processes at a great impediment to synthetic research. Beyond archiving, tDAR
provides integration tools to extend the lifespan of archaeological data and promote reuse. This allows users to map and translate data dynamically and
easily bring together data across sites, regions, and quickly iterate over research queries. This poster presentation describes the tool and how it can be
used to pursue synthetic research.
Brin, Adam [261] see Ellison, Leigh Anne
Briones, Claudia [272] see Lanata, Jose
Briseno, Monica [93] see Chickanis, Caius
Britt, Tad
[33]             Discussant
Britt, Krystal (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[289]            The Multi-Kiva Site: Migration and Interaction in Northern Arizona during the Pueblo III Period
The Multi-Kiva site (AZ P:3:112 [ASM]), situated on the Colorado Plateau in Northern Arizona provides insights into the ways that groups interacted and
negotiated their place on the landscape during migration. The Middle Little Colorado River Valley region has traditionally been characterized in the Pueblo
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                53
III (1125–1275 C.E.) period by dispersed pithouse settlements. Recent investigations have illuminated the presence of masonry pueblos in the Middle Little
Colorado River Valley during the P-III period which bear architectural similarities including large, double coursed masonry walls, formalized plaza spaces,
enclosing compound walls, and large room sizes. Even within the context of this recently recognized settlement pattern, however, the Multi-Kiva site
appears anomalous. With an estimated 30-40 rooms and areas of two story architecture, the Multi-Kiva site is thus far the largest pueblo identified in the
region during the P-III period. This paper seeks to contextualize the Multi-Kiva site within larger regional processes of migration and social interaction that
characterized the P-III period.
Britton, Emma
[66]             Results of Petrographic and NAA of Ramos and Babicora Polychromes from Across the Casas Grandes Region
Whereas past studies have suggested that some Casas Grandes polychrome types are more common in some geographic areas than others (see Brand
1935; De Atley 1980; Findlow and DeAtley 1982; Kelley et al. 1999; Larkin et al. 2004 for more complete discussions), these studies have been challenged
as they assume polychromes recovered are made locally, rather than imported from other sites (Douglas 1995; Minnis 1984, 1989). As a result, recent
studies refocus on polychrome production (Carpenter 2002, Sphren 2003, Woosley and Olinger's 1993). In my presentation, I will discuss the results of
petrographic and NAA of polychrome sherds from Sayle's 1936 surface collections, which is geographically extensive, extending from southern New
Mexico, eastern Sonora, to central Chihuahua. Sayle's (1936) collection will be utilized to determine the extent, strength, and directionality of human
relationships across the Casas Grandes region. Characterization studies, like petrographic analysis and NAA, aid in my understanding of variability of
standardization of paste-temper across the region, helping to determine past communities of practice and networks of knowledge. As single method
studies have been most common, in the past, coupling petrographic and NAA data may help clarify many of the intermittent, contradictory interpretations
that currently exist in the literature.
Brock, Fiona [290] see Ostapkowicz, Joanna
Brodie, Neil
[10]             Globalization and Heritage Values
The existence of different heritage values is well-established. For centuries, cultural objects have been looted or stolen because of their heritage value, in
particular because of their value as art objects. Cultural heritage sites have suffered accordingly. In the rapidly globalizing world of the late-twentieth and
early twenty-first centuries, however, a new set of fundamentalist values relating to ethnic and religious identity have been foregrounded, with no less
damaging consequences. Cultural objects are now targeted because of their perceived religious or ethnic affiliations. International public policy has been
slow to recognize this changing terrain of heritage valuation and is struggling to contain the problem. This poster will explore the immanence of
globalization in heritage valuation and the prospects for public policy.
Brodie, Laura [97] see Palumbo, Scott
Brooks, Alison (George Washington University), John Yellen (National Science Foundation), Andrew Zipkin (University of Illinois), Laure
Dussubieux (Field Museum of Natural History) and Potts Rick (Smithsonian Institution)
[13]             Early Worked Ochre in the Middle Pleistocene at Olorgesailie, Kenya
Excavation of the Middle Stone Age site of GOK-1 at Olorgesailie (2001–2011) yielded two pieces of iron-rich rock from a well-developed red soil below a
tuff dated to 220 ka. The soil’s stratigraphic position in the G locality and the associated lithics suggest it is more comparable to some of the earliest Middle
Stone Age sites in nearby Locality B, which date to over 300 ka. The larger rock exhibits grinding striations exposing powdery red pigment. Furthermore,
an incomplete perforation was bored into this stone from two directions. Chop marks in the bases of both opposing holes indicate human agency with a
sharp tool. Chemical analysis was carried out at The Field Museum of Natural History using minimally destructive LA-ICPMS. The results confirmed that
the stones were not grindstones with pigment residue but were themselves pigmentaceous. LA-ICPMS analysis of ochre samples from the nearest source
(Mt. Olorgesailie) showed that the rocks were not derived from this locality. Further analyses of ochre sources in Kenya currently underway may identify a
more distant source of the GOK-1 pigment. This find constitutes the oldest documented transport and utilization of ochre in east Africa, as well as the
oldest attempted perforation.
Brooks, Alison [22] see Yellen, John
Brotherson, David [74] see Stark, Miriam
Brouwer Burg, Marieka
[174]            It Must Be Right, GIS Told Me So! Questioning the Infallibility of GIS as a Methodological Tool
While the benefits of GIS are widely touted among archaeologists today, less attention has been paid to the potential pitfalls and drawbacks of this
undeniably important methodological tool. One of the greatest challenges of geospatial modeling is unbalanced data; due to the nature of the
archaeological record, we can never assume that the remnants of past behavioral processes we are working with constitute a fully representative sample.
Rather, our datasets are reflective of differential social and natural preservation conditions, as well as research biases. Most regional geospatial studies
must collate diverse data collected over decades by researchers with varying backgrounds and goals, using assorted spatial scales and levels of
technological sophistication. Such factors contribute substantial uncertainty to our models, uncertainty that should be recognized, quantified, and mitigated.
If GIS techniques are to continue shifting the way we conduct archaeology and improve our abilities to answer questions regarding past behavior, then we
must question the infallibility of GIS as a methodological tool and direct more attention toward developing robust geospatial applications that can meet the
idiosyncratic needs of archaeological analysis. This paper explores one such example of how such uncertainty investigation can be conducted.
[174]            Chair
Browman, David (Washington University)
[178]            Discussant
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                     54
Brown, Linda A. [27] see Wright, Joshua
Brown, Linda (The George Washington University)
[32]               Communicating Objects and Cultural Preservation among Contemporary Tz’utujil Ritual Practitioners
A unique building (Structure 12) excavated during the early 1990s was interpreted as a divination house serving individuals living in the agricultural
community of Cerén, based on its unusual architectural features and enigmatic artifact assemblage. The latter was composed of bits-and-pieces of mostly
broken, worn, or repurposed items, some of which showed physical evidence suggesting they were collected from a discard context or dated to an earlier
time period. The similarity between this unusual archaeological assemblage, and the practice of collecting sacred materials by contemporary Maya ritual
specialists in the Guatemalan Highlands, formed the basis for my on-going research into the meanings and uses of archaeological materials by descendant
communities. Contemporary Tz’utujil Maya ritual practitioners collect and curate artifacts, as well as other objects, as animate sacred materials. These
charismatic items are attributed aspects of personhood by their human curators, and function as communicating objects. Individuals and sacred objects
enter into reciprocal relationships with one another based on mutual caretaking. In this paper, I focus on how close relationships developed in such
interactions serve an important role in the preservation of traditional Tz’utujil ontologies and cultural knowledge functioning, in the process, to moderate
some of the intrusive forces of globalization.
Brown, Kelly (Simon Fraser University), Barbara Winter (Simon Fraser University), Chen Shen (Royal Ontario Museum) and Dongya Yang
(Simon Fraser University)
[38]               Developing Minimally Destructive Protocols for DNA Analysis of Museum Collection Bone Artifacts
Ancient DNA (aDNA) analysis has revolutionized the field of archaeology with its ability to provide unique and otherwise unattainable information about the
past. However, due to the destructive nature of current aDNA techniques, many museum curators are hesitant to subject their collections to this kind of
analysis. This poster presents a new sampling strategy for obtaining adequate amounts of bone powder from bone artifacts for aDNA extraction, while
minimizing the damage done to the valuable artifacts. A low speed drill should be used as it offers greater control and maneuverability during the drilling
process. This is a major advantage as drilling angle, depth, speed, and pressure are major considerations. X-ray imaging should be used to examine the
internal structure of the artifact in order to asses its stability and to identify the optimal drilling location and depth. We believe that the low drilling speed,
small drill bit size, and the use of X-ray imaging will reduce the likelihood of any unintentional damage being done to the internal or external structure of the
artifact. This strategy has been tested and optimized on many archaeological bone artifacts curated in the SFU Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology and
the Royal Ontario Museum.
Brown, William (Department of Anthropology, University of Washington) and Ben Hanowell (Redfin Corporation)
[38]               Everything is Not Yet Lost: Modeling Taphonomic Bias in a Bayesian Survival-Analytic Framework
The time-transgressive loss of archaeological, paleontological, and other geological deposits to destructive geomorphic processes has been parametrically
modeled by T. Surovell and colleagues (2009), with minor revisions offered by A. Williams (2012). We expand on these modeling efforts in an explicitly
survival-analytic framework, employing analytical techniques tailored to the study of time-to-event processes and data. First, we show that Surovell and
colleagues’ model is in fact a reduced (two-parameter) form of the Lomax survival model. Then we refit this reduced Lomax model through Bayesian
inference to the same terrestrial record of global volcanic deposits employed by Surovell and colleagues and by Williams, basing our parameter estimates
on the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimator and highest-probability credible region. We further expand these modeling efforts by fitting both the two-
parameter Weibull model and its reduced (one-parameter) negative exponential form to the same volcanic data set. Model selection based on the
Bayesian information criterion (BIC) favors the Weibull model over both the negative exponential and the reduced Lomax model. Implications of the fitted
Weibull model for the robust correction of archaeological temporal frequency distributions (tfds) are considered.
Brown, Andrew (University of North Texas), Lisa Nagaoka (University of North Texas), Feifei Pan (University of North Texas) and Steve
Wolverton (University of North Texas)
[65]               An Evaluation of Modeling Soil Moisture and Crop Growth at Fine Spatial Scales in the Mesa Verde Region, Southwestern Colorado
Soil moisture can have profound impacts on crop success and failure. Although soil moisture can be modeled at multiple spatial scales, most studies rely
on remotely sensed data that are at resolutions of 1-km or greater, where soil moisture is averaged or interpolated within spatial units. However, crop
growth can vary considerably across even small distances. The effects of soil moisture on growth variability at finer resolutions have not been thoroughly
studied. Therefore, we are developing a hydrological model to calculate soil moisture at a 10-m resolution. In this study, we evaluate variability in soil
moisture and its impact on crop growth to validate our model in a 15-m by 13-m experimental maize garden located at Crow Canyon Archaeological Center
(CCAC) in southwestern Colorado. Soil moisture and temperature data were recorded from three sensors within the garden; in addition, Leaf Area Index
and physical measurements were taken from the individual maize stalks over the course of one growing season. By evaluating the accuracy of modeled
soil moisture at different scales in comparison to the field collected data, we can further refine and validate the model’s ability to generate an accurate
representation of the potential for crop failure.
Brown, M. Kathryn (The University of Texas at San Antonio)
[109]              Discussant
Brown, Kaitlin (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[110]              Classifying Soapstone Cooking Pots in the Santa Barbara Channel Region
The Chumash manufactured cooking vessels using soapstone from Southern California quarries for thousands of years, especially between A.D. 1500 and
1804. These vessels have been recovered in a variety of shapes and sizes, ranging fin form small cups to large ollas with small orifices that stand over two
feet tall. Hundreds of Chumash soapstone cooking vessels were collected by early antiquarians in California and are curated in museums throughout North
America with little information regarding their provenience. Since the majority of the vessels were recovered from multicomponent sites occupied pre- and
post-European contact, the biggest challenge for archaeologists has been determining when the vessels were intensively used. It is still unclear whether
they were rigorously manufactured pre-contact (before 1542), during the first phase of contact by Spanish explorers (1542–1782), or almost exclusively
during the later mission period (1782–1834). Using a formal typology, these vessels will be seriated to identify their temporal relationship. Radiocarbon
dating will be used to provide context, and data drawn from this analysis will be used to look at change and continuity through time and across space.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 55
Brown, James (Central Washington University), Caitlin Limberg (Central Washington University), Anne Parfitt (Central Washington University),
Patrick Lewis (Central Washington University) and Patrick McCutcheon (Central Washington University)
[148]             A Statistical Analysis of the Spatial and Temporal Components of the Sunrise Ridge Borrow Pit Site (45PI408), Mt. Rainier, Washington
Understanding the change of artifact frequencies through time and across space at the Sunrise Ridge Borrow Pit site is essential to testing hypotheses
about settlement and subsistence in the Pacific Northwest. Some problems associated with intra-site time-averaging were controlled with intensive
chronological analysis and volumetric control of artifact bearing sediments. Initial differences in analyzed artifact frequencies reveal a decrease in
technological diversity and an increase in functional diversity through time. While the differences are intriguing, the effects of time-averaging are obvious as
each temporal component is not comparable in duration. The raw artifact frequency of each component was converted into density data in order to
                                                                                                                              3
compare the volume of excavation per component. The density of artifacts in the upper component is 1,739 lithics per m while in the lower component
                                        3
there is a density of 581 lithics per m . The upper component dates to 2000–1000 cal. years B.P. and the lower component dates to 4000–2500 cal. years
B.P. The greater technological diversity earlier in time and more abundant functional diversity later in time are at least in part a function of significant
changes in the duration of land use between the two components.
Brown, Clifford (Anthropology Dept., Florida Atlantic University)
[163]             Pottery of the Department of Chinandega, Nicaragua: Sequence, External Connections, Ethnicity, and Migration.
I summarize the archaeological ceramics recovered from our excavations in the Department of Chinandega, in northwest Nicaragua. Our analysis is still in
an early stage, and we have studied mainly collections from sites on the coastal plain, in the southern half of the Department. We have found Late
Preclassic ceramic assemblages intimately linked to those described for Quelepa, Chalchuapa, and Santa Leticia in El Salvador. We have also found
Terminal Classic to Early Postclassic assemblages with links to southern Mesoamerica, as illustrated by the presence of Las Vegas Polychrome and
Plumbate ware. We have so far identified only a few examples of Classic Period pottery, such as Chaparrastique Red-on-orange and Campana Fine Line
Polychrome. We have developed a partial ceramic sequence for the region. The links to the Maya area are surprisingly strong in the Preclassic, while links
to southern Mesoamerica continue throughout the sequence. I discuss ceramic evidence for the Epiclassic Chorotega migration to the area.
[163]             Chair
Brown, Erin (Carson National Forest), Linda Popelish (Cibola National Forest) and Steve Owen (Cibola County Historical Society)
[267]             Airway Beacons: Rehabilitation and Interpretation
Early airway beacons, which marked transcontinental flyways, may not be what you first think of when you see the term archaeology but they are a part of
our broader history as a nation, and as historic structures or sites can be eligible for the National Register. In order to preserve a key piece of recent
national history, two Passport in Time projects on the Mt. Taylor Ranger District of the Cibola National Forest focused on airway beacon sites. The
partnership between the Forest Service and a corps of dedicated Passport in Time volunteers sparked an interest in aviation history that unexpectedly took
a firm hold in the small New Mexico community of Grants. The Cibola County Historical Society has worked diligently for the past 3 years to build on the
initial PIT achievements, and continues to do so. The key structure, a federal flight service station, has recently been listed on both the State and National
Registers. Other accomplishments include the recording of multiple beacon locations, the rehabilitation of 2 beacon generator sheds, and the creation of
an interpretive site at the Grants-Milan Airport where a small part of aviation history lives on.
Brown, Alexander (Researcher- ArchaeoTek Archaeology)
[271]             Heated Competition: The Social Role of Hypocaust in Roman Dacia
 This paper explores the social influence in the employment of one aspect of Roman architectural culture, the hypocaust heating system, in the specific
context of Roman Dacia. Hypocaust heating became the prevalent standard for wealthy homes throughout the Empire, but due to the expense was more
commonly employed in a limited fashion, especially in Dacia. As a luxury accommodation, the hypocaust provides a potential proxy for wealth and status
of the resident user. As a luxury that is felt, and not directly seen, this also becomes a proxy for interpersonal social interaction; as opposed to other
architectural embellishments, hypocaust use was dependent on human presence, and size may more strongly indicate used capacity than other types of
rooms.
Comparisons of domestic contexts, both rural and urban, in which hypocausts are found or not found in Roman Dacia can thus help delineate the extent of
social networks that were operating the various economic and political machineries of the province. Following on preliminary investigations in the Mures
Valley Region of Romania, formerly Dacia, the author proposes that the physical ambience created by hypocaust would have influenced the structures of
sociopolitical interactions in Roman Dacia.
Browne Ribeiro, Anna (Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi - CCH) and Helena Pinto Lima
[23]              An Amazonian Crossroads: Results from Pilot Fieldwork on the Xingu-Amazon Confluence, Brazil
The mouth of the Xingu River was an important Lower Amazonian crossroads in colonial-historic times, as attested to in documentary sources. However,
little is known about the rich precolumbian past evinced by extensive terra preta (anthropogenic black earth) and abundant artifact deposits. Here, we
present research aimed at understanding the longue durée of the spatial articulation of cultural and natural systems.
Sited at the entrance to the Xingu River, Carrazedo was a prominent colonial-historic town, which sits atop a 60+ hectare precolumbian terra preta site.
Results from archaeological fieldwork at Carrazedo show that precolumbian sites occur in higher frequency distributions than colonial sites, and occupied
major riverine crossroads as well as inland areas. Hence, though the spatial distributions of settlements overlap, precolumbian habitation patterns exploited
a wider range of ecological localities and left a more significant imprint on the landscape than did colonial-historical settlements.
 This research, pilot work for the region’s first archaeological project, shows the understudied Xingu-Amazon confluence is promising for studying human-
environment dynamics. Additionally, sites like Carrazedo suggest that this crossroads was equally important to pre-colonial exchange networks as to the
early globalizing (1650–1900) world, and that its early-modern relevance may derive from its precolumbian status.
Bruck, Joanna (University of Bristol)
[116]             The Power of Relics: Curating Human Bone in the British Bronze Age
This paper will investigate evidence for the curation of ‘relics’ (pieces of human bone that were deliberately retained over long periods of time) in the British
Bronze Age. Isolated fragments of human bone have frequently been identified in settlement contexts, for example, pits and ditches; they have also been
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               56
found in graves alongside the complete bodies of other individuals. It is widely recognised that Bronze Age artefacts such as jet beads and ceramic
vessels were kept and circulated as heirlooms over many generations. This project will consider evidence to suggest that human remains may have been
treated in similar ways, including fragments of bone shown by radiocarbon dating to be earlier than their final depositional contexts, as well as worked bone
that has been transformed into items of material culture. The possible social implications of these practices will be explored, casting light on how memory,
materiality, and the body were drawn into the definition of social and political identities.
Bruno, Maria (Dickinson College), Katherine Moore (University of Pennsylvania), José Capriles (Universidad de Tarapacá), Andrew Roddick
(McMaster University) and Melanie Miller (University of California, Berkeley)
[122]            Manq'asiñani: Political Dimensions of Foodways on the Taraco Peninsula, Bolivia during the Formative and Tiwanaku Periods
Multi-year excavations at four sites on the Taraco Peninsula, Bolivia have produced rich plant, faunal, ceramic, and isotopic data that shed light on early
foodways in the Lake Titicaca Basin of the Andes. In this paper, we explore the roles food played for the various political entities that emerged and
subsided throughout the Formative (1500 B.C.–A.D. 400) and Tiwanaku (AD.. 400–1100) periods. From the small, autonomous village polities of the earlier
Formative periods to larger, political centers under the sway of the Tiwanaku state: How was food prepared and served in public spaces and how did it
articulate or diverge from daily foodways? How did certain elements such as ingredients, preparation, and presentation vary across these periods and
influence the way political structures motivated local participation and interactions?
Brunson, Katherine (Harvard Fairbank Center for Chinese Studies), Zhipeng Li (Institute of Archaeology, Chinese Academy of Socia) and Rowan
Flad (Harvard University Department of Anthropology)
[180]            The Oracle Bone Project: Tracing the Spread and Development of Oracle Bone Divination in Ancient China
Oracle bones—animal bones used for pyro-osteomantic divination rituals in East Asia—are one of the most important types of bone artifacts in Chinese
Neolithic and Bronze Age archaeological sites and the source of inscriptions containing the earliest writing in ancient China. In the Oracle Bone Project, we
are creating a database of Chinese oracle bones in order to study the origins of oracle bone divination rituals, their spread across Asia during the Neolithic,
the types of animal bones used to make oracle bones, and the ultimate development of oracle bone divination as a central part of Shang Dynasty royal
religious practices. We present the results of our first season of data collection and share the open access multi-language database available on Open
Context (opencontext.org).
Brush, Nigel [112] see Redmond, Brian
Bruxelles, Laurent [220] see Bonnissent, Dominique
Bryce, Joseph [39] see Lambert, Stephanie
Bryce, Joseph (Brigham Young University) and Spencer Lambert (Brigham Young University)
[113]            Food and Family: Comparing Residential Structures at Two Fremont Sites in Utah Valley
Excavations conducted by Brigham Young University’s Field Schools from 2010–2015 have uncovered several examples of Fremont residential
architecture at two sites around Utah Lake. At least five residential structures have been excavated at Wolf Village (42UT273), a site dating to A.D. 900–
1208, while one residential pithouse was uncovered at the Hinckley Mounds site (42UT111). Recent research at these sites has focused on architecture
and the use of space, particularly in regards to communal architecture. This paper seeks to add to these investigations by comparing the faunal
assemblages from the residential structures at both sites and how each was utilizing local lake, marshland, and mountain resources.
Brzezinski, Jeffrey [117] see Joyce, Arthur
Buchanan, Briggs [16] see Hamilton, Marcus
Buchanan, Jozie (Instituto De Estudios Peruanos)
[283]            The Role of Botanicals in the Hierarchy of Panquilma
In this paper, through botanical analysis, I will reconstruct the environmental consumption patterns in the Lurin Valley during the Late Intermediate Period.
To this end, we will compare botanical remains from each of the three sectors of the site. In particular, I will compare the botanical remains from ritual and
domestic contexts, to seek ideas related to hierarchy, identity, and power on the role of women.
Buchanan, Meghan (Indiana University)
[285]            Life in a Mississippian Warscape; Violence and Materiality at the Common Field Site
Analyses and interpretations of Mississippian Period warfare have typically been couched in evolutionary theoretical frameworks that down play, dismiss,
or ignore the impacts of endemic violence on the lived experiences of past peoples. Carolyn Nordstrom (1997) advocates the telling of “a different kind of
war story,” one that focuses on human experiences, tragedies, and creativity during periods of political and social upheaval and violence. In this
presentation, I discuss a framework for studying the intersections of violence and practice in archaeological warscapes enacted in micro-scale actions
(histories or genealogies of practices) and macro-scale regional histories. In the thirteenth century A.D., as palisade construction increased throughout the
Midwest and violent encounters occurred at numerous sites, the Mississippian Period Common Field site in southeast Missouri was destroyed in a
catastrophic conflagration. Drawing on ceramic data from Common Field, I argue that inhabitants of the site engaged in processes of hybridity related to
their changing social, environmental and cosmological interactions during this period of escalating violence in the decades prior to the destruction of the
site.
Buck, Paul (Nevada State College/Desert Research Institute) and Donald Sabol (Desert Research Institute)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  57
[110]             Sub Pixel Detection of Archaeological Materials using NASA Satellite and Aircraft Data
For this NASA-funded project, we examine the detectability of sub-pixel artifacts (i.e., site midden, obsidian artifacts, and pottery sherds) using airborne
and spaceborne image data. We focus on research conducted to date at Glass Mountain Site in northern California. This large obsidian quarry area has
been investigated during winter 2014 and again during the height of vegetation growth 2014. Visible, SWIR, and TIR spectral characteristics of targets and
background were measured in the field. A spectral library has been constructed from ~100 target and background samples. The average density of
                2
obsidian per m has been calculated for ~10 8 x 8 m squares. Image data include: NASA’s MODIS/ASTER airborne simulator (MASTER) imaging system,
the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS), and the advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER). Our
objectives are to: 1) test the detection limits of obsidian artifacts at the sub-pixel scale, 2) examine the influence of background, seasonal vegetation
change, and other on-site changes have for the detectability of obsidian, 3) establish the instrumentation, spatial scale, and spectral bands needed to
improve the detectability, and 4) test predictions of new locations for obsidian artifacts at specific (spatial) densities in other image scenes and ground truth
these predictions.
Buckberry, Jo [103] see Büster, Lindsey
Buckland , Philip [218] see Griffiths, Seren
Buckler, Edward [66] see Swarts, Kelly
Buckley, Michael
[84]              ZooMS Species Identification and its Compatibility with Other Bioarchaeological Methods
The interdisciplinary nature of the tools and techniques available to the bioarchaeologist ranges across the sciences. Most recently, the field of proteomics
within analytical chemistry has been utilised to develop methods of species identification of archaeological materials in a technique that we have been
calling ZooMS, short for Zooarchaeology by Mass Spectrometry. This methodology was initially created for separation of common domesticate vertebrates,
but recent years have seen the development of this technique across a wider range of wild animal taxa, as well as improvements in the high-throughput
potential of the analyses. Most recently, the compatibility of the ZooMS collagen fingerprinting technique with other bioarchaeological methods has been
explored. This paper presents the latest results on the taxonomic resolution of ZooMS collagen fingerprinting, and discussing its advantages and
disadvantages over other methods of species identification available to the archaeologist. It then goes on to highlight examples in which the method has
been applied to tackle archaeological questions in combination with other techniques, including stable isotope, radiocarbon, and ancient DNA analyses.
Practical considerations over this compatibility are discussed.
Buckley, Gina [129] see Hernandez Sarinana, Daniela
Buckley, Gina (The Pennsylvania State University), Rebecca Storey (University of Houston), Kenneth G. Hirth (The Pennsylvania State
University), Douglas J. Kennett (The Pennsylvania State University) and Brendan J. Culleton (The Pennsylvania State University)
[129]             Geographical isotopes, Migration and the Tlajinga District of Teotihuacan
The Tlajinga district was a possible southern entrance for visitors to the city of Teotihuacan. It was also a locus of craft specialization, especially of San
Martin Orange ceramics in the later periods, yet was a cluster of common status neighborhoods. The Tlajinga 33 compound (33:S3W1) was extensively
excavated 30 years ago, and recent excavations in two other compounds located along the southern Street of the Dead by the Tlajinga Teotihuacan
Archaeological Project (PATT), have added to our knowledge about its residents. Oxygen (δ18O) isotope analysis in bone and tooth enamel was
conducted on some Tlajinga 33 skeletons and revealed that about 30 percent were migrants to the city. Recent analyses of the tooth enamel from newly
excavated burials and additional Tlajinga 33 skeletons using oxygen and strontium (87Sr/86Sr) isotope ratios have provided additional insights into the
geographical origins of the residents of the Tlajinga barrio and the reconstruction of changes in residence since childhood. Implications of these new
findings are examined in order to further understand the extent of migration into Tlajinga and the impact this had on maintaining its population.
Budar, Lourdes [216] see Venter, Marcie
Budar, Lourdes (Universidad Veracruzana)
[264]             La Perla del Golfo, puerto prehispánico de Los Tuxtlas.
Desde fechas muy tempranas en Mesoamérica, existe evidencia de navegación y tecnologías asociadas a ella; la mayor parte de este corpus está
constituido por representaciones en estelas, figuras efigie, pictografías, improntas de canoas y algunos artefactos que se cree que fueron utilizados en
estas actividades. La mayoría de los estudios y las propuestas se han enfocado en reconocer las tecnologías, las rutas de intercambio y su papel e
importancia en el flujo de bienes suntuarios y/o utilitarios, dejando de lado las dinámicas sociales, económicas, políticas y de ejercicio de poder que
soportan el desarrollo y la práctica de la navegación. En la zona costera de la Sierra de Santa Marta se ha registrado un conjunto de sitios monumentales
que por sus características y disposición espacial constituyen un complejo portuario activo desde el Formativo Medio hasta el Clásico Tardío. En esta
ponencia se expondrán algunos resultados preliminares de los trabajos realizados en el sitio portuario de la Perla del Golfo haciendo énfasis no en las
posibilidades o evidencias de la navegación, si no en el conjunto de procesos sociales que la circunscriben a partir de la organización espacial, funcional y
administrativa de este puerto prehispánico de Los Tuxtlas.
[216]             Discussant
[264]             Chair
Budd, Tommy (Arizona State University) and Amanda Wissler (Arizona State University)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               58
[181]              Testing Differential Frailty in a Nubian Sample
Periosteal lesions are often used as non-specific indicators of overall levels of stress and health in the past. Using medieval London samples, Sharon
DeWitte (2014) demonstrated that distinguishing between active and healed periosteal lesions can significantly improve our understanding of stress and
differential frailty. She found that healed lesions correlated with higher levels of survivorship when compared to active or no lesions. This study examines
whether such a pattern may be observable in highly different populations and samples. We collected data on periosteal lesions, focusing on active versus
healed status, from a sample of individuals from the Semna South collection housed at Arizona State University. Excavated from a cemetery near the fort
at Semna South in modern Sudan, the remains date to the Meroitic (350 B.C.E. to 350 C.E.), X-Group (350 to 550 C.E.), and Christian (550 to 1400 C.E.)
periods. This study tests the repeatability of DeWitte’s findings on a dissimilar population. Results of the analysis are presented and compared to those of
DeWitte, and implications for future research are discussed.
Bueno, Marilyn [93] see Copeland, Lauren
Bueno, Lucas (Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina) and Andrei Isnardis (Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais)
[139]              Mobility and Territoriality in the Early Peopling of Central Brazilian Plateau
The occupation of Central Brazilian Plateau between late Pleistocene and early Holocene seems to have privileged as displacement axies the fluvial
valleys of the great perennial rivers that crosscut this region. This proposal is based on the existence of sites with similar characteristics, located at great
distances, as the Rio Peruaçu (Minas Gerais state) and the Serra da Capivara (Piauí state), connected to the same hidrografic basin, and presenting same
occupation chronologies. Throughout these main axies of displacement, certain places that are marked by resource diversity and specific landscape
features had been frequently used, with recurrent occupations since the late Pleistocene and continuously throughout the Holocene. Our proposal
emphasizes that such places, that could have been initially selected in function of the available resource diversity in a period of climatic instability, had
passed to be conceived in another way, acquiring a different status during the occupation process of Central Plateau. This “change of status” could be
related to the changing perception that such places are “places of people,” marked with recognizable signs of human agency, mainly represented by rock
art. Such process involves different patterns of mobility and territoriality.
Buffalo, Johnathan [266] see Noldner, Lara
Buffalo, Johnathan (Meskwaki Nation, Iowa, USA)
[266]              Chair
Buhay, William Mark [220] see Chinique De Armas, Yadira
Buhrow, Kristin (Clemson University) and Melissa Vogel (Clemson University)
[92]               Gender, Class and Textile Production: An Analysis of Casma Spindle Whorls from El Purgatorio, Peru
Spindle whorls have historically been subjected to less archaeological attention than other artifact classes. This dearth of analysis may reflect an
underestimation of the insights to be gained from spindle whorls, in terms of archaeological interpretations of gender, status, and exchange patterns, which
may be much greater than previously acknowledged. The case study presented here examines a sample of spindle whorls from the Casma capital city of
El Purgatorio, Peru. We examine their iconographic and functional designs with an eye to understanding these artifacts utilitarian tools, items of personal
adornment, symbols of wealth and status, and possibly as indicators of intrapolity exchange patterns. The results show that many whorls were not only
tools and utilitarian in function, but were also intended to be decorative and perhaps indicators of female wealth or status. The sample studied here also
reflect varying degrees of standardization, suggesting that perhaps they were manufactured by specialists, and supplying insight into Casma state
production practices.
Bukhsianidze, Maia [87] see Coil, Reed
Burchell, Meghan (Memorial University), Natasha Leclerc and David Grant
[185]              Trace Elements in Archaeological Shells: Limits and Potential for Seasonality and Paleoclimate Studies
Stable oxygen isotope analysis of marine shells has increasingly become a common tool used to identify seasonality and reconstruct past sea surface
temperatures (PSST). Oxygen isotope analysis of marine carbonates cannot, however, discriminate between freshwater fluxes and temperature changes
as they both affect oxygen isotope ratios (18O/16O). The inability to discriminate the geochemical data can lead to ambiguous PSST and seasonality
interpretations. Trace element ratios of Sr/Ca are affected in marine organisms by salinity and freshwater, whereas Mg/Ca ratios are specifically affected
by temperature. Trace element ratios can potentially be used to isolate freshwater and temperature changes, and provide more reliable PSST estimates for
sites located in estuarine settings or in areas with high seasonal freshwater discharge. For this project, we used live-collected shells to examine
geochemical properties of Saxidomus gigantea (butter clam), one of the most commonly recovered bivalves from shell middens on the Pacific Northwest
Coast to test the limits and potential of trace element analysis to resolve archaeological questions of seasonality and past sea surface temperatures.
Burga Gil, Fiorella (Fiorella M. Burga)
[254]              Cambiando visiones. La Puesta en Valor como medio de Conservación de un sitio arqueológico. El caso de Cerro Azul
¿Es posible implementar una puesta en valor sin necesidad de realizar grandes intervenciones arquitectónicas y remociones de material? Esta ponencia
busca mostrar un plan de puesta en valor, que basado en el uso del sitio como espacio público sea a futuro el soporte de actividades de desarrollo social
sostenible y participativo.
“El Huarco” (Cañete, Perú), sitio Inca con arquitectura monumental, cuenta con un incalculable valor histórico y turístico, indudablemente representa un
eje potencial de desarrollo social, no solo a nivel regional sino nacional. Su puesta en valor, se logrará mediante el engranaje de diversos factores: el
aprovechamiento de circuitos pre-existentes, el uso del turismo recreacional y educativo; y el apoyo de los actores locales.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  59
Sin embargo, los diagnósticos realizados muestran un sitio amenazado por diversos agentes: naturales y antrópicos, afectando severamente sus
estructuras. Aunque estos limitan su puesta en valor, creemos que una propuesta de puesta en valor integral dentro de los esquemas participativos,
comunales y sostenibles que caracteriza el proyecto Qhapaq Ñan Peruano, convertirán al sitio en vehículo del desarrollo social, sin incurrir en onerosos
gastos, enfocándonos en el uso del sitio como espacio público, recuperando sus significados locales y resaltar sus potencialidades sociales.
Burger, Richard (Yale University)
[31]              Revisiting the Chronology of Chavin de Huantar
Chavin de Huantar continues to play a central role in our understanding of the Central Andes during the Initial Period and Early Horizon and thus an
understanding of its chronological position remains crucial. This talk will present a critique of the contribution of recent work at Chavin to this theme,
including a consideration of both ceramic and radiocarbon sequences. A new set of radiocarbon measurements based on the analysis of animal bone from
the residential sector will be presented and used to evaluate conflicting interpretations regarding the history of the site.
Burger, Richard [57] see Salazar, Lucy
Burgos, Walter [212] see Barrios, Edy
Burgos , Walter [212] see McNeil, Cameron
Burham, Melissa (University of Arizona) and Danielle Phelps (University of Arizona)
[236]             Defining the Spatial to Find the Social: Applying Generative Planning Theory and GIS to Distinguish Communities at Ceibal, Guatemala
While residential zones in many Mesoamerican cities were perceptibly defined by physical boundaries, the spatial division of Maya urban centers is not
very clear. Following empirical urban theories outlined by Michael Smith (2010; 2011), we employ generative planning theory as a framework for defining
residential zones in the peripheries of Ceibal, Guatemala. We believe that physical zones likewise represent social boundaries, in this case, local
communities that comprised the larger Ceibal polity. Like many lowland Maya sites, Ceibal grew into an urbanized center in the Late Preclassic (ca. 350
B.C.–100 B.C). During this time, numerous minor temples were constructed in peripheral areas, and clusters of residential structures were built
contemporaneously around them. Ritual was clearly an important consideration for outlying populations during Ceibal’s urban expansion. We suggest
these temples were the physical and ideological epicenters of local communities, which were fostered through monumental construction and subsequent
ritual practices. While some houses are clearly associated with the temples, the physical limits of the communities are uncertain. To supplement the
analysis, we employ GIS to identify related architectural groups. This case study more broadly explores the potential of generative planning theory for
understanding the spatial and social organization of ancient Maya cities.
Burke, Chrissina [65] see Nowakowski, Joshua
Burke, Chrissina (Northern Arizona University) and Joshua Nowakowski (Northern Arizona University)
[65]              Dog Burials and Healed Cranial Lesions: Exploring the Human-Dog Bond in the American Southwest
Since the initial domestication of the dog, humans and their canid companions have maintained a close connection. Dogs have been employed as hunters,
beasts of burden, mousers, refuse disposers, ritual guardians, and for emotional support. Also, given their physical size and profile, dogs have often been
considered an animal underfoot. Despite dogs’ myriad working conditions, zooarchaeological research illustrates a non-random pattern of cranial lesions to
prehistoric domesticated dogs from many sites around the world. In consideration of this, the authors studied over 50 dog burials from the Museum of
Northern Arizona’s curated faunal collection. Skeletal material from the dog burials were examined for age, sex, size, burial orientation, mortuary context,
and skeletal pathologies. In this poster, we address the results from these examinations with specific focus on the cranial lesions and explore the possibility
that the human-dog relationship led to these injuries.
Burke, Ariane (Université de Montréal), Masa Kageyama (Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l'Environ), Guillaume Latombe (Monash
University), Mathieu Vrac (Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l'Environ) and Patrick James (Universite de Montreal)
[211]             Risky Business: The Impact of Climate Variability on Human Populations in Western Europe during the Last Glacial Maximum
The extent to which climate change has affected the course of human evolution is an enduring question. The ability to maintain spatially extensive social
networks and fluid social structure allow human foragers to “map onto” the landscape, mitigating the impact of resource fluctuation. Together, these
adaptations confer resilience in the face of climate change—but what are the limits of this resilience and what is the role played by climate variability? We
address this question by testing how climate conditions and climate variability, which we consider a proxy for environmental risk, affected the distribution of
human populations living in western Europe during the Last Glacial Maximum. The mechanisms used by foragers to counter resource failure come at a
cost and the ability to make accurate predictions about the availability of resources helps foragers avoid costly mistakes. Climate variability, therefore, is a
potentially significant risk factor since it affects the distribution of plant and animal resources unpredictably. Here, we quantify the sensitivity of human
systems to this potential risk factor at a variety of spatial and temporal scales.
Burkholder, Jo (University of Wisconsin - Whitewater)
[206]             Investigating Rock Art in the Coastal Valleys of Arequipa
Rock art takes on a diversity of forms in the coastal valleys of Arequipa ranging from pictographs and petroglyphs to larger geoglyphs and rock alignments.
This poster documents initial steps being taken to document and understand the contributions of all forms or rock art to the sacred geography and cultural
landscape of this region before, during, and after the Middle Horizon Period (400–1000 A.D.) Techniques being used include photo documentation,
mapping, and viewshed/intervisibility analyses.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                60
Burks, Jarrod (Ohio Valley Archaeology, Inc.)
[34]              Variability in Large-Area Magnetic Surveys at Hopewell Earthworks and the Challenges of Big Data
Many Ohio Hopewell earthworks present an interesting challenge to archaeological geophysics: they are very large and contain vast amounts of what
seems to be empty space. Both have limited our understanding of the breadth of the archaeological record at these complex sites; that is, until very
recently. Large-area surveys at three Hopewell earthwork complexes in Ross County, Ohio (Hopewell Mound Group, High Bank Works, and Hopeton
Works, ca. 30 ha each), have uncovered a wealth of new features, from large pits and lightning strikes to wood henges and new earthen enclosures. In this
presentation I explore the range of new finds and some of the challenges, and solutions, to working with large amounts of geophysical data. The results of
today’s geophysical surveys will be the stuff of research designs for decades to come.
[34]              Chair
Burnett, Paul (SWCA Environmental Consultants), Erik Otarola-Castillo (Purdue University) and Lawrence Todd (Park County Historic
Preservation Commission)
[115]             Improving Discovery-Based Probability Models for the Shoshone National Forest, Wyoming
Site prediction models continue to contribute useful information to the management of archaeological resources. For example, since 2009, we have
developed several probability models for the Shoshone National Forest. The first model was used to guide inventory of areas burned in wildland fires to
rapidly appraise archaeologically sensitive areas. The model was overhauled in 2015 to cover the entire Shoshone National Forest. Until now, we have
used stepwise logistic regression to identify environmental parameters significantly contributing to site presence/absence. This approach has been
successful. However, opportunities for model improvement remain. First, the stepwise regression procedure can be affected by the happenstance of a
particular random sample. In addition, estimates of model parameters can be heavily biased due to sample area coverage and its resulting spatial
autocorrelation. We improve on this process by employing new statistical techniques guarding against pseudoreplication of variables by modeling and
accounting for the observed autocorrelation in the site/nonsite sample. Secondly, rather than relying on stepwise selection of a variety of environmental
parameters for inclusion in the model, we employ environmental parameters that we interpret as conditioning site presence/absence. We use the Akaike
Information Criterion to identify the best model.
Burnett, Katherine (Fort Irwin), Armando Abeyta (Fort Irwin), Jessica Mauck (Fort Irwin) and Amber Fankhauser (Fort Irwin)
[245]             An Overview of the Distribution of Clovis/Great Basin Concave Base Projectile Point Sites at Fort Irwin, San Bernardino County, California
Fort Irwin is a United States Army installation located approximately 37 miles northeast of Barstow, California, in the central Mojave Desert. Totaling 1,193
square miles in size, this installation has a wide variety of archaeological resources including at least four sites with recorded Clovis/Great Basin Concave
Base projectile points and several isolated finds identified as Clovis points. The goal of this study, conducted by Redhorse Corporation on behalf of the Fort
Irwin Cultural Resources Program, is to integrate data on these projectile points from a variety of legacy collections, academic publications, and cultural
resources management reports with new data from Fort Irwin’s archaeological collections into a GIS layer. In this paper, we will provide an overview of the
distribution of Paleoindian points within various landscapes at Fort Irwin, particularly focusing on resource exploitation. Compiling this data into a GIS layer
that can be used to investigate a variety of research questions is the first step in Redhorse’s plan to build a geodatabase that features a layer on each of
the Mojave Desert chronological periods represented at Fort Irwin with the ultimate goal of providing a tool that can be useful to researchers and land
managers.
Burns, Jonathan [176] see Welker, Martin
Burroni, Daniela [214] see Donahue, Randolph
Burt, Chadwick K. [18] see Walker, William
Burtt, Amanda [123] see Scheiber, Laura
Burtt, Amanda (Indiana University), Alex Badillo (Indiana University), Lindsey Kitchell (Indiana University) and Gary Motz (Indiana University)
[176]             Identifying Canid Tooth Modification: A Side-by-side Comparison of 3D Imaging Techniques
In this paper, we evaluate the efficacy of two methods, namely photogrammetry and 3-D laser scanning, for the purpose of identifying cultural modification
of bone, specifically canid teeth. Instances of dogs with altered canine and carnassial teeth have been observed in Plains Native American archaeological
assemblages as well as in the ethnographic record of the Late Prehistoric era. The identification of this type of cultural modification will help interpret ways
in which animal and human interactions have changed through the past. We use a comparison of two prevailing imaging techniques to compare how
accurate they are for measuring degrees of destruction of canid teeth in order to identify evidence of cultural modification. We aim to demonstrate that this
particular type of modification has a unique morphological signature that can fit within a likelihood model in order to determine a quantified basis for the
evaluation of the presence of cultural modification. This methodology will lay the groundwork for examining other assemblages in hopes of detecting
modification of canid teeth that have not previously been identified as such. Canid remains from two sites in Wyoming are used as examples of culturally
modified dentition in dogs.
Bush, Dominic and Mark Schurr (University of Notre Dame)
[112]             Using Stable Isotope Analysis to Demonstrate Humans' Role in Faunal Diet Construction at the Collier Lodge Site (12PR36)
Previous research on the faunal assemblage recovered from the Collier Lodge site (12PR36) centered on the presence and absence of taxa to reconstruct
a possible diet breadth for inhabitants of this historic Indiana site. However, the focus of this year’s research is the inferences drawn from stable isotope
analysis of said assemblage; specifically, the ratio of 12C to 13C and 15N to 14N. The former provides insights into the source of carbon obtained through
diet, while the latter gives clues to an organism trophic level based on the transfer of nitrogen. This kind of analysis is used to create a food web for the
fauna, both domestic and wild, that inhabited 12PR36. The δ13C and δ15N, where δ represents the ratio of the previously mentioned isotopes compared to
a standard, will be used to determine the role of humans in the diets of the fauna analyzed. Ultimately, it will be shown to what effect animals were relying
on human scraps and agriculture for dietary purposes.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 61
Büster, Lindsey (University of Bradford, UK), Ian Armit (University of Bradford), Laura Castells Navarro (University of Bradford), Jo Buckberry
(University of Bradford) and Rick Schulting (University of Oxford)
[103]            A later Prehistoric Mortuary Complex on the Moray Firth: The Covesea Caves, NE Scotland
The Sculptor’s Cave in NE Scotland is known for its Late Bronze Age and Roman Iron Age human remains, which were unearthed during excavations in
1928–30 and 1979: the former suggest the curation and display of (possibly fleshed and adorned) juvenile heads, while the latter indicate the practice of
decapitation of (predominantly adult) individuals inside the cave. These remains are being analysed as part of a project at the University of Bradford to
reanalyse and publish the excavation archive. In addition, recent fieldwork at an adjacent cave (Covesea Cave 2) is beginning to reveal similar evidence to
that from within the Sculptor’s Cave, suggesting that the latter was not unique but part of a larger mortuary landscape along this stretch of the Moray
coastline. This paper will examine preliminary findings from the Covesea Cave assemblage, with evidence for excarnation, trauma, selective redeposition,
and processing of certain skeletal elements, in what could be considered a ‘chaîne opératoire’ of later prehistoric mortuary practice, and will compare this
from what is already known from the Sculptor’s Cave and elsewhere in Britain and Europe.
Butler, Virginia L. [35] see Catto, Lisa
Buvit, Ian
[150]            The Middle Upper Paleolithic of the Transbaikal, Russia: Ice Age Humans in Southern Siberia
The Last Glacial Maximum (LGM, 26-20 kya) was a time of reduced global temperatures. Southern Siberia, where decades of Paleolithic research have
demonstrated a keen link between environment and middle Upper Paleolithic hunter-gatherer behavior, offers a unique testing ground to examine various
ecologically sound models about whether human populations declined or disappeared during the height of the last ice age. Other unanswered questions
have to do with the origin and dispersal of microliths in the area. Here, we discuss evidence for and against LGM occupation of the Transbaikal Region with
an emphasis on radiocarbon dating and technology. Included is an introduction to Lagernaya, an apparently pre-LGM site where excavations are going on
to address questions about the topic.
[120]            Chair
Buvit, Ian [120] see Chenvert, ErinMarie
Buzon, Michele R [24] see Whitmore, Katie M
Byambaa, Gunchinsuren [180] see Ciolek-Torello, Richard
Byers, David (Utah State University) and Suzann Henrikson (Bureau of Land Management, Burley, Idaho Field Off)
[113]            Bison, Cold Storage and Holocene Climate Change on the Snake River Plain
Over the past several years, efforts to expand our knowledge of the Holocene climate of southern Idaho have been initiated through analyses of the
relationships between bison remains recovered from seven cold lava tubes on the eastern Snake River Plain and several paleoenvironmental indicators.
Although the mere existence of these unique storage features would suggest that they would always be utilized, we suggest the key variables associated
with such use would revolve around fluctuations in temperature and precipitation that resulted in variation in bison encounter rates. Preliminary data
indicate that such climatic shifts were of significant magnitude to have negatively influenced the availability of bison during hotter, drier periods. We argue
that this patterned motivated the storage of bison products in lava tubes containing year-round ice as a risk-mitigation strategy designed to reduce the
variance in the availability of important nutrients during times of environmentally-induced resource stress.
Byrd, Julia (Florida Bureau of Archaeological Research)
[290]            The Original Spaghetti Junction: Using Canoe Locations to Trace Routes of an Ancient Transportation Network in Florida
This paper presents results of spatial analysis on Florida’s 400 dugout canoes recorded in the Florida Bureau of Archaeological Research’s canoe
database. Patterned concentrations of canoes located at the edges of basins suggest that prehistoric people had a system of drop-off points, where
canoes were left for later use. Such a system is consistent with ethnographically recorded canoe-use practices among indigenous peoples in Florida and
beyond. Drop-off points represent important places on the riverine landscape, marking the interchanges that connected communities from neighboring
regions. This model of specific canoe routes is testable and has the potential to be used as a guide to find and protect ancient canoes.
Byszewski, Berenika [226] see Spears, Michael
Cabana, Graciela [111] see West, Frankie
Cabaniss, Andrew (University of Michigan) and Kristen Mann (University of Sydney)
[189]            A Bayesian Framework for Combining Architectural Constraints and Artifact Assemblages in Domestic Spaces
Twentieth century excavations contributed greatly to our knowledge of domestic contexts throughout the Aegean. These excavations occupy a broad
spectrum in terms of sampling strategy, data collection quality, and publication extent. Architectural studies of household behavior have received particular
attention, and explorations of settlement social organization through household archaeology are ongoing. Yet few methodologies explicitly address this
issue of diverse publication levels and variation in data quality or excavation methodology.
To address this gap, we construct a Bayesian framework for systematically integrating artifact data with constraints that the built environment can impose
on household activities. By unifying possibilistic constraints with the creation of probability distributions, we can assess the deviation of the artifact
distribution from possible use contexts so as to estimate a minimum bound on the effect of depositional and taphonomic processes in creating the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 62
observed material record. The resulting probability distributions of activities in space can be compared across houses using non-parametric measures to
investigate spatial specialization and organizational variation between houses.
We use this technique to compare houses between three sites in the Aegean at different stages of urbanization in order to elucidate changes between the
domestic and civic spheres during the Archaic period (800–500 B.C.E.).
Cadena Guativa, Angel Adolfo (A. Cadena)
[14]              Acercamiento a las Opciones Técnicas en la Elaboración de Cerámicas Tempranas del Caribe Colombiano: Estudio Tecnológico de los
                  Sitios Puerto Hormiga y Monsú
Las cerámicas tempranas del Caribe Colombiano (5000 a 1000 a.C.), las más antiguas del continente, son importantes en la formulación de hipótesis
sobre origen y producción de alimentos en América. Esta investigación plantea un estudio tecnológico de cerámicas de Puerto Hormiga y Monsú
desarrollando tres actividades. Primero, se determinaron las propiedades físicas y mineralógicas mediante técnicas de laboratorio (RX, petrografía, SEM,
y DRX). Segundo, se comprobaron hipótesis sobre su función. Tercero, se identificaron de manera inicial algunos de los componentes de la cadena
operativa.
Cain, Tiffany [54] see Diserens, Kasey
Cain, Tiffany (University of Pennsylvania)
[221]             Intersubjectivity and a Theory of Actively Engaged Heritage Practice
Engaged heritage practice locates its core around the reflexivity of its practitioners and the dialogic nature of its projects. Indeed, the relevance of heritage
work is arguably inextricable from its capacity to recognize the needs and interests of both researchers and community members, however defined. Those
needs and interests can be better addressed if we look more critically at the subjectivities of participants and non-participants in our projects, ourselves
included. This paper proposes that an action-oriented exploration of intersubjectivity may bolster theoretical works surrounding cultural heritage practice. In
doing so, I turn particular attention to the wanting discussion surrounding gender in stakeholder-focused archaeological heritage work. I suggest that one of
the reasons gender in heritage practice is understudied is that practitioners have, for important social and political reasons, had to contend with the role
and impact of other subjectivities like race and class first. Drawing on field experience in Quintana Roo, Mexico, I consider the gendered dimensions of
fieldwork and the limitations of particular methodologies and interpretative frameworks, particularly the highly masculinist representations of historical
violence and tendency toward discussions of economic sustainability as the prominent value of community-based participatory research projects.
[221]             Chair
Cajigas, Rachel (University of Arizona)
[120]             Magnetic Gradiometry in the Spatial Reconstruction of the Early Agricultural Period Canal System at La Playa, Mexico
La Playa (SON F:10:3), in Sonora, Mexico, is an Early Agricultural Period (2100 B.C.–A.D. 50) archaeological site which has the remains of an irrigation
canal system. The Early Agricultural Period is characterized by the development of agriculture in the southwestern United States and northwestern Mexico.
Due to severe erosion at La Playa, intact canals and cultivated soils had not been located for study. Magnetic gradiometry was used to detect intact
agricultural features buried by alluvium. This paper presents recent magnetic data from La Playa. Intact irrigation canals, water retention features,
reservoirs, and possible cultivation plots were successfully identified using this method. This data set has significantly contributed to the understanding of
land management strategies by imaging the extent and morphology of the canal network and relationship to other agricultural features. Data from this
survey will guide future sampling strategy and archaeological testing. This technique has changed future excavation strategies from those which focus
primarily on salvage archaeology, to strategies which can incorporate the testing of specific archaeological features before they are destroyed by erosion.
Calaon, Diego (Marie Curie Fellow, Stanford, US - Ca' Forscari Venezia, I)
[161]             “L’Isola che non c’è”. Narratives about 8th Century Venice / Malamocco
Venice in the eighth century was a key trade centre in the Mediterranean. Between 742 and 812 A.D. the centre of Venice was not located were it is today.
The Duke’s palace and his headquarters were in Malamocco Island. Malamocco is a never-never land (“Isola che non c’è”): its location on the lagoons has
never been positioned accurately, and traditional archaeology methods have failed in the description of the materiality of the site. How can modern
archaeology fill this gap and project a holistic research around a pivotal site of the medieval Europe? GIS analyses allow identifying the location of the
settlement. Comparisons with other lagoon sites permit a tentative material reconstruction. A comprehensive environmental approach will help to define the
sustainability of the site and the reasons of its abandonment. Modelling activities will encourage the reconstructions of the settled areas, and ideas about
the social structure of the first Venetian communities. An anthropological and sociological reassessment of the political narratives will shed light on the
interpretation of old archaeological excavated material. Finally, the analysis of the perception of the first Venice among the nowadays Venetians, will advise
us on how to tell the story of the Malamocco never-never land.
Cali, Plácido [70] see Sallum, Marianne
Callaghan, Michael [27] see Kovacevich, Brigitte
Callaghan, Michael (University of Central Florida)
[109]             Discussant
Calleja, Maryann and Debra Martin
[143]             Using GIS to Analyze the Mortuary Context and Taphonomy of the Bronze Age Commingled Tomb at Tell Abraq
The archaeological site of Tell Abraq (UAE) has been the subject of multiple studies since its original excavation by Dan Potts. For five seasons between
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 63
1989 and 1998 a team of archaeologist excavated the Bronze Age site. The analysis of mortuary context and taphonomy can provide invaluable insights
into past biological and cultural conditions. The use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) can facilitate bioarchaeologists in the further investigation of
mortuary placement of human remains and taphonomic processes. The excavation of the tomb—by Debra Martin from 1993 to 1998—containing the
commingled remains of more than 400 adults and children, predated the widespread use of commercial GPS technology. This study revitalizes old data by
transforming handwritten documentation into a digital format more compatible with GIS software. This modification enables us to perform modeling of the
tomb and detailed spatial analyses. Through the use of GIS modeling we are able to gain a clearer picture of the tomb, thus enhancing our ability to
discover patterns in taphonomy or mortuary practices at Tell Abraq.
[143]              Chair
Camacho-Trejo, Claudia
[294]              Cincalco: Origin and Kingship in Mexica Cosmology
In prehispanic times, caves signified the place of origin, the underworld, or where Tlacamecayotl kingship was claimed. Cincalco, a cave located on
Chapoltepēc Mountain, was first recorded in the sixteenth century Historia Toltec-Chichimeca (1550–1560) as being appropriated during 1156 or 1168
after the fall of Tollan. Toltec legend tells that the last king of Tollan, Huemac (Big Hand), committed suicide at the cave after failing to receive help from the
gods. At the approach of the Spanish, Moctezuma Xocoyotzin was supposed to have tried to join Huemac in the cave but was denied access by the latter.
The Mexicas may have used Cincalco to associate themselves with the Toltecs. The relation between Mexicas and Cincalco started with Moctezuma I,
when the first portraits of the Mexica tlatoani was carved at the foot of the mountain. This is described by Diego Duran in his Historia de las Indias de
Nueva España y Islas de Tierra Firme (1581). This paper reports on the cave and its importance to Mexica cosmology.
Camens, Aaron [223] see Clarke, Geoff
Cameron, Catherine [53] see Lekson, Stephen
Campan, Patricia [207] see Belardi, Juan
Campbell, Wade (Harvard)
[66]               A Petrographic Analysis of Jemez Black-on-white Pottery from Five Classic Period Sites in the Jemez Province, New Mexico (c. 1350–1700
                   A.D.)
Unlike many other ceramic types in the American southwest, Jemez Black-on-white is commonly regarded as a distinctive locally-made type that remained
both stylistically and compositionally unchanged for three centuries. This generally accepted status of Jemez Black-on-white, however, has meant that until
recently, little additional work has been done to better understand its origins and development. Here, I present the results of a petrographic analysis of 15
Jemez Black-on-white sherds taken from five separate Classic Period (c. 1350–1700 A.D.) Puebloan sites in the greater Jemez Valley, New Mexico. This
work aims to expand the existing knowledge of Jemez Black-on-white ceramic production practices and provide a basis for future arguments concerning
the non-centralized local production of Jemez Black-on-white versus a higher degree of subregional organization/control of ceramic production in the
Jemez region.
Campbell, Janice, Jennifer Wildt (Prentice Thomas & Associates, Inc.) and Prentice Thomas (Prentice Thomas & Associates, Inc.)
[164]              Strategic Factors in Middle and Late Woodland Settlement Patterns on East Peninsula, Tyndall Air Force Base, Bay County, Florida
Data derived from archaeological investigations at Tyndall Air Force Base in northwestern Florida suggest strategic decision-making in settlement patterns
during the Middle and Late Woodland periods. The installation occupies prime property on a northwest/southeast-trending peninsula that extends for 18
miles along the Gulf of Mexico and is between two and three miles wide. This small coastal stretch with minimal relief was the scene of increasingly
intensive settlement beginning with the construction of burial mounds and villages by Middle Woodland Swift Creek people. In the Late Woodland period,
Weeden Island occupants established larger mounds and villages in close proximity to the earlier settlements. Based on radiocarbon dates and
assemblage traits, researchers believe the Weeden Island sites reflect a settlement shift by the same population. This paper examines evidence
suggesting the large population centers were deliberately established at strategic locations offering both coastal prominence and vantage points for any
group approaching the peninsula by water.
Campbell, John (Memorial University of Newfoundland)
[190]              Kaskisebook Tett L’nuk—People on the Edge of the Riverbank: New Perspectives of the Transitional Archaic from the Annapolis River,
                   Nova Scotia
Recent excavations at the Boswell Site (BfDf-08) in southwestern Nova Scotia have yielded a unique assemblage of Transitional Archaic artifacts. Dating
to 3,630 ± 30 B.P., the Boswell Site provides important insights into population movements during this period in Maine and the Maritime Peninsula.
Previous archaeological investigations have led to debate concerning the relative importance of cultural diffusion and migration in the southern origins of
broadpoint technology. By comparing artifacts from the Boswell Site to collections in Maine, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia, while considering the use-
life of lithic technology through the framework of landscape ethnoecology, an integration of lithic analysis, site location, and traditional knowledge is
proposed. In addition, this research explores the migratory movements of Transitional Archaic peoples throughout Maine and the Maritime Peninsula, not
only within the currently accepted geographic framework, but also including a northern extension that has not been previously considered.
Campbell, Roselyn (University of California, Los Angeles)
[215]              Smiting Pharaohs: Violence and Power in Ancient Egypt
Violence against the physical bodies of both the living and the dead provides a powerful way to create and reinforce power dynamics, modify and maintain
social roles, and to structure identity groups. The human body has been used as a canvas for violent messages both in modern communities and in past
societies. Throughout the long history of ancient Egypt, violence against foreigners and prisoners of war was regularly depicted in art that was intended to
demonstrate the king’s dominance over enemies and forces of evil. Many have assumed that such depictions of state-sanctioned violence were purely
symbolic, but there is evidence to suggest that ritualized killing did take place in ancient Egypt for a variety of reasons. This evidence spans much of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                64
Egyptian history, from the hundreds of subsidiary, apparently sacrificial, burials accompanying the tombs of the earliest Egyptian kings, to the bound body
buried at a temple in southern Egypt a millennia later. Violence seems to have been a valid method of communicating power relationships both between
Egyptians and outsiders, and within Egyptian society itself. This paper will examine how the ancient Egyptians used violence to negotiate and reinforce
social relationships through the medium of the human body.
Campbell, Jennifer (SUNY Potsdam)
[221]             Gendered Heritage: Interspaces and Intersubjectivity
Ideally, the intersubjectivity of heritage work creates space for the interaction of multiple gendered viewpoints maintaining a collective tension where
heritage work flourishes in consideration of multiple lens, multiple meanings, and multiple gendered interpretations. The reality, however, is much further
from the rhetoric. In medieval South Asia gender performance was a habituated component of the collective and individual social project. It remains so
today. In this paper, I work to consider the production of heritage, the engagements and motivations of heritage stakeholders, and to focus specifically on
the life histories that develop around heritage places. Heritage sites are not static or rigid constructs—they are fluid and dynamic. How we study such
dynamism is fundamentally shaped by our epistemological project and our own subjectivities. Heritage work deals with powerful past-negotiation and is an
active site for the enactment of gendered identities and the projection of present gendered perceptions onto the past. Looking to medieval trade and transit
systems and their maintenance today as heritage sites, I attempt to recast this work in consideration of gender; examining how the social construction of
gendered practice shapes the heritage project(s) I engage in and forms space within my research for gendered analyses.
Campbell, Rod (Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, NYU)
[256]             Discussant
Campetti, Casey (AECOM/Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[197]             High and Dry: A Look at the Relict Nipissing Shoreline of Isle Royale National Park, Michigan
Isle Royale, located in northern Lake Superior, is a freshwater archipelago and home to Isle Royale National Park (ISRO). Though the antiquity of Isle
Royale’s prehistory is well-established, identification and excavation of sites has historically been difficult due to the remoteness of the island and its rough
terrain. Over the past several years, these efforts have been greatly enhanced by the use of GIS predictive modeling, which has allowed ISRO
archaeologists to target surveys and manage archaeological sites more effectively. Though existing models have been in part based on geological
research and environmental conditions, they have largely been ‘intuitive’ models. There are further opportunities to refine the existing models to benefit
management and to expand their use as substantial research tools by creating more formal system and applying these models to questions beyond
predicting site presence/absence. Following the most recent season of fieldwork along Isle Royale’s relict Nipissing shore, work has begun to make
comparisons between differences in shoreline use during the Archaic and Woodland periods. This paper presents some of these new directions in thinking
about Isle Royale throughout the Archaic/Woodland transition and its larger role in Great Lakes archaeology.
Campos, Cinthia [93] see Orozco, Joseph
Cannarozzi, Nicole [7] see Rock, Carolyn
Cannarrozzi, Nicole [28] see Quitmyer, Irvy
Cannon, Mike (SWCA Environmental Consultants) and Lisa Krussow (SWCA Environmental Consultants)
[104]             Relationships among Foraging Efficiency, Agricultural Investment, and Human Health in Fremont Societies
Marked variability in subsistence strategies has been noted throughout the Fremont archaeological culture. Previously, we have explored such variability
by using data on baseline environmental productivity, zooarchaeological evidence for resource depression, and archaeological measures of the importance
of agriculture to test the hypothesis that agricultural investment among the Fremont varied inversely with local environmental productivity. Data from
throughout the Fremont region are consistent with this general hypothesis in one way or another, though intra-regional variability is indicated in the specific
factors that led individuals to allocate time to farming. Data from the Uintah Basin appear to be consistent with the hypothesis that agriculture was a
response to resource depression, whereas in the eastern Great Basin, it appears that agriculture was, in part, a response to some factor associated with
greater available moisture, possibly higher agricultural yields. Such intra-regional differences in economic contexts may have had important implications for
human health, and we explore these here by examining osteological evidence of malnutrition. Specifically, we present an initial test of the hypothesis that
human health was poorer in parts of the Fremont region where wild resource foraging efficiency was lower and where agriculture was primarily a response
to that lower foraging efficiency.
Cannon, Kenneth (USU Archeological Services, Utah State University), Shaun Nelson (Utah Army National Guard), John Crane (Utah Army
National Guard and Utah State University) and James Long (Utah State University Quinney College of Natural R)
[208]             Managing, Protecting, and Interpreting Utah Army National Guard Cultural Resources
Since 2011, USU Archeological Services has assisted the Utah Army National Guard in the management and interpretation of its varied cultural resources.
The work was conducted through a Cooperative Agreement between the UTARNG and Utah State University Quinney College of Natural Resources.
Initially, USU Archeological Services worked with the UTARNG on data recovery in advance of firing range construction; however, the presence of
unexploded ordnance required great changes in project scope with limited time. The flexibility of the cooperative agreement allowed for a rather simple
change in the project parameters without costly delays and expense. Over the past five years, projects included evaluative testing at a possible Fremont-
era site at the Salt Lake City Readiness Center, site reassessments at Camp Williams, historic structure documentation at various installations,
geophysical surveys at a Puebloan II-III site, development of interpretive displays, historic canal history, documentation of rock art, curation preparation,
and the development of a precontact context for Camp Williams. This partnership has also provided an opportunity for training and employing USU
archaeology students, an important mission of USUAS.
Cantley, Garry [64] see Slaughter, Mark
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               65
Cantryll, Rick (University of Nottingham)
[176]             Pest, Prey or Domesticate: Odocoileus virginianus in the Maya World
In 1982, Pohl and Feldman questioned whether the ancient Maya had been in the process of domesticating white-tail deer. The possibility that the Maya
actively managed deer populations in proximity to human settlements deserves detailed consideration. Although white-tail deer remains are abundant in
zooarchaeological assemblages, comprehensive size and demographic studies have not yet been undertaken to help establish which motives might
inspired efforts toward herd management. A lack of metrical analysis presents a significant hurdle to establish sex profiles for pre-historic deer populations.
This presentation will describe the methods of a new osteometric study of modern and ancient white-tail deer from North and Central America. It will
demonstrate the necessity of understanding geographical and diachronic variations in body size described by Purdue, Compton, and Wolverton, in
relationship to human activity in other regions in North America. This is a preliminary step toward determining the ratio of males to females in ancient deer
populations. After final analysis and publication, the data from this study will be made available on open access D-bases at both the University of
Nottingham and the University of Florida in Gainesville as a new research platform for future investigations.
Canuto, Marcello [26] see Horowitz, Rachel
Canuto, Marcello (M.A.R.I./Tulane University)
[256]             The Dynamics of an Ancient Hegemony: How the Classic Snake Kingdom Rewrites the Story of lowland Maya Political Organization
The political organization of the Classic Maya has been a hotly contested topic for many years. Since the 1930s, interpretations have fluctuated between
visions of large-scale centralized states and small-scale decentralized polities. However, the recognition of a particular body of data in the inscriptions—
statements of royal subordination and allegiance—is giving rise to a new consensus that obviates this well-worn dichotomy.
This introductory paper will set the scene for this session ahead without establishing a programmatic bias. It describes the history of changing models for
lowland Maya political organization and how scholars have reconciled previously opposed sets of archaeological evidence. Further, it will acknowledge the
growing importance to this subject matter of increasingly better understood epigraphic data. We suggest that the next challenge is the proper conjunction of
these data sets in order to develop a more nuanced model for lowland Maya political organization.
[256]             Chair
Cap, Bernadette (University of Texas-San Antonio)
[26]              The Workings of Classic Maya Marketplace Exchange from the Perspective of the Buenavista del Cayo Marketplace
Marketplace exchange among the Classic Maya is frequently inferred from the degree of homogeneity in consumption practices among households of
differing statuses. The actual presence of marketplaces among the Classic Maya has been a point of debate, but recent empirically based investigations at
a few Lowland sites have provided evidence for their existence. The Late Classic marketplace located in the East Plaza of Buenavista del Cayo, Belize is
such an example. Examination of marketplace exchange from the marketplace itself provides a unique perspective that adds to and complements the
information household consumption patterns offer. In this presentation, I discuss the types of goods exchanged in the Buenavista del Cayo marketplace
and the efforts involved in its maintenance. Household goods made of raw materials locally available, such as chert and limestone, and non-local materials,
such as obsidian, were exchanged in the Buenavista del Cayo marketplace, which indicates that multiple communication networks were involved in
sustaining a marketplace that served to provision households. The location of the Buenavista del Cayo marketplace in the site center has implications for
its administration. Direct empirical evidence for administration is lacking, but I offer possible avenues of control over the marketplace by different status
groups.
Capece, Matthew (Quinnipiac University), Tucker Hlad (Columbus State Community College) and Jaime Ullinger (Quinnipiac University)
[149]             Analysis of Color and Fracture Patterns on Burned Bones from the Békés 103 Bronze Age Cemetery
In this study, we use color and fracture patterns of burned bone to reconstruct cremation temperatures and the conditions of the body prior to cremation in
highly fragmented skeletal material from a Bronze Age cemetery in Eastern Hungary. Using a Munsell Soil Color Book, we were able to qualitatively
measure the color of cremains in order to estimate burning temperature. Determining whether or not the body was burned with flesh relied on two
methodologies: the analysis of color patterns across the body and the identification of specific heat-related bone fractures. With the majority of bones being
a shade of white, it was estimated that the crematory fires likely exceeded 800˚C. Thumbnail fractures along long bones and the prevalence of nonwhite
bones on specific areas of the body, such as where two bones articulate, both suggest that the body was cremated while flesh was on the body. Together,
these observations indicate that the people of this region during the Bronze Age took care to cremate the dead soon after death and then carefully tended
to the pyres, allowing them to maintain such high temperatures.
Capece, Matthew [149] see Bormann, Edward
Capone, Patricia
[30]              Museum Archaeology in the United States: Refocusing Research Questions and Updating Methodologies Alongside NAGPRA
Collections in museums are components of refocusing and revising archaeological interpretation in the United States alongside the Native American
Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA). Review of collections as prompted by NAGPRA is improving documentation and interpretation of those
collections subject to the Act and beyond, across sites and regions. Previously incomplete archaeological contexts may be refined and these bring potential
for updated research questions and methodologies. A selected summary of recent projects highlights the benefits of improved collections documentation,
consultation involving multiple perspectives on collections and research questions, and the potential for shaping methodological advances and analytical
techniques toward updated research questions. Each of these benefits enhances the public relevance of archaeological research and education.
Capone, Patricia [265] see Costello, Laura
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  66
Capriata Estrada, Camila (Proyecto Qhapaq Ñan - Ministerio de Cultura del Perú) and Raúl Zambrano (Proyecto Qhapaq Ñan - Ministerio de
Cultura del Pe)
[233]            Molle and its Relationship with the Qhapaq Ñan
Molle is a prehispanic settlement located the Lurin Valley, central coast of Peru. Preliminary data indicates that it was primarily occupied during the Late
Intermediate Period and the Late Horizon. During excavations performed in the years 2014 and 2015, we were able to determine that one of the major
sections of the Inca road system or Qhapa Ñan, the one connecting Pachacamac to the administrative center of Hatun Xauxa, runs across this site. In this
paper, we will discuss the role that Molle played in the political landscape of the valley, as well as its relation with this major road.
Capriles, José [62] see Osorio, Daniela
Capriles, Jose (Universidad de Tarapacá), Calogero Santoro (Universidad de Tarapacá), Daniela Osorio (University College London), Juan
Albarracin-Jordan (Fundación Bartolomé de las Casas) and Claudio Latorre (Pontifica Universidad Católica de Chile)
[139]            Mobility Strategies between the Atacama Desert and the Lípez Highlands during the Late Pleistocene
One of the main constraints limiting understanding late Pleistocene archaeology in South America is the lack of compatible and standardized datasets from
scholars working in neighboring countries. Here, we present interdisciplinary collaborative work for discussing the nature of human mobility between the
Pacific Coast, the Atacama Desert, and the Lípez Highlands of Chile and Bolivia at 21° S. In an attempt to identify mobility strategies by human populations
occupying these drastically different environments, we describe settlement and stone tool utilization patterns. Our results suggest that during the late
Pleistocene, a broad logistical pattern of mobility supported by a curated technological strategy was in place, consisting of sizeable occupations near
wetlands in lower elevations and temporary and logistical visits to the highlands. Therefore, we propose the existence of a very early circuit that linked the
coast with the then largely forested aquifers of the Atacama and in turn, to the Andean highlands. Specific environmental conditions made this circuit
possible and its eventual disappearence during the early Holocene, motivating new kinds of mobility strategies. Finally, the establishment of this circuit is
consistent with previous inferences about the progressive nature of human adaptation of high-elevations.
Caramanica, Ari
[75]             Upward Mobility among Smallholders of the Desert North Coast of Peru
Mobility among smallholders or campesinos is a crucial element for understanding the development of both ancient and modern-day Peru. In the case of
the ancient agricultural landscape of Mocán, the movement of people, products, and possibly plants, lead to increasing network complexity eventually
culminating in the area’s incorporation into an important coastal polity. Archaeological evidence suggests changing approaches to landscape and water
management over the 2,000 years of occupation in the area can be correlated to the fluctuating mobility and interchange between Mocán and neighboring
regions. Mocán is located in the Paiján desert region on the north coast of Peru, and in both the past and today occupation is contingent upon mitigation of
environmental and seasonal change, resulting in a form of small-scale mobility that is unique to smallholders. Experiments in landscape and agricultural
strategies by smallholders in Mocán affected the environment in different ways over time, linking the area to greater socioeconomic networks represented
in the archaeological record by landscape formations, architecture, and other forms of material culture.
Carballo, David [129] see Hernandez Sarinana, Daniela
Carballo, David (Boston University)
[129]            Urbanism and Domestic Life in the Tlajinga District, Teotihuacan: New Research
                                                                                                                                                          2
Teotihuacan’s Tlajinga district comprises a cluster of neighborhoods of primarily common status apartment compounds, covering approximately 1km in the
south of the city. Previous investigations at one of them, 33:S3W1 or “Tlajinga 33,” provided valuable information concerning daily life in the urban
periphery. The Proyecto Arqueológico Tlajinga Teotihuacan (PATT) has thus far involved excavations at two other compounds (designated 17:S3E1 and
18:S3E1) and along the southern extension of the Street of the Dead, in addition to geophysical prospection of these areas and others within the district. In
this paper, I provide a summary of fieldwork and contexts for the artifact analyses and chronological considerations of papers to follow. I discuss processes
of urban sprawl into the periphery, the construction of the southern extension of the Street of the Dead, changes in domestic architecture, a domestic
obsidian workshop, and ritual caches and termination deposits that are informative as to the social status and activities of the residents of the compound.
[169]            Discussant
[129]            Chair
Carballo Marina, Flavia [205] see Nuevo Delaunay, Amalia
Cárcamo, Javier [206] see San Roman, Manuel
Card, Jeb (Miami University) and Marc Zender (Tulane University)
[212]            An Inscribed Flask from Tazumal: Historical Evidence for a Political Relationship between Copan and Western El Salvador
Re-analysis of an inscribed flask excavated by Stanley Boggs in 1952 from a burial in the main pyramid at Tazumal is the first Classic Maya written text
found in a primary deposition context in El Salvador. It is also the first historical evidence for political interaction between Copan and El Salvador, a
situation that has long been suggested based on archaeological evidence including the use of Copador ceramics in both Honduras and El Salvador and
the presence of other elite Classic Maya goods in monumental contexts at Tazumal and Campana San Andres. The Tazumal flask is the only Classic
hieroglyphic text from El Salvador naming a recognizable individual, tagged as the property of Copan’s most powerful lord, K’ahk’ Uti’ Witz' K’awiil, who,
during the seventh century, emphasized expanding his dynasty’s influence outside of the Copan pocket. It is also one of only a few miniature Classic Maya
vessels tagged with an individual’s name. The presence of this vessel in a burial in a monumental context at the largest Classic site in El Salvador
suggests a diplomatic history to this vessel, and brings the relationship between Copan and Classic El Salvador into sharper focus.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                67
Carder, Nanny [222] see Crock, John
Cardona, Karla [27] see Kovacevich, Brigitte
Carey, Mia [90] see Trocolli, Ruth
Carey, Mia (University of Florida)
[287]             Conducting Public Archaeology on Private Land: The Case Study of Yarrow Mamout at 3324 Dent Place, N.W.
Since 1979, the Archaeological Resources Protection Act has secured protection of archaeological resources and sites which are located on public and
Native American lands. Unfortunately, it is the archaeological sites and resources located on privately owned land that are under the most immediate threat
of destruction due to private and commercial development interests. So what happens when a concerned citizen notifies the D.C. City Archaeologist that
an early nineteenth century African Muslim site is being threatened? This paper outlines the archaeological survey conducted between June and
September 2015 to answer this question. The property once belonged to Yarrow Mamout, a prominent African Muslim who became famous after he sat for
two well-known nineteenth century painters. The archaeological survey entailed GPR, geoarchaeology, mechanical testing, and manual excavation of
STPs and test units.
[287]             Chair
Carino, Tanya [125] see Terry, Richard
Carlock, Bradley (Mississippi State University) and Tiffany Raymond (Mississippi State University)
[277]             Comparison of Surface Data Collection Methods at Freshwater Mussel Shell Rings in the Mississippi Delta: When is Enough, Enough?
For the most part, freshwater mussel shell rings in the Mississippi Delta have not been systematically tested to determine whether they are contemporary,
what their function may have been, how they were created, etc. This is in part due to the massive undertaking it requires to pull the necessary data from
the field. Controlled surface collection is one of the methods that have been used to do this, and while it is labor-intensive, it can provide a wealth of
information about a site. This paper will compare the results from five mussel shell ring sites in the Mississippi Delta to determine if the methods employed
were overkill, just enough, or if a compromise somewhere in the middle would have been adequate to glean the necessary information to answer the
aforementioned questions.
Carlson, Kirsten [16] see Bement, Leland
Carlson, Justin (University of Kentucky)
[120]             Archaeological Investigations of Deeply Stratified Deposits at Crumps Sink, South-Central Kentucky, USA
In the holokarstic Sinkhole Plain, sinkholes provided access to cave entrances for shelter, water, chert outcrops, and contain distinct microenvironments.
As closed basins, sinkholes accumulate sediment from the surrounding catchment, burying archaeological deposits, sometimes rapidly. Therefore, these
sites can provide critical information concerning paleoenvironmental change and human use of the surrounding landscape. Excavations were undertaken
at Crumps Sink in the summer of 2015 to assess the chronology of occupation, determine the range of prehistoric activities, and assess the
geomorphological and pedological history of the site. Stratified midden deposits spanning the Archaic and Woodland periods were encountered to a depth
of 3.8 meters below surface. The density of archaeological deposits suggests the site was repeatedly occupied throughout the Archaic and Woodland
periods. Geoarchaeological analysis of macro-stratigraphy, loose sediment samples, micromorphological samples, and associated archaeological material
allow for an in depth discussion of the depositional and pedogenic history of the sink in relation to climatic and anthropogenic impacts over time. This work
demonstrates that sinkholes should be investigated beyond traditional shallow testing because many may contain deep, well-preserved archaeological
deposits.
Carlton, Allison (University of Massachusetts-Boston)
[70]              A Theory on Cultural Inversion: Resistance, Resilience and Agency within the Archaeology of Colonialism
Colonial studies have progressed exponentially in archaeology, but such studies can suffer from contextual limitations. Analyzing colonialism in many
different social contexts adds to its potential as a lens through which to study the archaeological record. Diverse applicability would allow archaeologists an
opportunity to make sense of colonialism’s profuse influence on the people it affects. Throughout the nineteenth-century, the Nipmuc from eastern
Massachusetts faced many of the common processes of colonialism such as religious conversion, land acquisition, and economic and political control.
However, their identities were negotiated by various means. Lately, theories of colonialism in archaeology have begun to analyze the identities of the
people who in the past tended to be erased by the dominant settler party when confronted by colonialism. This paper presents a study of the
Massachusetts Nipmuc through the lens of colonialism as a theoretical construct to show how they may have negotiated their identities in their particular
colonial setting. In particular, items of personal adornment are analyzed to assess whether there is evidence that the Nipmuc participated in the social
discourse and practice surrounding respectability or whether they attempted to culturally invert or mimic such notions of respectability to cope with racism.
Carmody, Stephen [6] see Sherwood, Sarah
Carmody, Stephen (Sewanee: University of the South), D. Shane Miller (Mississippi State University), Thaddeus Bissett (Cultural Resource
Analysts, Inc.), Lydia D. Carmody (University of Tennessee, Knoxville) and David G. Anderson (University of Tennessee, Knoxville)
[49]              Secrets from within the Shell: Exploring the Differences between Shell-Bearing and Shell-Free Deposits at 40DV307 along the Cumberland
                  River, Tennessee, USA
The Bell Site is a multicomponent prehistoric site located along the Cumberland River in Central Tennessee. Archaeological fieldwork conducted in the
summer of 2010 and 2012, including riverbank profiling, auger testing, unit excavation, and column sampling, revealed a long and dynamic occupational
history of the site. Here, we integrate multiple lines of evidence including paleoethnobotany, zooarchaeology, and geoarchaeology, to unravel the site's
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                     68
complex (pre)history and explore the functional differences between the sites Late Archaic shell midden deposits and the later Woodland-period shell-free
settlement deposits.
Carney, Molly
[19]              Paleoethnobotany on the Columbia Plateau: A Case Study from the Pend Oreille River Valley
Paleoethnobotanical studies of hunter-gatherer archaeological assemblages on the Columbia Plateau in the Pacific Northwest are exceedingly rare and
often poorly reported. The Flying Goose Site (45PO435), located along the Pend Oreille River in northeastern Washington, offers an opportunity to
examine a Plateau culture area archaeobotanical assemblage in greater detail. Summer excavations in 2014 and 2015 indicate that this late Prehistoric
site appears to have been some form of small structure, which was likely purposefully burned and subsequently buried under relatively sterile silts. The
unusually well preserved structural remains at Flying Goose offer an excellent opportunity to examine Plateau architecture, internal and external use of
space, and both nutritional and technological use of plants. The presence of plant food remains, the lack of artifacts or zooarchaeological data, and
comparison to regional and continental ethnographic knowledge allows us rethink commonly established notions of gender and mobility on the Columbia
Plateau.
Caromano, Caroline (Museu de Arqueologia e Etnologia/USP/Brazil) and Rui Murrieta (Instituto de Biociências/USP/Brazil)
[167]             Adding Fuel to the Fire: An Ethnoarchaeological study of Fire amongst the Asurini of Xingu, Brazilian Amazon
Research conducted in the Amazon point to the importance of anthropic fire in the history of people and the forest itself, being a common element in
traditional agriculture and responsible for changes in ecosystems and soil productivity. Despite its importance, fire is not subject to systematic study in
Amazonian archaeology. Few efforts are made in actively searching for evidences of its use in archaeological contexts, being such evidences documented
opportunistically when casually observed during excavations. Furthermore, when dealt with, fire is treated from a strictly technical approach. Few
interpretations are made on its possible roles in social relations, and little attention is given to the social processes behind the production and use of fire
and the formation of its archaeological record. Through ethnoarchaeology amongst the Asurini of the Xingu River, southern Amazon, this work will present
technical and symbolical aspects on the use of fire, identifying and classifying the types of combustion structures and the employment of fire in different
areas of activity, with the intention on creating models on how diverse types of fire produced by the Asurini may generate different features and distinct
assemblages of remains.
[167]             Chair
Carpio, Edgar
[20]              Ritual to the Hills and Water in Mejicanos, Amatitlán, Guatemala: The Rock Art Evidence
The Mejicanos archaeological site is located on the side of a hill surrounded by other hills and a volcanic complex, in addition to beach to Lake Amatitlan.
This situation apparently sufficed for implementation of major religions to water and hills as evidenced by the ceramic offerings deposited in the lake during
the Classic Period as well as the many petroglyphs found in the rocky site sets. These consist mainly recorded in the rocks and miniature representations
of temples, usually with cavities at the top for liquid acquisition. We assume that on the site important rituals related to the cult to the deities of water and
hills were carried out.
Carr, Christopher (University of Cincinnati), Vernon Scarborough (University of Cincinnati), Nicholas Dunning (University of Cincinnati) and
Elizabeth Haussner (University of Cincinnati)
[64]              An Agricultural Risk Mitigation Strategy using Multiple Water Sources, Chaco Canyon, New Mexico
From approximately 850 to 1250 A.D., despite an extremely arid environment, the ancient people of Chaco Canyon were able to marshal the food
production and engineering skills to build a string of “Great Houses,” several containing hundreds of rooms. This poster describes a system of multiple
water sources supplying the agricultural area below the Great House at Peñasco Blanco. High-resolution aerial lidar was key to identifying the multiple
water sources. Rainfall and snow are the source of domestic and agricultural water in this area which lacks perennial streams. During the growing season,
rainfall arrives in intense, brief, locally isolated bursts. This pattern of rainfall presents risks of too much rain, rain in the wrong place, and rain at the wrong
time. The ancient Chacoan people managed these risks by: (1) utilizing channel flow from drainages of multiple sizes and surface flow off of slick rock
areas, (2) storing water in potholes, (3) canalizing water to and away from posited fields, and (4) reservoir containment. Our study used lidar-based digital
elevation models (DEM) to identify flow channels, water storage areas, and watershed sizes. On-the-ground examination and excavation were used to
validate the findings.
Carr, Chris [121] see Brewer, Jeffrey
Carr, Robert (AHC)
[246]             Belle Glade Circular Earthworks: A New Interpretation
A summary of prehistoric circular earthworks in the Lake Okeechobee and northern Everglades is provided. Their forms and their relation to the area's
wetlands are discussed, and a hypothesis as to their function is provided.
Carrasco, Michael (Florida State University)
[209]             The “Problem” in the Ecology of Images
In The Shape of Time (1962) George Kubler suggested that formal change results from a chain of solutions to problems that alter as the solutions
accumulate. While this concept has been influential in studies on formal change, his notion of “problem” remains underdeveloped. This paper takes
Kubler’s formulation of “problem” as a starting point for abducing meaning in works for which texts are lacking. By attending to the “problem” as the locus of
dynamic change and the link to other social regimes, the paper utilizes the advantage that duration affords to propose that a series of questions about
objects emerges that is not, or not wholly, reliant on texts or ethnographic analogies. This has the effect of expanding art history into the territory of
anthropology, as structural processes gain greater significance than the history of specific iterations or iconographic content. Formative Period Maya
stucco masks, cache vessels, and effigy censers of the Classic Period exemplify how changing solutions reveal conceptual “problems” that provide access
to meaning and the role of the image. The goal is to better understand the networks among people and images—what might be called the ecology of
images.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                    69
Carrasco, Ramón [256] see Martin, Simon
Carriere, Ed [63] see Croes, Dale
Carroll, Lynda
[75]              Smallholders, Settlements, and the Reimagined State: How New Grammars of Modernity Impacted Land and Labor in the Late Ottoman
                  Empire
Archaeological studies of the modern world often focus on the effects of the “global” on the “local.” Understanding smallholder experiences in the modern
period requires us to examine—to varying degrees—the economic and social consequences that global capitalism, colonialism, and nationalism had on
people at the local level, as well as how the construction of new grammars of modernity affected daily lived experiences. In this paper, I focus on the
impacts of these new grammars on smallholders in the modern Middle East who lived under the Ottoman Empire. In the late nineteenth century, many
smallholders living in the shadow of the Ottoman state found themselves impacted by shifting land tenure policies that affected their access to land, and
new definitions of civil society and individual rights. While some became laborers for privately held large farms, others faced dispossession as a result of
large-scale population movements of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries (both voluntary and involuntary). In this paper, I will compare
variations in settlement patterns in Anatolia and Transjordan as a way to examine how these new grammars and realities affected different types of
smallholders.
Carroll, Jon (Oakland University)
[121]             Experimenting with Multilevel Agent Based Archaeological Modeling in NetLogo
Agent Based Modeling (ABM) has become increasingly popular because of its relatively shallow learning curve and robust capacity for simulating social
and environmental phenomena. This paper discusses new developments in ongoing work simulating social interaction in Precontact small-scale societies
using NetLogo, a freely available software package. Model design, assessment, and experimentation of a multilevel ABM are discussed, as well as how
the simulation results compare to real world, geospatially referenced archaeological datasets drawn from the Great Lakes region of North America.
Carroll, Beau (Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians), Tom Belt (Western Carolina University), Alan Cressler and Jan Simek (University of
Tennessee)
[131]             Talking Stone: Cherokee Syllabary Inscriptions in Dark Zone Caves
Caves have offered the Cherokee people concealment before and after contact with Europeans. With the invention of Sequoyah’s Syllabary a way to
record these hidden activities became available. A number of caves in the southeastern United States contain such historical inscriptions and interpreting
these can tell archaeologists about who made them and when they were made. This paper considers several such inscription caves, located in the area of
north Alabama, north Georgia, and southeastern Tennessee, with Sequoyan Syllabary on the walls. They offer us a better understanding of the
Chickamauga Cherokee, the Lower town Cherokee, and the birth of the Cherokee Nation. On the surface, the Cherokee were compliant with the demands
of the overwhelming civilization, but traditions were kept alive by concealment. The writing in caves in the southeastern United States can provide missing
links to historical accounts and provide new archaeological research avenues for the future.
Carroll, Jon [199] see Perez, Daniel
Carroll, Sean (University of Wyoming)
[232]             These are the Flintknappers: A Case Study Concerning the Ability to Measure Flintknapping Skill Variation in the Analysis of Debitage
One application of experimental archaeology is attempting to understand variations in flintknapping skill. These experiments often have flintknappers of
varying skill levels attempt to replicate different variants of prehistoric stone tools. Previous studies of skill level in the debitage produced during
flintknapping are restricted to qualitative means of analysis. To add to the expanding collection of experimental archaeology that attempts to identify
flintknapping skill, this paper addresses whether quantitative analysis can be used to distinguish individual flintknapper skill levels in debitage analysis.
Additionally, in an attempt to produce a more controlled flintknapping environment, the experiment reported in this paper implemented liquid porcelain
biface casts as the objective pieces. Using a more controlled objective piece, this paper attempts to take the quantitative analysis that has previously been
done in experimental archaeology on formal prehistoric tools and apply it to debitage to see if similar indications of skill can be identified.
Cartagena, Nicaela, Michael Lawrence (Pacbitun Research Archaeological Project), Sheldon Skaggs (Pacbitun Research Archaeological Project)
and Terry Powis (Pacbitun Research Archaeological Project)
[120]             The Geophysical Investigations at the Tzib Group in Pacbitun, Belize
The archaeological site of Pacbitun is one of the ancient sites that were inhabited by the Maya for approximately two thousand years. It is located in the
west central side of Belize, near the town of San Antonio. Exploration of the surveyed areas revealed a smaller archaeological site in 2011 known as the
Tzib Group, also known as “Mano Mound” due to the significant amounts of mano fragments found on the surface. In the 2014 summer season,
geophysical data was collected using an instrument called the magnetometer. Data analysis of this survey showed a large rectangular anomaly within five
meters of Mano Mound itself that became part of the focus to the 2015 summer excavation. Within the excavation units a row of limestone rock terminating
at the mound was found, which is probably a terrace that the Maya placed there to level out their farm land. Other artifacts that were found within the
excavation units were mano and metate fragments, along with hammer stones and pottery sherds. Geospatial analysis was also used to track the features
of the Tzib Group area in regards to where other possible terraces may connect with structures in the area.
Cartagena, Nicaela [234] see Skaggs, Sheldon
Cartajena, Isabel [139] see Loyola, Rodrigo
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                70
Cartajena, Isabel (Departamento de Antropología, Universidad de Chile)
[249]             Discussant
Carter, Brian [123] see Marcum-Heiman, Alesha
Carter, Michael (Director, Industry Relations, Master in Digital Media)
[140]             Virtual Archaeology, Virtual Longhouses and “Envisioning the Unseen” within the Archaeological Record
In the 1960s, Ivan Sutherland envisioned a time in the near future in which people would be able to physically enter into an alternative, “digital” world. The
ability to not only see the environment around them, but also to touch, smell, hear, and be affected by the environment itself would provide a unique digital
phenomenological experience where viewers become participants and build on their own personal narratives in a non-linear, almost life-like, virtual
experience. In reimagining a fifteenth century Northern Iroquoian Longhouse within a virtual 3D environment, we attempt to address issues of agency,
authenticity, authority, and most importantly, transparency within virtual heritage reconstructions. Virtual Archaeology and our ability to harness the
technology in an applied, innovative, and experiential way has allowed scholars, Descendants, and the public to “envision the unseen” within the
archaeological record. As such, archaeological virtual reconstruction through virtual reality has become a powerful tool in the interpretation of
archaeological landscapes and artifacts as a means of knowledge-building and meaning-making. Thus, Virtual Archaeology is moving from being
evidenced-based to evidence-informed through a natural progression allowed by the evolution of technology and the growth of capabilities, user
experience, and expectation.
Carter, Alison (University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign), Cristina Castillo (University College London), Rachna Chhay (Apsara Authority,
Cambodia), Tegan McGillivray (University of Wisconsin-Madison) and Yijie Zhuang (University College London)
[262]             Household Archaeology in Angkorian Cambodia: Preliminary Results and Challenges for Future Research
This paper presents the results from the 2015 excavation of a house mound within the Angkor Wat enclosure. Although household archaeology is well
established in other tropical locations, notably Mesoamerica, few households have been closely examined in southeast Asia. In this paper, we discuss
some of the preliminary findings from our excavation of an Angkorian house mound, as well as research on the use of space around the mound and the
potential for household gardens. A comparison with household studies amongst the Maya highlight potential fruitful avenues for future research as well as
challenges unique to studying households of the Angkorian period.
Caruso Fermé, Laura [49] see Monteiro, Patrícia
Carvajal Contreras, Diana [14] see Iizuka, Fumie
Carvajal Contreras, Diana
[14]              Use of Aquatic and Stone Tools at Three Colombian Caribbean Sites near Canal del Dique
This work derives from research in the ongoing research project "Evaluation of Zooarqueológica de Concheros cerca al Canal del Dique." We present the
preliminary results of the archaeological research of three sites sampled near Canal del Dique: Monsú (5000 a.C.), Puerto Hormiga (4000 a. C), and
Leticia (a shellmound from the twelfth century A.D.). Samples of animal remains were recovered from 1/8 inch mesh screening. These samples were
analyzed for taxonomic, taphonomic, and quantification analysis. Starch grain analyses were conducted on stone tools and human remains. Use wear and
experimental analyses were applied on stone tools, which were used in different subsistence activities. This information is contrasted with current
archaeological information from the Caribbean Lowlands. We conclude that the diversity and abundance of aquatic resources are linked to the location of
the sites, suggesting that the most representative species collected by precolumbian residents, for occasional meals, were mollusks and vertebrates from
brackish environments, mangroves, estuaries, swamps, and muddy sand mixed areas.
[14]              Chair
Casana, Jesse (Dartmouth College) and Claudia Glatz (University of Glasgow)
[12]              Settlement Systems and Land Use Strategies in the Upper Diyala/Sirwan River Valley, Kurdistan Region of Iraq
This paper presents results of a regional archaeological survey in the Upper Diyala/Sirwan River valley, a study area that straddles the highland
landscapes of the Zagros Mountains and lowland plains of southern Mesopotamia. Historically constituting a key communication route between these
regions, the Upper Diyala offers a unique laboratory for analysis of changing subsistence strategies and interactions among and ancient communities who
inhabited very different upland and lowland environments. From 2013–2015, our project has undertaken to document settlements of all periods, to map
relict fields and water management features, as well as to understand the geomorphological and environmental history of the area. Based on our results
to date, this paper explores the differing trajectories of change in settlement organization and agricultural strategies in early prehistoric (7500–4500 B.C.),
Bronze Age (3000–1000 B.C.), and Parthian/Sasanian periods (250 B.C.–A.D. 650), highlighting key distinctions that are evident both geographically and
temporally and how these reflect the cultural dynamics of the region.
Casar, Isabel (Instituto de Fisica UNAM), Jose Ramon Gallego (Instituto de Investigaciones Antropologicas Univer), Jose Concepcion Jimenez
(Instituto Nacional Antropologia e Historia), Edith Cienfuegos (Instituto de Geologia, Universidad Nacional Autono) and Pedro Morales (Instituto
de Geologia, Universidad Nacional Autono)
[20]              Diet and Mobility Patterns of Hunter-Gatherers and Full-Time Farmers from the Tehuacan Caves of Tehuacan, Puebla
The transition between the diet of the hunter-gatherers and the full-time farmers is described on an individual level based on evidence from three ancient
caves in Tehuacan, Puebla. The populations studied occupied the caves for almost 8,000 years from 6800 B.C. to A.D. 1520. The reconstruction of their
diet was done on the basis of stable isotopic values of δ13C and δ15N of the bone collagen as well as the δ13C and δ18O from bone-bioapatite and from a
series of slices from molars, alternating on them the isotopic analysis of dentine-collagen and dentine-bioapatite.
The results show a gradual dietary transition between the group of hunter-gatherers from the ancient periods with about a 50 percent C3 signature in both
dietary components and the diet of the full-time agricultural group from the later periods with a high ingestion of maize close to 90 percent in the whole diet
and probably some gathering of CAM plants, and 100 percent C4 signature in the protein ingested, from animals hunted in the maize fields or semi-
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                71
domesticated. Also, the interpersonal variation of the diet consumed shows interesting correlation with the mobility patterns between the hunter-gatherers
and the full-time farmers calculated from their δ18O values.
Cascalheira, João [170] see Bicho, Nuno
Cascalheira, Joao (ICArEHB - Portugal)
[211]              Changing Weapons in a Mutable Landscape: Exploring the Relationship Between Upper Paleolithic Weaponry Variability and Drastic
                   Environmental Changes in Western Europe
Lithic industries from the European Late Pleistocene archaeological record are marked by the presence of one of the most numerous and diverse set of
artifacts identified as projectile weaponry tips. Variability in the morphology and technology of these tools has long been used for organizing the Upper
Paleolithic archaeological record into distinct cultural and chronological units—the so-called techno-complexes—validating a direct association between
transformations in projectile technology and shifts in other domains (e.g., subsistence, technology) of hunter-gatherers’ adaptive systems. Widespread
cultural changes occurring during this time-span are frequently thought to have been triggered by abrupt climate events and some of the modifications
occurred in the design and technology of projectiles have been putatively defined as technical solutions to enhance performance and reduce risk in
changing environments.
This paper represents a first attempt to characterize how modifications in the design of Upper Paleolithic lithic projectiles correlate with abrupt
environmental changes and how they possibly enhanced human fitness under particular selective environments.
[211]              Chair
Cascon, Leandro (Museu de Arqueologia e Etnologia/USP/Brazil) and Rui Murrieta (Instituto de Biociências/USP/Brazil)
[125]              Root, Fruit and Dirt: Using Ethnoarchaeology and Archaebotany for Constructing Reference Collections of Plants in Activity Areas in
                   Eastern Amazon
In the Brazilian State of Pará, Eastern Amazon, indigenous Asurini populations living in the middle course of the Xingú River currently face the challenge of
maintaining traditional lifeways in a situation of great ecological and social change, due to the construction of Belo Monte, one of the world’s largest
hydroelectric dams. Amongst their practices, the cultivation of diverse varieties of manihot, sweet-potato, beans, maize, and other crops is an important
aspect of Asurini culture, and one which they have strived to maintain through over a century of conflict-induced migrations. The work here presented is the
result of an ongoing study conducted amongst the Asurini, with the objective of better understanding the diverse importances that cultivated plants possess
amongst these populations, as well as of assessing how these different forms of use may be identified in the Asurini archaeological record in the region,
using the comparative analysis of phytoliths and starch grains found in artifact and soil samples from present day activity areas, as well as from past
Asurini villages.
Caseldine, Christopher (Arizona State University)
[289]              Shifting Perceptions: An Examination of Landesque Capital and Landscape Perceptions within Hohokam Canal System 1
The Hohokam that occupied the area now covered by the present city of Phoenix, Arizona, and surrounding cities, constructed one of the largest canal
systems in the ancient world. Of the systems operated by the Hohokam, Canal System 1 was the largest irrigation system built and maintained by the
Hohokam. Despite its size, it is the least understood of the major irrigation systems within the lower Salt River Valley, the area often identified as the
Hohokam core. Recently, a project to reconstruct the developmental history of Canal System 1 was undertaken to fill in this void in data. Preliminary results
from the long-term Riverview excavation project, located near the system’s headgates, indicate that Canal System 1 may have significantly expanded in
size sometime during the Preclassic/Classic Transition (c. A.D. 1100–1300), a period previously characterized as a time of increasing water uncertainty.
Using settlement data, I will examine the association between shifting landscape perceptions and shifting settlement patterns within Canal System 1 from a
landesque capital perspective, and the implications for settlement patterning across the lower Salt River Valley.
Cases, Laurent [288] see Hoggarth, Julie
Casserino, Christopher (Spokane Tribe of Indians) and Jennifer Pietarila
[29]               Preserving Tribal Resources on the Reservation
The Spokane Tribal Preservation Program’s work within Reservation boundaries focuses on locating and monitoring tribal resources along the Spokane
River and upland areas by a tribal field crew. Artifacts recovered from field surveys and excavations are curated within a tribal collections facility. Utilizing a
partnership between its staff and tribal members, the Program is able to identify these important resources and provide a rich layer of tribal history to these
objects. Through collections access and digital-age crowd sourcing techniques, the Preservation team integrates the knowledge of tribal elders and other
community members into the processing of artifact information and archaeological site provenience. The incorporation of multiple viewpoints takes into
account that every person or family is connected to a person, place, or object in a unique way. Through this unique partnership, life is given to tangible
objects, cultural tradition, and traditional cultural places.
[203]              Discussant
Castanet, Cyril [96] see Nondédéo, Philippe
Casteel, Cassandra (MU-Anthro) and Christine VanPool (MU-Anthro)
[237]              The Development of the Feathered Serpent in Mesoamerica and the American Southwest
Mesoamerican and southwestern researchers debate the origins, meanings, and influence of the feathered serpent. Some believe that the southwestern
horned serpent is derived from the Mesoamerican feathered serpent, while others believe the southwestern serpent tradition developed largely
independently from other regional traditions. Those contending that southwestern and Mesoamerican serpents are connected rely on similar meanings of
the serpents, such as its association with rain and fertility, while those arguing for local developments rely on differences in morphological traits of the
serpents (e.g., Aztec’s Quetzalcoatl being a rattlesnake with a body covered in quetzal feathers whereas Zuni’s Kolowisi has a smooth, featherless body
with a headdress of turkey feathers and a wooden horn). Both perspectives tend to view the relationship in an “all-or-nothing” manner, without really
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              72
considering the possibility for combinations of historically shared and independently developed traits. Here, we use phylogenetic analysis to examine
morphological data (e.g., placement of plumes, tail form, and mouth and eye shape) and archaeological context (e.g., associated mural images,
architectural features, etc.) to identify homologous and analogous traits. Our results break down the dichotomy by identifying which traits reflect historical
connections, and reconstructing the historical development of classes of serpents (e.g., Aztec and Maya).
Castells Navarro, Laura [103] see Büster, Lindsey
Caster, Joshua [254] see Fairley, Helen
Castilla-Beltrán, Alvaro (RMA student Leiden University Faculty of Archaeology)
[220]             Modelling Archaic Forager Mobility: A Discussion on the Application of Agent-Based Models (ABMs) to Forager Mobility Strategies in the
                  North-Eastern Caribbean Archaic Period
Diverse types of models have been proposed to shed light to Caribbean colonization process as well as general patterns of mobility, exchange, and
connectivity. These models have hitherto been narrative, theoretical, and statistical and their products have widened our understanding of the
archaeological record. Agent-based models (ABMs) represent a promising step forward on the modelling approach to Caribbean archaeology by placing
attention to the interactions among agents and agents and the environment in order to assess counterintuitive effects in the emergence and self-
organization of social structures. This innovative tool brings the opportunity to create a series of dialogic encounters between environmental data, the
archaeological record, and foraging models based on the ethnography and ethnoarchaeology, thus allowing the possibility to pre-test sets of assumptions
with the click of a mouse. Some variations of foraging mobility models will be presented in order to explore the potential of ABMs and to provide new
insights into the first humanization of the north-eastern Caribbean and posterior cultural development throughout the Archaic Period.
Castillo, Luis Jaime [206] see Saldaña, Julio
Castillo, Mario (California State University, Dominguez Hills)
[251]             Hñähño Narratives of San Ildefonso, Mexico: Social Memory in the Form of Oral History
Oral history is the process of audio-recording first person accounts of experiences, stories, and memory from living witnesses. Oral history has proven to
be a valuable resource for archaeologists. It is argued that oral history research is important for foregrounding subsequent archaeological research. In the
summer of 2015, 10 hours of audio-recorded personal narratives were recorded from five Hñähño/Spanish speakers in the colonial of El Bothe, San
Ildefonso, Queretaro, Mexico. Hñähño speakers in Mexico are commonly referred to in the anthropological literature as Otomi indians. In the pueblo of San
Ildefonso, local residents continue to speak Hñähño along Spanish and largely practice an agrarian lifestyle. This presentation provides a summary of
these interviews and discusses the relationship between personal and social memory.
Castillo Butters, Luis Jaime [102] see Cusicanqui, Solsiré
Castillo Sánchez, Nina (Nina Castillo Sánchez)
[151]             “Textileras”: Mujeres de prestigio o formalismo social
Las últimas investigaciones sobre patrones funerarios en la costa central peruana exponen, principalmente, entierros femeninos de élite dedicados a la
actividad textil. Sobre la base de las descripciones del ajuar asociado a la textilería. Estas explicaciones hacen énfasis en los objetos hallados, asumiendo
directamente la posición social del individuo, sin mencionar que este ajuar, probablemente, representa el actuar colectivo sobre estándares sociales de
enterramiento femenino y no necesariamente corresponde a la actividad y preferencia real del individuo.
Nos preguntamos ¿todas las mujeres enterradas se dedican a la textilería?,o ¿todas las mujeres de élite son enterradas con ajuar relacionado a la
actividad textil por ser una convención social?
Para responder a estas preguntas analizaremos 18 fardos encontrados durante las excavaciones del Proyecto Qhapaq Ñan, en el sitio Cerro del Oro,
Cañete, al sur de Lima.
Se caracterizará a cada individuo analizando los objetos asociados a su cuerpo, singularizando cada contexto, comparándolos con otros contextos de la
costa central, evaluaremos la asociación y la convención del ajuar de los individuos femeninos, intentando descubrir si el patrón funerario pertenece a un
modelo social mejor elaborado o son arreglos personales de cada individuo y si existen variabilidades que sugieren elecciones personales.
Castillo-Cardenas, Karime (UCLA)
[20]              Ethnoarchaeology of Glassblowing in Tlaquepaque and Tonalá, Jalisco, Mexico
Blown glass is produced today in Jalisco, Mexico, in places that have a longstanding glass-working tradition. Many parts of the process are done in a
traditional way, even though some technological innovations, like the use of gas kilns, have been implemented. During the summer of 2015 an
ethnoarchaeological project was carried out in the towns of Tonalá and Tlaquepaque, located in the metropolitan area of Guadalajara, Jalisco, the main
center of traditional glassblowing in Mexico today. The research was focused on learning about the technology and the organization of production in order
to understand how the technology of glassblowing, which was introduced to Mexico during the colonial period, developed into the present day tradition.
Historical research conducted at Archivo General de la Nación in Mexico City provided information to place the glassblowing tradition in historical context.
The research also served to gain insights useful in the analysis and interpretation of archaeological glass collections and the remains of glass workshops in
the archaeological record.
Castro, Sergio [97] see Romano, Francisco
Catanzariti, Antonietta (University of California, Berkeley)
[12]              The Qara Dagh Archaeological Landscape: The Relation between Settlement Patterns and Environmental Contexts
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                73
The Qara Dagh Valley, located 41 km south from the city of Sulaymaniyah in the Kurdistan region of Iraq, is the subject of study of the Qara Dagh Regional
Archaeological Project (QDRAP). This project aims to investigate the Qara Dagh Valley’s archaeological history. The valley is generally known for the
presence of the Darban-i-Graw relief, which represents a late third millennium king subduing his enemies. Indeed, textual and visual evidence suggest that
this region was exposed to frequent foreign invasions, which, together with its natural setting, may have heavily influenced settlement distribution in the
valley. In the 1940s, a team of Iraqi archaeologists carried out a survey of the valley but, until May 2015, when the QDRAP team initiated an investigation
in the Qara Dagh area, no other survey had been conducted. The QDRAP was able to provided fresh information that confirms the archaeological
relevance of this area. Although this study is in its early stages, the preliminary analysis of the data collected suggests that the occupation of this area
dates at least to the fourth millennium B.C.E.. In this presentation, questions on the environmental characteristics that may have influenced the distribution
of the sites identified will be discussed.
Catsambis, Alexis [83] see Neyland, Robert
Cattin, Marie-Isabelle
[242]             Material Culture and Environmental Change at the End of the Late Glacial: Examples from Monruz and Champréveyres, Magdalenian and
                  Azilian Campsites on the Swiss Plateau
During the Magdalenian in Switzerland, the climate was very cold and the landscape was treeless. Faunal assemblages are dominated by horse but
include arctic and alpine species. Lithic assemblages include backed bladelets (used to make composite projectile points) and tools used to butcher and
process prey. The appearance of bipoints marks a shift in projectile point technology that coincides with an increase in juniper in the pollen record. The
débitage show continuity with the preceding period but for the introduction of soft stone percussion. Faunal assemblages are dominated by red deer, while
reindeer all but disappear.
At the beginning of the Azilian, the landscape was a thin tree cover including birch, willow, sea buckthorn, and juniper. Reindeer disappear entirely and red
deer and horse dominate the fauna assemblages. The débitage is still oriented towards the production of blades and bladelets, but the products are
irregular; frontal exploitation of cores is frequent as is the use of soft and hard stone percussion. We also observe changes in lithic raw material
procurement; some flint sources fall into disuse while new sources are exploited. Whether or not these cultural changes are a response to environmental
change is the question we will address here.
Catto, Lisa (Portland State University)
[35]              Are Websites Doing What We Want Them To Do? Evaluating the Effectiveness of Websites for Public Archaeology
Archaeologists widely incorporate websites into public archaeology projects and rely on them as primary vehicles for connecting with the non-archaeologist
public for many reasons: they are relatively inexpensive to create, adaptable to most any content, and potentially accessed by a global population. While
websites have great potential for advancing public understanding of the human past, to date there has been little consideration of what makes a “good”
public archaeology website. Our project addresses this gap. Few resources exist to support archaeologists (who are often untrained in Web
communication) in a more intentional use and evaluation of websites. This project addresses the absence of such resources by creating usable tools to
guide archaeologists in website creation and evaluation. The tools are grounded in data produced from our qualitative content analysis and Web
functionality assessment of 10 archaeology websites. Using the five archaeological themes (e.g., stewardship, access to archaeology) outlined by Franklin
and Moe (2012), we are evaluating how—if at all—they are incorporated into the 10 websites and if they could be better showcased/highlighted. Our
ultimate goal will be to create a guidebook for developing archaeology websites, including a rubric to guide creation (or assessment) of archaeological
content.
[35]              Chair
Cavero, Yuri [31] see Matsumoto, Yuichi
Cecil, Leslie (Stephen F. Austin State University), Tom Dillehay (Vanderbilt University) and Michael Glascock (University of Missouri Research
Reactor)
[57]              Recruited or Annexed Lineages: A Chemical Analysis of Purén and Lumaco Pottery and Clays
The Purén-Lumaco Project conducted an archaeological survey of the Purén and Lumaco Valley in Chile (approximately 30 km) from 1994–2004. During
the survey, Dillehay and colleagues noted 300+ prehistoric and historic localities that ranged from agricultural features to multifunctional mounds. Those
archaeological features represent an Araucanian polity dating to the Early Prehistoric (A.D. 500–1550) and early Hispanic (A.D. 1550–1700) periods. The
chiefdom-level polity was strong politically and economically, while experiencing demographic changes that ultimately resulted in a central force of
resistance against the Spanish. One goal of the Purén-Lumaco Project was to use ceramic analysis to better grasp the strategies used to establish and
maintain Araucanian dominance in the area as well as the presence of recruited or annexed lineages. If these Araucanians were recruiting distant groups
into their lineage, non-local ceramics and a greater variability in the ceramic assemblage should occur. On the other hand, if neighboring lineages were
annexed, one would expect Purén-Lumaco wares to be present at archaeological sites in the annexed areas, less local ceramic variability, and the
introduction of a few Purén-Lumaco wares. A chemical analysis of pottery (n=259) and clay samples (n=78) addressed the degree of variability present in
the ceramic assemblage.
Cecil, Leslie [291] see South, Katherine
Cegielski, Wendy [4] see Rogers, J. Daniel
Cegielski, Wendy (Arizona State University)
[72]              Networks of Social Stability in the Mediterranean Bronze Age
Certain social systems do not become more complex. They remain stable for considerable periods of time despite constant environmental and cultural
change, a fact that remains a puzzle in archaeology. Research by Iberian archaeologists indicates that the Valencian Bronze Age in Mediterranean Spain
may be such a case where material homogeneity represents a social system lasting with little change for nearly 700 years (B.C. 2200–1500). This trend
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  74
stands in stark contrast to the complex social changes noted for its southern, contemporaneous neighboring region—the Argaric. Moreover, several
archaeologists have proposed that the types and scales of social networks that a society exhibits have a profound influence on changes in social
complexity. Thus, this study presents the preliminary results of the use of Network Science to explore both spatial and social explanatory mechanisms for
the apparent social stability of the Valencian Bronze Age.
Celhar, Martina [189] see Zaro, Gregory
Cercone, Ashley (University at Buffalo (SUNY Buffalo)) and Mark Golitko (The Field Museum of Natural History; University of)
[149]             Ceramics Production and Trade Across the Great Hungarian Plain: Chemical Analysis of Bronze Age Ceramics from Békés 103 in Eastern
                  Hungary
The Bronze Age in Europe is noted for an increase in foreign interaction and trade, yet some areas show few signs of receiving non-local goods. Using
chemical analysis of Bronze Age ceramic pastes from the cemetery of Békés 103 and nearby clay sources, this poster seeks to investigate trade networks
and exchange between the people of the site and other areas of the Great Hungarian Plain. Using LA-ICP-MS, we examine the extent of trade and the
degree to which the community participated in the exchange of goods compared to other areas of the Great Hungarian Plain. Combining new data with
information from previously excavated ceramics, this project further explores the movement of ceramics on the Great Hungarian Plain by examining
whether or not there are differences between graves in terms of acquisition and use of local versus non-local ceramics.
Cerezo-Román, Jessica (Harvard University)
[215]             Bodies among Fragments: Non-Normative Inhumations among the Preclassic and Classic Period Hohokam in the Tucson Basin
Inhumation and cremation usually are studied in isolation regardless of the fact that they may be practiced in the same culture and time period. Among the
Tucson Basin Hohokam in the Prehispanic American southwest, cremation was the main funeral custom and normative and non-normative inhumations
were practiced with very low frequencies throughout the Preclassic (A.D. 700–1150) and Classic (A.D. 1150–1450/1500) periods. This paper explores
changes through time in non-normative burial customs of inhumation from ten Tucson Basin (Arizona) Hohokam archaeological sites. This is done by
exploring both biological reconstruction of bodies and posthumous treatments within and between sites. Inhumations are contrasted with cremations to
explore how they are related but also distinct practices of remembrance. It is argued that critical and contextualized approaches to the study of non-
normative burials are necessary in order to reconstruct the complexity of funeral customs and their associated cultural significance through time. The
results provide a glimpse of social variation and multiple social groups within the Tucson Basin Hohokam sites.
Cervantes, Gabriela (University of Pittsburgh) and Robyn Cutright (Centre College)
[102]             Coastal Politics in Cajamarca: Recent Research in the Middle Jequetepeque Valley
Based on research at Ventanillas, a Late Intermediate Period community in the middle Jequetepeque Valley, Peru, this paper discusses the role of coastal
polities and highland influence in a multiethnic middle valley context. Mapping, surface collection, and excavations in 2011 and 2013 focused on
investigating the cultural and political affiliation of Ventanillas residents. Ventanillas’ imposing adobe platform mounds link the site visibly to coastal
traditions; however, households used a mix of coastal and middle-valley utilitarian ceramics, spindle whorls, and food. We propose that Ventanillas
residents incorporated highland and coastal traditions into a distinct chaupiyunga identity, while negotiating their political affiliation with expanding coastal
Lambayeque and Chimú polities centered in the lower valley.
Chacaltana, Sofia (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[219]             Colonial Enclaves of Coastal Colesuyo during the Inca Influence
How were small communities of coastal Colesuyo transformed under Inca authority? What roles were played by local and regional elites? Previous work
conducted at the coastal site of Tacahuay has suggested that this site was an altiplano enclave controlled by more powerful Lupaca group. This enclave
was established with the aim of obtaining coastal products, and in return Tacahuay elites would have access to Inca sumptuary goods. In this session I
present different lines of analyses for future work that will be conducted at Tacahuay with the focus of responding: How were altiplano enclaves established
at the coast? Were family ties established by intermarriage relations between altiplano lineages and coastal elites? How does the economy of a coastal
enclave permit us to observe economies as complex webs of interactions with the altiplano, Inca, and local communities?
Chacaltana Cortez, Sofia [219] see Wackett, Joshua
Chacon, Enrique [168] see Sandoval, Cindy
Chacón, M. Gema [278] see Rosell, Jordi
Chadwick, Bill [208] see Neusius, Phillip
Chakraborty, Kalyan (University of Toronto)
[149]             A Virtual Documentation of Excavation through 3D Modeling; Is it Worth the Effort?
Illustration of various means has always helped in visualising complex information, and archaeologists have used means such as photographs, drawings,
and even three-dimensional illustration to present complex archaeological data. Archaeologists began using three-dimensional models of various
archaeological monuments only in the 1990s. However, in recent years, and with high-end computer applications, archaeologists are able to document
different stages of excavations using 3D illustration, which has the potential to better compensate for the irreversible and destructive nature of
archaeological excavation. I used Agisoft Photoscan Pro to build 3D models of different levels of stratigraphic excavation to map the spatial distribution of
archaeological finds from the cemetery site of Békés 103 in Hungary. Here, I address how these models provide additional information on various
anthropogenic processes affecting the preservation of the archaeological record. I also report on how these models can be used to visualise the
relationships between urns excavated in different years. Finally, I argue how this combination of information can be used to develop superior interpretations
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                75
of the archaeological record, justifying the additional time spent in documentation.
Chalfant, Jack [29] see Geiger, Crystal
Chamberlain, Andrew [183] see Harvey, Virginia
Chambers, Jason (SWCA)
[115]             Lindenmeier Redux: Spatial Patterns of the Lindenmeier Folsom Site (5LR13)
The Lindenmeier Folsom Site (5LR13) was excavated from 1934–1940 by Frank H.H. Roberts, Jr. of the Smithsonian Institution. Over the course of six
field seasons spent excavating the site, the spatial locations of approximately 6,000 items were mapped and recorded by Roberts, and later published as a
series of maps in the appendices in the Concluding Report. These maps have been digitally reproduced using ArcGIS mapping software, preserving the
spatial relationships between the artifacts mapped during the 1930s excavations, and sophisticated spatial analyses have been applied to the resultant
Lindenmeier dataset to detect spatial patterning. Among other conclusions, the spatial patterns at Lindenmeier vary across the site, reflecting differential
discard patterns enacted by the Folsom camp site occupants. These spatial patterns suggest an integrated suite of activities, including hideworking and
projectile manufacture, undertaken across the site with logical segmentation of space and association of tools into specific toolkits. This presentation
highlights some of the spatial patterns exhibited at the site. Examining spatial patterns within the distribution of discarded items at the Lindenmeier Folsom
site will contribute greatly to enhancing archaeologists' interpretations of Paleoindian, and specifically Folsom, lifeways on the Great Plains during the Late
Pleistocene.
Champion, Louis [177] see Winchell, Frank
Chamussy, Vincent [45] see Espinosa, Alicia
Chase, Arlen [26] see Chase, Diane
Chase, Diane (University of Central Florida) and Arlen Chase (University of Central Florida)
[26]              The Economic Landscape of Caracol, Belize
The economies of the ancient Maya did not exist in vacuums; rather, they were interconnected to each other. This paper details the way in which one of
these economies functioned during the Late Classic Period (A.D. 550–900). Archaeological research at Caracol, Belize, has been able to reconstruct how
ancient Maya production and exchange systems were functioning within a large metropolitan area that serviced over 100,000 people. The population of
Caracol maintained agricultural self-sufficiency on the residential level and produced a wide variety of crafts in their households for trade and exchange.
Many quotidian goods were imported into the city for distribution, as were items of higher value. Specific exchange areas, in the form of formal plazas,
were established to administer the distribution and exchange of goods. These plaza areas were also likely the locations for other administrative services.
These physical locales were managed by local elites who in turn had central oversight. The transactions that occurred in these plazas not only served local
inhabitants but also presumably resulted in the collection of taxes on the goods and services being traded, thereby bolstering the local and site center’s
elite.
[171]             Discussant
Chase, Zachary (The University of Chicago and Brigham Young University) and Zach Chase (The University of Chicago and Brigham Young
Univer)
[99]              Reconstructing Andean Pasts: Archaeology, Biology, or Ethnohistory? All of the Above, Please
Over the last several decades, Andean archaeology of the late prehispanic through early Spanish colonial periods has grown to the point that critical
reassessments of ethnohistorical materials and the anthropological models constructed from them are not only possible but necessary.
Taking as a premise that language and material culture are primary transmissions of cultural life through time, this presentation summarizes recent
archaeological research in Cuzco, Huamachuco, Pachacamac, and highlands Huarochirí–all centers of mytho-historical materials central to scholarly
reconstructions of the Andean past. I explore the implications of the results of this recent archaeology for our interpretations of early Colonial ethnohistory.
In cases of apparent or obvious contradiction, use of archaeological data to reevaluate rather than reject information from colonial documents leads to
greater understanding of late prehispanic Andean culture and life.
The realities of Quechua words/concepts like pacha, huaca, llacta, callpa, are amenable to archaeological analysis; examination of their concrete historical
instantiations can nuance definitions of these concepts even as our understanding of the concepts can produce new archaeological data. The idea is to
envision approaches that retain the analytical—even objective—vantage point provided by archaeology while also always working towards reconstructing
perceptive and effective realities in the Andean past.
Chase, Adrian (Arizona State University)
[262]             Heterarchical Entanglement: The Complexity of Maya Water Management
Many large cities of the ancient Maya, occupied in the Classic Period from 300 to 900 C.E., had limited or no access to permanent bodies of water.
Instead, these low-density urban centers focused on harnessing the full extent of the seasonal rainfall their tropical environment provided. Previous
research has highlighted the complex water management practices of the ancient Maya through their built environment and the sequestration of water into
reservoirs (constructed feature sealed with clay or lime-plaster) and agaudas (naturally occurring water storage features). Based primarily on the
prevalence, scale, and grandeur of large monumental reservoirs in city centers, the literature on water management has been dominated by top-down
models of water control; however, many smaller household reservoirs have also been identified. Comparative archaeological research in other tropical
areas highlights the existence of both top-down and bottom-up water control systems that worked in tandem. The ancient Maya also employed a
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                76
substantial bottom-up model of complex water management. This paper examines first how this bottom-up system helped support sizeable ancient Maya
populations in locations where a modern city would require drastic and costly hydrological engineering efforts, and second, how water management
affected the trajectory of many Classic Maya states.
[158]            Discussant
Chase, Arlen (University of Central Florida) and Diane Chase (University of Central Florida)
[162]            Comparing Ancient Human-Nature Reslationships at Tikal, Guatemala and Caracol, Belize
Gordon Willey wrote about the importance of settlement patterns, focusing on the ways that humans distributed themselves over the landscape. While his
and other early researchers’ efforts incorporated built features, they did not really research or assess the impact of the human-nature relationship within a
given landscape. Vern Scarborough’s work has helped to fill in this gap in the Maya area, particularly relating to Tikal, Guatemala and to northern Belize.
This paper builds on Scarborough’s examination of water systems at Tikal by comparing and contrasting the human-nature relationships at Tikal with those
at Caracol, Belize. These two sites had a tangled archaeological history, but each exhibits distinct adaptations to their particular landscapes. An
examination of the landscape and archaeologically-recorded differences between the two cities helps to better contextualize their interactions during the
Classic Period (A.D. 250–900) and importantly highlights the diverse ways in which the ancient Maya were shaped by— and shaped—their human-nature
relationships.
[262]            Discussant
Chatelain, David (Tulane University)
[88]             Political Dynamics in the Northwestern Petén from the Preclassic to the Classic: The View from La Cariba, Guatemala
La Cariba was a relatively small minor center in the northwestern Petén, but was situated in an area of important political dynamics with far-reaching
consequences in the Maya world. During the Late Preclassic, the region may have been heavily influenced by El Mirador. Eventually, during the Late
Classic, the nearby center of La Corona became a strong ally and vassal of the Kaan Dynasty at Dzibanche and later Calakmul. Formal investigations at
La Cariba since 2012 have revealed that La Cariba transitioned from an active center during the Late Preclassic to a close ally or administrative center of
La Corona during the Late Classic. The data from La Cariba, incorporating architecture, ceramics, lithics, obsidian, epigraphy, and iconography, contribute
to our understanding of the history of this region. By focusing our attention on smaller peripheral sites, we can understand the strategies of rulers of sites
such as La Corona in incorporating and maintaining control over their peripheries. In particular, La Cariba shows how the political strategies practiced by
the earlier Kaan Dynasty were adopted at a smaller scale, and with only brief success, by the later La Corona lords.
Chatters, James (Applied Paleoscience)
[21]             Making Sense of Kennewick Man
For almost 20 years, the >9,000 year-old skeleton known as Kennewick Man has been the subject of rumor, media hyperbole, lawsuit, political posturing,
and even some good science. Archaeological, osteological, morphometric, stable-isotope, chronometric, and genetic studies have now been completed
and reported and more than 50 scholars have presented their findings in internet publications, journals, and books. Widely divergent claims have been
made about this man’s heritage and place of origin. He has been variously characterized as an early European who arrived before Native Americans, a
wandering Ainu trader who lived on seals, and a direct ancestor of a single member of the Colville Tribe. All of these claims are colored by politics; none is
securely founded in scientific fact. This paper will summarize what is known, critically assess what has been reported, and discuss Kennewick Man’s
appropriate place in the archaeological and paleoanthropological story of the Americas.
Chavez, Christina [66] see Kerr, R. Stanley
Chavez, Christina (Marron and Associates), Charles Frederick (Consulting Geoarchaeologist, Dublin, Texas) and Arlo McKee (Consulting
Geoarchaeologist, Richardson, Texas)
[168]            Analysis and 3D Modeling of Pithouse Architecture during the Developmental-to-Coalition period Transition in the Albuquerque Basin
Recent archaeological investigations at LA 151618 on the west side of Albuquerque exposed an extensive residential site dating to the late Developmental-
to-Coalition period transition. The site contains a wide range of subterranean architectural features, including three pithouse structures, and three storage
pits/middens, some of surprising depth. In partnership with Charles Frederick, consulting geoarchaeologist, Dublin, Texas, and Arlo McKee, consulting
geoarchaeologist, Richardson, Texas, two features were modeled using Agisoft Photoscan to produce a scaled 3D model, DEM, and orthophoto. Through
comparison with features from contemporaneous sites in the region, the results of these analyses have implications for social developments occurring in
the Middle Rio Grande Valley during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Chechushkov, Igor (University of Pittsburgh)
[143]            Age of Heroes: Elite Warfare during the Eurasian Bronze Age
The Eurasian Bronze Age has been in focus of archaeologists, historians, and linguists at least for last 50 years for the rich and striking records of Indo-
European origin and movements. Important topics strongly attached to this theme are horse utilization and emergence of battle chariot. However,
previously they have not been analyzed statistically and rarely treated from the positions of anthropological archaeology. This paper examines the modern
level of knowledge of archaeological records through their quantitative analysis, results of experimental tests, and re-examination of chronology in light of
radiocarbon dates. One of the results is an attempt to show that during the Bronze Age, warfare caused emergence of social complexity and shaped it by
producing military professional class of elites, later reflected in such written sources as Rig Veda, and yet elites in order to preserve their social privileges
kept to create necessity of warfare and required means. This military class was directly involved to warfare; however, due the examinations of
archaeological records, it is not seen as the endemic wars, but as rare “elites”-related events.
Cheetham, David [236] see Renson, Virginie
Chen, Peiyu (University of Pittsburgh)
[31]             Household Practice and Early Forms of Social Inequality in Huaca Negra, Viru Valley
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              77
This research attempts to understand daily household practice in Huaca Negra, a coastal site that was occupied from 5,000 to 3,000 B.P. in the Viru
Valley, to answer two interrelated research questions: (1) Were there signs of institutionalized social inequality represented at the household level in Huaca
Negra during its occupation? (2) If so, through what kinds of daily household practices did potential leaders in this particular community differentiate
themselves from others? Alternatively, through what kind of practice was social equality maintained?
Previous excavation in 1946 by the Viru Valley project revealed the domestic nature of Huaca Negra. Data from 2014 survey and the excavations in the
2015 field season season will be presented and be used to examine synchronic intra-community household inequality and its long-term diachronic change.
Three lines of evidence: subsistence resources, craft goods, and exotic/prestige material imply differential access to natural resources, wealth
accumulation, and extra-local social networks, and they constitute different facets of economic activities as indexes of social inequality.
Chen, Maa-Ling [106] see Wu, Mu-Chun
Chen, Xiao (University of British Columbia), Steffan Gordon (University of British Columbia) and Zhuo Sun (Wuhan University)
[173]            Palaces and Power in Early China: Comparative Analysis between Shang and Zhou Elite Courtyard Complexs
The courtyard building, enclosed by walls or corridors, was a typical architectural pattern in ancient East Asia. According to archaeological excavations,
such as in the Yanshi and Huanbei Shang city sites, and the Zhouyuan Zhou capital site, this pattern emerged early in China, before the emergence of
Qin-Han Empires (ca. 221 B.C.E. to 200 C.E.), and then was used widely in high-class buildings such as palaces and ancestral temples. Comparison of
the high-class courtyard buildings of the Shang and Zhou periods suggests that the size and proportion of courtyard space decreased, while the interior
space of the main hall and length of the north-south axis increased, the surrounding corridors disappeared, a fixed U-shape pathway connecting the
entrance and main halls appeared, and sacrificial remains moved from south of the main hall to north. These variations of the fixed- and semifixed-feature
elements suggest a concurrent change in the nonfixed-feature elements, the people involved, such as their numbers, relationships, and the types of
activities, meetings, or rituals they engaged in within these structures. Space syntax analysis helps to show how these changes in the built environment
facilitate changes in strategies for the establishment, transmission, and inheritance of power in early China.
Chenault, Mark
[53]             Technical Analysis of Hohokam Stone Palettes from Pueblo Grande Museum
In a graduate seminar on flaked and ground stone analysis, Payson Sheets emphasized the importance of experimental replication of production
techniques for lithic analysis. In this study, I build upon the work of another of Payson's students, Devin White, who analyzed Hohokam palettes in the
collections at Arizona State Museum in Tucson, and apply his methods to the analysis of palettes at Pueblo Grande Museum in Phoenix. In addition, I
attempt to replicate some of the techniques used in the production of palettes to determine the steps involved in creating the objects and some of their
common design elements. I also examine the palettes under magnification to search for remnants of painted designs on the borders, a decorative
technique that might have been more common than once thought, but was rarely preserved.
Cheng, Chieh-fu Jeff (Boston University)
[106]            An Archaeological Study of Landscape, People, and Mobility in the Lakulaku River Basin in Eastern Taiwan from the 18th Century to the
                 Present
This research explores the historical development in the Lakulaku River Basin in the eastern section of Yushan National Park in Taiwan from the
eighteenth century to the present through a landscape archaeological perspective. The Lakulaku River area has a complex history. Indigenous Bunun
group, Qing Empire from China, and Japanese colonial government had once occupied this region, leaving the traces of human activities that change the
natural landscape. This research analyzes these traces of human activity from the past to the present, such as trails, abandoned villages and police
stations, and facilities of the national park, discussing how landscape has been manipulated by different groups of people due to the changing relationships
among them through time.
[106]            Chair
Cheng, Wen Yin (Elaine) (University of Toronto)
[180]            Raw Material Sources of Bronze Vessel Production during the Shang and Zhou Dynasties
Bronze vessels of the Shang and Zhou dynasties were extensively studied artefacts, but how were they related to the ancient geographical landscape? By
understanding how extensive the industry was and how far it had impacted the landscape, we could further our knowledge on the ancient Shang and Zhou
bronze casters as well as society. Bronze vessels required a variety of raw materials for its production. By looking at the ancient mines to produce bronze
and the clay resources for the bronze moulds, a map of the ancient bronze casting industry may be seen, giving us a better understanding of their
relationship to the landscape and how these relationships may have continued or changed between the Shang and Zhou dynasties.
Chenvert, ErinMarie, John Davis (Central Washington University), Ian Buvit (Central Washington University), Alexis Dyson (Central Washington
University) and Jillian Hendrix (Central Washington University)
[120]            Comparing Methods for Determining Particle-Size Distribution
Particle size analysis can be time consuming and expensive. Effective time and money management have the potential to contribute to more accurate
particle size analysis results. Here, we compare various pretreatment procedures to determine which is more efficient. Coarse-fraction was determined for
nine sediment samples by sifting through nested sieves with standard mesh sizes #5, #10, #35, and #60 to compare wet-screening to mechanical dry-
screening. Carbon was then removed from the smaller than #60 sub-sample by combustion, and fine-fraction was then calculated using laser diffraction.
Results show that there is no significant difference between the wet and dry screening. These results suggest that whichever method is more
advantageous financially would be the best choice of particle-size analysis.
Cheong, Kong (American University), Mads Jorgensen (University College London) and Roger Blench (Kay Williamson Educational Foundation)
[46]             Shake It Off: The Ancient Sound of Ceramic Vessel Rattles (Maracas) from Tala and Teuchitlan, Jalisco, West Mexico
In the past 60 years, the presence of musical instruments, musicians, and dancing in West Mexican art has been frequently discussed but largely
unanalyzed, limited to comparison and contextualization of individual pieces, or occasional mention tangentially as part of some other narrative. The
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 78
cursory treatment of this class of material has resulted in many unanswered questions: Who, for example, made these instruments? Who played them?
How were they made? How and when were they used? What do they sound like? What did they mean to the people who used them? In order to answer
these questions, we must further our understanding of the instruments themselves. In this paper, we will present our study on vessel rattles, or maracas.
Vessel rattles are one of the true indigenous instruments of the Americas. They are almost always associated with rituals, as evident in iconography and
ethnographic records. Seven ceramic vessel rattles from a private collection in Jalisco, ranging from the common gourd shaped to zoomorphic and
anthropomorphic, are presented. Insights into the possible usage and meaning of these instruments and their organology are discussed as an analysis of
ancient West Mexican musical culture.
[46]             Chair
Cherkinsky, Alex [39] see Loftis, Kathy
Cherry, John (Brown University) and Thomas Leppard (Rutgers University)
[296]            Re-assessing Island Colonization and Exploitation in the Late Pleistocene-Early Holocene Mediterranean
In 1981, one of us (Cherry) first attempted to tease out spatial and temporal patterning in the colonization of the Mediterranean islands by human
communities. Since the 1980s, slowly accumulating evidence has suggested that the Mediterranean islands were sporadically exploited by hunter-
gatherer-fishers (HGF) during the Epipalaeolithic and Mesolithic. Here, adapting principles from island biogeography, we seek to establish whether or not
these patchy data exhibit patterning. We suggest that the non-permanent exploitation of larger and ecologically-robust islands (such as Crete and Sardinia)
indicates that, while humans were clearly capable of reaching the Mediterranean islands prior to the Neolithic, their general reluctance to do so can be
explained in terms of the variable environmental attractiveness of the insular Mediterranean. Tending to be relatively small, dry, and biologically
depauperate, the Mediterranean islands were largely inhospitable to mobile HGF groups requiring extensive territories with diverse and robust biotas.
Sedentism only became a widely viable strategy in the insular Mediterranean with the development in the Neolithic of what we might regard as
‘terraforming’—that is, the introduction of cereals, pulses, and ovicaprids, all tolerant of xeric environments.
Chesson, Meredith [171] see Ames, Nicholas
Chhay, Rachna [262] see Carter, Alison
Chiang, Chihhua (Department of Anthropology, National Taiwan University)
[180]            The Projectile Points at the Wansan site, Neolithic Taiwan
Wansan site is one of the late Neolithic sites in Northeastern Taiwan. In 1998, due to construction, a large rescue excavation was conducted at the site and
huge amounts of lithic and ceramic artifacts were uncovered. Among the lithic artifacts are finely ground tools, including projectile points, adzes, axes,
knives, etc. This poster aims to analyze one specific tool: the projectile point. Three parts of analysis are demonstrated in this poster. First, I will introduce
the projectile points uncovered from that excavation, including the types, raw materials, and the distribution of these projectile points. Then, I will examine
the broken pattern of these projectile points spatially. In the end, I will investigate the rich ethnographic data in Taiwan to discuss the functions of the
projectile points in traditional indigenous societies. In conclusion, I will try to infer how Neolithic Wansan people might use these projectile points and the
possible meaning of these different projectile points.
Chiarulli, Beverly (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[153]            An Analysis of the use of Quarries and Workshops by Late Prehistoric People in Western Pennsylvania
During the Late Prehistoric Period in the central Allegheny Valley of Western Pennsylvania, at least four major lithic raw material types were used for the
manufacture of a limited variety of tool types. The major tool forms were small triangular projectile points and flake tools. The major raw material types
used in this region include Onondaga, Loyalhanna, and Shriver cherts and Vanport Siliceous Shale. Workshops and quarries have been identified for
these materials and are found on the north, south, east, and west sides of this region. An analysis of the lithic assemblages from several villages
investigated by our field schools and other projects has found that these raw materials were used throughout the area. Additional investigation of the raw
materials used in the villages suggests that although the frequency of raw materials used in any particular village generally reflects the distance to sources,
there are some materials that are present in greater than expected quantities. While there is no expectation that native groups in western Pennsylvania
were transporting the quarry products in great quantities, it is possible that some raw materials could have been moved either overland or through canoe
transport on the regional rivers.
Chiatti, Lawrence
[226]            Boxes and Boxes of Guilt: Guilt Mail from the Canyon de Chelly National Monument
Within the collections housed at the Canyon de Chelly National Monument there are many archaeological artifacts and natural resource materials which
were taken and subsequently returned by visitors to the park, along with associated letters and correspondence. While the existence of these returned
unauthorized collections, also known as “Guilt Mail,” is not common knowledge among the general public or park visitors, many national parks have similar
items in their collections.
Within the National Park Service, comprehensive guidelines regarding management, recording, and cataloging returned unauthorized collections are
nonexistent. Also, detailed or even large scale studies of these returned artifacts and associated letters are embryonic at best.
This study will focus on the kinds of materials taken, when the thefts occurred and when the items were returned, and the procedures and practices that
the national parks follow in cataloging guilt mail. Artifacts and letters from the Canyon de Chelly are the prime focus of this study, but other southwestern
parks and their collections are referenced.
Chickanis, Caius and Monica Briseno
[93]             Developing a New Methodology for Sourcing Calcite and Quartz Crystals
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                    79
Quarts and calcite crystals are used by shamans throughout Mesoamerica for divination. Ethnographic accounts mention shamans who, lacking actual
crystals, use pieces of broken glass. This suggests that crystals may not occur in all areas so that crystals could have been actively traded in
precolumbian times. Testing this hypothesis requires developing a methodology for sourcing quarts and calcite crystals using trace elements incorporated
into the crystal matrix during growth. So far as we know, this has not been previously attempted. This paper presents the results of tests using a number of
sourcing techniques run on crystals recovered riverine sands in the Cueva de Río Murciélagos, Dos Pilas against crystals from other areas. We hope to
apply this methodology to the Maya area.
Chicoine, David [56] see Treloar, James
Chicoine, David (Louisiana State University)
[56]              Enchanted Plazas: Monumental Art and Iconography in Early Horizon Coastal Ancash
This paper considers the spatial design of ritual gathering places and the iconographic content of associated sculpted friezes at Early Horizon centers in
Nepeña, coastal Ancash, Peru. The Early Horizon marked a transition from representational art of the late Initial Period to abstract forms of public visual
arts during the second half of the first millennium B.C. This paper examines the context of the public visual arts within enclosed compounds—hypothesized
as multi-functional residences—and evaluates their role in shaping social interactions during the Early Horizon. I argue that the visual and aesthetic
properties of the public art “enchanted” visitors and rendered semi-public plazas “magical” to the gaze of outsiders. The shift from late Initial Period to Early
Horizon iconographies marked both a democratization of religious practices and a revival of natural, animistic forces as powerful agents of social
reproduction. It is argued that abstract visual arts have the capacity to associate human ritual actions with powerful natural and supernatural agents. This
represents a radical shift from the therianthropic forms of Chavín, Cupisnique, and Sechín arts.
[56]              Chair
Chiewphasa, Ben [175] see Law, Karly
Childs, Terry (Department of the Interior)
[202]             Discussant
Chilton, Elizabeth [10] see Battle-Baptiste, Whitney
Chinchilla, Oswaldo (Yale University)
[58]              Public or Private? Archaeology in Modern Guatemalan Museums
Recent decades have witnessed a veritable explosion in the number of museums in Guatemala. Most of the new museums are small, focused on specific
collections or sites. Some emerged from governmental initiatives, but many are private endeavors. In this paper, I trace the historical development of
museums, going back to earlier, nineteenth and early twentieth-century precedents. I also offer comments on modern Guatemalan museums, including
questions of institutional development, funding, collections management, and preservation, and public outreach at the national and international levels.
Chinique De Armas, Yadira (Department of Anthropology, University of Winnipeg), William Mark Buhay (Department of Anthropology, University
of Winnipeg), Roberto Rodríguez Suárez (Anthropological Montane Museum, University of Hava), David Smith (Department of Anthropology,
University of Toronto) and Mirjana Roksandic (Department of Anthropology, University of Winnipeg)
[220]             Subsistence Strategies and Food Consumption Patterns of “Fisher-Gatherer” Populations from Western Cuba: From Traditional
                  Perspectives to Current Analytical Results
Starch and isotopic analyses have changed our understanding of subsistence strategies and food consumption patterns of Cuban “fisher-gatherers,”
traditionally considered as populations who depended on natural resources, without management of cultigens. Isotopes (13C and 15N) from Guayabo
Blanco, Cueva del Perico, Cueva Calero, and Canímar Abajo (CA) sites, indicated two different food consumption patterns among coexistent “fisher-
gathers,” suggesting that populations with different dietary traditions co-existed in Cuba. At the site of CA, we identified beans and maize and/or sweet
potato starches. While CA individuals depended on marine resources and C3/C4 plants, the others relied mostly on terrestrial sources and C3 plants. Our
findings do not support the traditional evolutionary model that stated a unilinear transition from “fisher-gatherer” towards agriculturalist, as older CA
individuals managed plants 1,000 years earlier than people from the other sites. This also confirmed that cultigens were used before Agriculturalist
expansion into the island.
Chiou, Katherine (University of California, Berkeley)
[122]             Common Meals, Noble Feasts: An Archaeological Investigation of Moche Food and Cuisine in the Jequetepeque Valley, Peru
In the North Coast of Peru, relatively little is known about the majority of the population that supported the lifestyles of the elite. In this paper, I discuss the
concept of a Moche cuisine through a study of the foodways of both elite and commoner classes, drawing on archaeobotanical data from a feasting
preparation area located in the elite cemetery of San José de Moro and from a humble household situated near the base of the fortified hilltop settlement of
Cerro Chepén. Cuisine can be interpreted as much more than a set of cooking traditions that define a group or groups of people through space and time. It
is a cultural construct that incorporates the meanings surrounding the ingredients, the preparation, cooking, and combination of flavors, and the when,
where, why, and how of eating, linking foods with a way of life; in essence, cuisine is what sets one culture apart from another and provides a common
understanding of what it means to belong to a community. By conceptualizing the common, everyday meal and contrasting it with the opposite extreme—
the feast—I examine how food might have played a central role in the creation and negotiation of Moche identity.
[122]             Chair
Chiou, Katherine L. [122] see Kennedy, Sarah
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 80
Chiquito Cortés, Erik (UNAM)
[136]            Una propuesta de estilo entorno a la pintura mural de Ixcaquixtla, Puebla.
Con el hallazgo fortuito de una cámara mortuoria en Ixcaquixtla, Puebla (dentro de la mixteca). se pudieron registrar un conjunto de pinturas murales que
hasta la fecha son únicas en la región.
A pesar de contar ya con once años de haber sido descubiertas, los trabajos entorno a la pintura mural son escasos y los existentes se centran en
determinan su contenido iconográfico.
Con base en la anterior, nuestra presentación reflexiona y busca dar una propuesta estilística sobre la pintura mural, considerando los factores culturales
(internos y externos) que desarrolla e influyen a la pintura, a su vez se tomará en cuenta el periodo histórico (epiclásico) en el que se elabora dicha obra y
el mismo contexto arqueológico.
Chiriboga, Carlos [138] see Freidel, David
Chirikure, Shadreck (Department of Archaeology, University of Cape Town, South Africa) and Abigial Joy Moffett (Department of Archaeology,
University of Cape Town)
[107]            Fluid Spaces and Fluid Objects: Nocturnal Material Culture in Sub-Saharan Africa with Special Reference to southern Africa
The transition of time from day into night is a fundamental pivot through which human existence revolves. And yet, as if ‘afraid of the dark’, few
archaeological reconstructions have attempted to explore nightly practices. In the anthropology of southern Africa, particularly amongst groups such as the
Shona, the dawn of the night opened the door to a host of nocturnal activities, which included learning, reproduction, relaxation, and ritual. For example,
witches used mundane winnowing baskets as transport while they placed quotidian pestles adjacent to their partners as decoys to prevent them from
noticing their absence during nocturnal expeditions. Given that houses and material culture used during the Iron Age (C.E. 200–1900) of southern Africa
often closely resemble that used in some contexts, it is possible, within limitations, to delineate nocturnal activities. We fuse a rich body of anthropological
knowledge, supplemented by participation in Shona society to explore nocturnal activities in an archaeological context. Interestingly, objects such as glass
beads, often celebrated as symbols of prestige by archaeologists, were used to enhance sexual pleasure at night. The use of spaces and objects was fluid
between day and night such that archaeological interpretation should be alert to multiple possibilities.
Chirinos Ogata, Patricia (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[102]            Wari Imperial Presence in Cajamarca: A View from Yamobamba
The Wari empire built at least two main centers in the Cajamarca region as part of its expansion to different regions of the Central Andes. One of them,
Yamobamba, 25 km southeast on the road to Huamachuco, presents an architectural pattern that corresponds to Wari canons, including square patios,
narrow corridors, and peripheral galleries. In particular, its distribution, size, and orientation show a strong resemblance to Jincamocco (Ayacucho), almost
900 km away.
Recent research at Yamobamba confirmed the layout and distribution of most of the preserved structures, and defined a room at the center of the site that
probably served as a point of access to the subdivided half of the enclosure. However, the associated materials suggest that while the site was built during
the Middle Horizon, it was only briefly occupied. This paper presents the results of two seasons of work at Yamobamba, and examines its place in the
imperial network, considering its architectural features, location, and evidence of activities.
[102]            Chair
Chisholm, Linda (Katmai National Park & Preserve), Thomas M. Urban (Cornell University), Robert W. Jacob (Bucknell University), Dale Vinson
(Katmai National Park & Preserve) and Jillian Richie (Gates of the Arctic National Park & Preserve)
[148]            Geophysical Survey Meets Cultural Resource Management at Brooks River NHL
The Brooks River Archaeological District National Historic Landmark (XMK-050) in Katmai National Park, Alaska, includes sites that date from 2500 B.C. to
the historic period—a cultural record that spans nearly 4,500 years. While this district has already yielded data of great scientific importance—including the
greatest concentration of Arctic Small Tool tradition dwelling sites in Alaska, and possibly in North America—it is suspected that as much as 90 perecent of
the cultural resources remain undisturbed and untested. These resources are presently under threat from both erosion and the ongoing need to maintain
infrastructure at the visitor camp. In 201,5 our team conducted extensive geophysical surveying of highly-impacted areas using ground-penetrating radar
(GPR), magnetometry, and electomagnetic induction (EM). The surveys located a number of previously unknown archaeological features and gathered
new information on some known features. The highlights of this effort are presented.
Chiykowski, Tanya (Binghamton University)
[41]             Petrography, Pots and People: Determining the Source of Hohokam Plainwares at Cerro de Trincheras, Sonora, Mexico
Late prehistoric Sonora, Mexico, was a dynamic landscape of warfare, mass migration, and trade networks spanning modern international borders. At
around A.D. 1300, archaeologists have clear evidence of Hohokam populations moving from southern Arizona and displacing indigenous Trincheras
populations in the Altar River Valley of Sonora. With a ceramic type called Sells Plain, Hohokam potters introduce a new ceramic manufacturing
technology—paddle-and-anvil ceramics—to the region. In response to this migration, the indigenous Trincheras Tradition population built the site of Cerro
de Trincheras 60 km away in the Middle Magdalena Valley. The presence of large quantities of Sells Plain ceramics at Cerro de Trincheras suggests that
Trincheras and Hohokam populations interacted, but not how the process occurred, nor the impact those actions had. My research uses ceramic
petrography and stylistic analysis to test for trade, community migration, and the movement of women. This poster presents the petrofacies model and its
correspondence to sherds recovered from northern Sonora. My analysis shows that the predominant form of interaction between the two cultures were
Hohokam women moving to the site, likely under coercion or violence.
Chmilar, Jennifer
[162]            A Flow of Ideas: Water Management from an Aguada and into Wetlands
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 81
The approach taken by Vernon Scarborough to the study of water management in the Maya area has been a thorough investigation of the role of water in
the formation of both the relationships of people with their environment, and also the impact of water in the organization of people among themselves.
While I was a student of Vern Scarborough's from 2003 through 2005, he emphasized three key points in my thinking. The first is an openness to seek is a
cross cultural analogy. Secondly, he stressed the depth of knowledge that people had of their environmental systems and how this knowledge may have
been incorporated variously into economic, political, religious, and other organizational schemes. Finally, while adhering to the scientific method,
Scarborough stressed the need for multi-disciplinary collaboration and a resulting interpretation that is both holistic and humanistic. The following
presentation will draw from Scarborough's extensive body of work in the Maya area to demonstrate his impact not only on my work— while as a student of
his working on an aguada in Belize and also subsequently while investigating ancient Maya use of wetlands in Quintana Roo, Mexico—but also comment
on the legacy he has created.
Chovanec, Zuzana (University At Albany) and Sean Rafferty (University at Albany)
[189]            Detecting Olive Oil and Other Mediterranean Plant Oils: Experimental Considerations in Differentiating Lipids in Ancient Residues
This paper presents an experimental research program that assesses the possibility of distinguishing olive oil from other oils derived from Mediterranean
plants based on fatty acid profiles. Due to the olive’s prolific use in the region, its oil is often presumed rather than demonstrated to be present in ancient
residues. Other residue studies have suggested that different organic products may be differentiated based on specific ratios of fatty acid pairs. To
evaluate this approach, a sample of Cypriot olive oil underwent an artificial aging study that modeled chemical alterations of fatty acids using gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS). Fatty acid pairs that potentially could be used to differentiate olive oil from other plant oils were statistically
determined. These results of the experimental study were compared to chemical data for other plants indigenous to the island of Cyprus and applied to a
data set of archaeological samples that had undergone chemical analysis. The outcome suggests that the method described may be used to distinguish
olive oil from other plant oils if a vessel was used exclusively for the storage of olive oil.
Christenson, Andrew (Smoki Museum of American Indian Art & Culture)
[258]            The Matthew Effect in Archaeology: Discovery, the Transmission of Knowledge, and Credit
Although the Matthew Effect was originally used by sociologist Robert K. Merton for the disproportionate credit given to eminent scientists in cases of
collaboration or independent discoveries within a professional discipline, it also is appropriate to apply it to situations where professionals take away or gain
credit for work done by amateurs. Examples of such an effect are provided with an examination of the more general issue of how knowledge of discoveries
is transmitted in archaeology and how outsiders are usually at a strong disadvantage over insiders in making their research known and in receiving credit
for important contributions. This effect is further reinforced when it carries over into histories of archaeology that take the research activities of
professionals to be their primary basis, leaving recognition of the important contributions of amateurs under- or un-represented.
[258]            Chair
Christie, Jessica (East Carolina University) and Ivan Ghezzi (Yale University)
[233]            The Inka in Chankillo?
The Inka used numerous strategies to expand and integrate a growing empire. We present a case of Inka mobilization of things and ideas, seeking to
establish context, through the lenses of stone cults, wak’as, sun worship, and sukankas, for a unique fertility offering found far from the capital on a tower
at the Chankillo site (400–200 B.C.) on the north-central coast.
The towers functioned as a solar observatory: sunrises and sunsets were tracked across the towers from two observation points. An Inka delegation
traveling on the northern coastal road could have placed this offering at Chankillo. The similarities between its towers and the Inka sukankas have long
been noted. Their form recalls vertical monoliths on mountaintops underneath which qhapaq ucha figurines were sometimes buried. Vertical stone wak’as
with associated qhapaq ucha figurines in Inka contexts have been documented. Since there is no Inka occupation at Chankillo, this offering represents an
act of Inka wak’a making at an important, early, and by then abandoned, site. The astronomical context and symbolism of this ritual performance indicate
the Inka related the meaning of the Chankillo towers to their own worldview, and mobilized people and objects accordingly.
[233]            Chair
Christine, Markussen [124] see Dolan, Patrick
Chunag, Amraturvshin [180] see Ciolek-Torello, Richard
Church, Robert [39] see Warren, Daniel
Church, Warren (Columbus State University, GA)
[102]            Beyond the Marañon: A Consideration of Cajamarca's Changing Relationships with Chachapoyas Societies
This paper offers observations regarding the distribution of Cajamarca fine, painted kaolin-ware pottery recovered to the east, across the Marañon canyon
in the Chachapoyas region cloud forests. Cajamarca’s complex societies lay at the center of expansive interaction networks during prehispanic times. The
clearest evidence of Cajamarca's long-distance communication networks consists of its signature fine, painted kaolin-ware bowls discovered in sacred and
mortuary contexts across the central Andes, especially during the Middle Horizon. During the 1940s, the first chronological sequence was produced by
Henri and Paulette Reichlen who documented the development of Cajamarca’s kaolin fine-ware tradition that paralleled production of quotidian wares over
two thousand years. The Reichlens were also among the first to cross the Marañon canyon to conduct systematic survey and excavations, and to note the
distribution of Cajamarca kaolin wares extending eastward into the archaeological region of Chachapoyas. Chachapoyas archaeology is still
underdeveloped, but Cajamarca kaolin bowls, and local imitations, are found at monumental sites and in local collections. Recently, excavated samples
allow dating of interregional communication across the Marañon between Cajamarca and Chachapoyas to the first centuries B.C. Lacking trace-element
studies, only tentative hypotheses regarding the sociopolitical and economic nature of this culture contact are offered.
Ciccone, Salvatore
[61]             Space and Architecture: Historical Archaeology at the Eastern Pequot reservation
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                82
Prior to the devastating Pequot War of 1636, the Pequot people of modern day Connecticut were one unified nation. As a result of the conflict, there now
exists two separate cultural groups, the Mashantucket Pequot and the Eastern Pequot. They experienced a trajectory throughout history that remained
mostly parallel until modern times. My research examines some of their historic variations, particularly their architectural practices, and the timing of their
transition to English-style framed houses. Much is already known about the Mashantucket transition, believed to have been complete by 1830; however,
recent archaeological excavations at the Eastern Pequot Tribal Nation Reservation from the 2015, 2013, and 2011 field seasons have the potential to shine
new light on to what degree their architecture stylistically and functionally changed throughout reservation occupation. Through a direct comparison of
Eastern Pequot architectural materials to contemporary English ones, I seek to understand the negotiation of Euro-American and Indigenous concepts of
space and architecture on the Eastern Pequot reservation.
Ciccone, Jay (Klyne Esopus Museum)
[274]            The Paleoindian Period at the Aldrich Island Site: A Multicomponent Paleoindian site in the Hudson River Valley
The Middle and Late Paleoindian Periods had formerly been close to absent from the literature of known Hudson Valley Paleoindian sites. This led some
researchers to suggest that these cultures might have, to a larger degree, stayed away from this region as a whole. However, recent findings from the
Aldrich Island Site demonstrate that the Hudson Valley of New York State was indeed inhabited and utilized by these cultures, and perhaps much more
extensively than once previously thought. A wide range of Middle and Late Paleoindian projectile point typologies are present at Aldrich Island, along with
all stages of preforms manufactured from a large high-grade lithic source very close to the site. Some of these typologies, before now, are not known from
the northeast, where the “home” landscapes of these cultures are from far outside of this region. Highly exotic lithic materials, most of which from the Late
Paleoindian portions of the collection, suggest that long distance travel just after the Younger Dryas might not have experienced as much of a constricted
environment as once had been thought for the northeast during this time period.
Cienfuegos, Edith [20] see Casar, Isabel
Cinquino, Michael [131] see Hayward, Michele
Ciolek-Torello, Richard (Statistical Research, Inc.), Michael Heilen (Statistical Research, Inc.), Jeffrey Homburg (Statistical Research, Inc),
Amraturvshin Chunag and Gunchinsuren Byambaa
[180]            Modeling Archaeological Site Location in Northern Mongolia: The Northern Railways Archaeological Project
Around the world, predictive models are increasingly important to heritage management by estimating where sites are likely to be located, particularly in
un-surveyed areas. Northern Mongolia is well known for its archaeological resources, particularly Bronze Age and Early Iron Age sites, but vast areas
remain to be surveyed. This poster presents a project conducted by the Mongolian International Heritage Team and Statistical Research to provide
recommendations on the routing of a proposed Northern Rail Link between Murun and Erdenet, in northern Mongolia. The project involved several steps.
First, a preliminary model of archaeological site location was created by regional experts using prior knowledge of the regional archaeological record and
logical expectations regarding site location. The model was operationalized in a geographic information system and subsequently used to design sample
survey within an area surrounding several proposed railway corridor alternatives. Survey results were then used to refine the model using advanced
statistical methods, estimate the potential for impacts and heritage investigation costs along segments of the proposed railway, and recommend further
work. The project proved to be a responsible and cost-effective approach to considering and protecting heritage resources of national and global
significance in a remote and understudied region.
Cipolla, Craig (Royal Ontario Museum)
[18]             “Nothing but Wood and Stones”: A Long-View Perspective on Human-Stone Relations in the Native Northeast
In 1762 Ezra Stiles—ethnohistoric observer and future president of Yale University—puzzled over the significance of brush and stone heaps constructed
by indigenous people of New England. He found the label “sacrifice rocks” unfit for such features because indigenous people never killed animals or
offered lives of any kind there. I begin this paper by addressing some of the challenges involved in interpreting eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
indigenous spirituality and religion. I contextualize archaeological patterns from households, cemeteries, and landscapes in terms of their long-term
histories, beginning with deeper eras of prehistory. I focus on the complicated relationship between humans and stones, tracing its development through
time. I consider the ways in which ancient bodily practices and engagements with stone relate to the archaeological patterns we find in colonial contexts,
suggesting that perhaps wood and stone were more person-like (even in Christian Indian worlds) than Ezra Stiles ever considered.
[18]             Chair
Clark, Jeffery [17] see Peeples, Matt
Clark, Geoffrey (Arizona State University)
[170]            Lithics, Landscapes & la Longue-Durée – Curation as an Expression of Forager Mobility
With the recognition that practically all archaeological sites are depositional composites unrelated to the activities of any contemporary group of individuals
(i.e., palimpsests) and that forager adaptations are not ‘site-specific’ but rather landscape-scaled phenomena, statistical approaches designed to take
these predicates into account have been developed over the past decade that depart from the traditional techno-typological systematics used for decades
in much of Europe and the Levant. Based on artifact density and the frequency of retouched pieces scaled to the volume of sediment excavated in cave
and rockshelter sites (Riel-Salvatore and Barton 2004), and the ratio of retouched artifacts to artifact totals scaled to unit area in surface sites (Miller and
Barton 2008), they can potentially determine whether or not changes in mobility and land-use often assumed to have coincided with major evolutionary
events (e.g., the Middle-Upper Paleolithic transition) actually occurred. Lithic artifact counts and densities from excavated cave and rockshelter sites and
surface surveys in Spain and Jordan are used to illustrate the potential of the approach.
Clark, Brian (Rice University)
[181]            Ethiopia's Peripatetic Royal Capitals and Prospects for Their Study
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                83
From the thirteenth to seventeenth centuries, emperors of Ethiopia, attended by the royal court, largely abandoned rule from fixed capitals in favor of a
migratory lifestyle suited to projecting imperial power across an unruly collection of subjugated states and territories. At its peak, this system of
administration was formalized into a highly regulated assembly of people with the visual and functional attributes of a royal urban center, though it lacked
the spatial permanency of a conventional city. The archaeological study of such a site then is important not only for better understanding the context of
royal power and authority in medieval Ethiopia, but would also make a major contribution to our understanding of urbanism and the diversity of forms it may
take. The mountainous setting of the Ethiopian Highlands, however, poses a number of challenges to the identification and study of such ephemeral
settlements. This poster will outline the significance and archaeological identification of such settlements with attention toward recent research into
highland formation processes, human and natural, likely to affect the archaeological visibility and preservation of such ephemeral settlements.
Clark, Barbara
[260]            The Best Days at FPAN are Shared with Others: The Various Partnerships FPAN had Developed Over the Years
Since its inception, the Florida Public Archaeology Network has relied on partnerships with other organizations to help meet our goal of public awareness
and education. Throughout the years, we have partnered with various organizations to offer training, workshops, youth and adult programs, and other
opportunities for the public to learn about Florida’s archaeological heritage. Each of these partnerships is unique and bring with them their own challenges
and successes. This paper will discuss some of the partnerships FPAN has developed over the last ten years and share some of the lessons we have
learned through these partnerships.
Clark, Ryan (Field Director, Prentice Thomas & Associates)
[286]            Engendering the Monongahela: Social and Spatial Dimensions of the Johnston(36In2) Village Site Mortuary Practices
Since the early 1930s, systematic archaeological excavations of Monongahela sites have produced a large mortuary assemblage. Despite the large
number of burials, Monongahela mortuary studies have remained mainly descriptive. Previous attempts to categorize Monongahela mortuary behavior
have relied on generalities about Monongahela burial data, masking the importance of gender and age variability within a site. This research presents the
results from a study using comparisons of patterns among spatially segregated burials, gravegood associations, mortality curves, grave orientation, and
spatial patterns which provide information important to understanding the range of different activities and contexts that likely involved gender. The results
of this research provide a baseline for an examination of the Monongahela mortuary complex in relation to the cultural manifestations of the Johnston Site,
Blairsville, Pennsylvania (36In2).
Clarke, Andrew (University of Cambridge, UK)
[223]            10,000 Years of Bottle Gourds (Lagenaria Siceraria): Archaeology of the First Global Crop
The bottle gourd (Lagenaria siceraria) has been cultivated for at least 10,000 years and was the only plant species cultivated in both the Old and New
Worlds before Columbus; in this sense, it can be considered the world’s first global crop. Its durable fruit shells are used for containers, apparel, and
musical instruments throughout the tropics, subtropics, and some temperate zones worldwide. Despite the importance of bottle gourd, its distribution
across many cultures, and a long-standing interest from archaeologists, very little is known about its origins and dispersal. Based on a synthesis of the
available archaeological and genetic evidence, a model of the evolutionary history of the bottle gourd is presented, with a focus on the origins, human
selection, and dispersal of this important crop. Particular attention is given to the bottle gourd in Africa—the putative homeland of the species, but the
region about which least is known. Progress using ancient DNA (archaeogenetic) analysis for reconstructing the history of bottle gourd is also presented.
Further understanding the history of bottle gourd will allow insights into the tempo and mode of human selection, the development and spread of
agriculture, and biological exchange in the Anthropocene.
Clarke, Geoff (ANU, Australia), Aaron Camens (Flinders University), Simon Haberle (ANU) and Atholl Anderson (ANU)
[223]            Radiocarbon Dated Archaeozoological and Palaeoecological Evidence of Initial Human Colonization in Madagascar
Human impacts to Madagascar, through the introduction of non-native species, habitat modification, and species extinctions, are thought to have begun in
the prehistoric period. Understanding of these anthropogenic modifications to Madagascar’s ecosystems is, however, impossible without solid
chronologies for human settlement and expansion across the island, which are currently lacking. Estimates of the period in which people first colonized
Madagascar have varied considerably, and never more so than today. Archaeological remains of material culture generally suggest colonization began
1400–1100 B.P., within a context of Austronesian migration. However, palaeoecological changes and apparent cultural damage on the bones of extinct
megafauna have been radiocarbon dated as occuring 2000-4000 B.P. and one archaeological site extends to 4300 B.P. by OSL dating. We question
aspects of this evidence and report that results from our archaeozoological and palaeoecological fieldwork in southwest Madagascar, indicate substantially
later human settlement.
Clasby, Ryan (UMSL)
[56]             Understanding the Ceja de Selva in Relationship to the Central Andean Coast and Highlands during the Early Horizon
Andean archaeologists have long debated the degree to which the ceja de selva or eastern Andean montane forest was involved within the larger historical
processes that led to the development of sociopolitical complexity in central Andean highlands and coast. For some scholars such as Julio C. Tello and
Donald Lathrap, the apparent tropical forest influence in Chavín iconography as well as the similarity of eastern slope ceramics to contemporary highland
and coastal assemblages suggested that the region was well connected to events happening in the central Andes during the Initial Period and Early
Horizon. While this debate was long hampered by a lack of research, a recent surge of investigations in the ceja de selva have provided new insights into
the type of societies that developed in the region. This paper will attempt to synthesize these results using new evidence from the site of Huayurco in the
northeastern slopes of the Peruvian Andes to better contextualize the role of the ceja within Early Horizon interaction networks. Particular emphasis will be
placed onto the degree to which the ceja participated within the Chavín sphere of interaction.
Clauter, Jody (Office of the Wyoming State Archaeologist), Zachary Garhart (University of Wyoming Archaeological Repository), Adam Guinard
(University of Wyoming Archaeological Repository) and Rachael Shimek (University of Wyoming Archaeological Repository)
[265]            Clovis Points, Trade Beads, and Everything in Between: Collections at the University of Wyoming Archaeological Repository
This poster details the archaeological collections housed at the University of Wyoming Archaeological Repository (UWAR) located in Laramie. The
repository houses approximately three million artifacts from 15,000 different Wyoming sites as well as comparative, replica, experimental, and educational
materials. We highlight our extensive suite of artifacts from across the state, which includes artifacts from all time periods from the Paleoindian to the
Historic. Many of these objects are submitted through private donations, academic research, or are curated by contractors through federal projects. We
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                84
also discuss our partnerships with state, federal, and local agencies to complete education and outreach programs. These programs increase awareness
and use of our archaeological collections in a variety of ways including hosting visiting researchers, loans to museums and historical societies, exhibit
preparation, school group tours and classroom activity development, and an archaeological collections management class for undergraduates and
graduates at the university. Finally, we show how we have used information from our own research on older collections to enhance modern investigations.
Clauwaerts, Pauline (Université Libre de Bruxelles)
[118]              The Priestesses of San José de Moro: Toward a Material Approach of Personhood in the Moche World
After more than 20 years of investigations, the San José de Moro Archaeological Project has discovered a total of seven funerary chambers pertaining to
Late Moche “priestesses” (A.D. 600–850) in one of the most important ceremonial centres and cemeteries located on the north coast of Peru. This
attribution was made by the correlation with different elements present in the tomb referring directly to this character. This “priestess set” works as an
efficient identification criterion. However, the image of this emblematic Moche priestess became fixated in the collective unconscious. We argue that this
aspect of their identity is not the only one we can identify in the grave. With this paper, we move away from the traditional iconographic assignation.
Instead, we look into the plural personhood of these women through an analysis of the material correlates found in the tomb. We explore the material data
related, along with the architectural and anthropological data, considering the tomb as a “biographical object.” Finally, we aim to highlight the singularities
of their dividual personhood and consequently draw a more complete portrait of these singular women.
Clay, Elizabeth (University of Pennsylvania)
[126]              Constructing Space and Community within Landscapes of Slavery in Early 19th c. Jamaica
While household artifact analyses contribute a great deal to understanding the enslaved experience in the colonial Caribbean, where possible, landscape
studies allow archaeologists to more completely reconstruct past built environments of slavery. Using a landscape approach, this paper investigates the
use of space by the enslaved population at Marshall’s Pen, a nineteenth century Jamaican coffee estate. Through landscape survey, we can better
understand how enslaved men and women actively constructed space to suit their needs and in doing so created a unique community of individuals and
families. In order to reconstruct how this community came about spatially, we investigate architectural variability, the delineation of associated house yards,
the construction of gardens and pens, and the conglomeration of these features into compounds. This type of analysis provides a much more detailed
understanding of the living environment of enslaved workers than that which is available through the documentary record alone.
[126]              Chair
Clayton, Sarah (University of Wisconsin-Madison)
[129]              A City in Decline: Insights on the Collapse of Teotihuacan from the Southern Basin of Mexico
In this paper I discuss the urban decline and political breakdown of Teotihuacan from the vantage of Chicoloapan Viejo, an agrarian settlement situated in
the Basin of Mexico hinterland, 40 km south of the capital city. Fieldwork in the southeastern Basin, including settlement survey led by Jeffrey Parsons in
the 1960s and excavations at Chicoloapan in 2013 and 2014, shows that population numbers in this area grew dramatically in the years surrounding the
state’s dissolution. As a settlement that expanded whilst others, elsewhere in Basin, were abandoned, Chicoloapan presents an opportunity to consider the
conditions and strategies that promote resilience in the midst of decentralization and to examine collapse as a simultaneously regional and local process. I
present the results of recent excavations at Chicoloapan and their implications for understanding changing practices, material culture, and heterogeneity
among local households through time. I emphasize the impact of migration on demographic growth in the area, including the possible reception of previous
residents of Teotihuacan, a city that was in the throes of urban decay. Finally, AMS radiocarbon determinations from multiple domestic contexts at
Chicoloapan make it possible to relate changes on a community scale to broader processes of contracting state power.
[129]              Chair
Cleghorn, Naomi [181] see Peart, Daniel
Clifton, Virginia (Colorado State University/EBI Consulting)
[39]               Victorian Era Opiate use at the Vanoli Red Light District of Ouray, Colorado
By 1875 Ouray, Colorado, was a booming mining town with a prosperous red light district (Vanoli Site 5OR30) after rich silver veins were discovered in the
surrounding mountains. As the town rapidly expanded and prospectors flooded into the mines, the red light district flourished, entertaining the thousands of
miners in the area. In 1977, excavations led by Steve Baker investigated the lives of patrons and prostitutes who frequented the Vanoli red light district. As
a result, thousands of artifacts were unearthed. Of primary interest to the current investigation are those associated with recreational drug use, which are
suggestive prostitution culture at the end of the Victorian era. This paper researches the assemblage of over 300 complete medicine bottles recovered from
three privies located in close proximity to the Gold Belt Theater, the 220 Dance Hall, and the prostitutes cribs. The Vanoli sample, compared against other
collections and publications, determined which bottles once contained heroin. The cultural and biological significance of heroin use at the time are
important elements to this conclusion. From this evidence, it is likely that the prostitutes and their clients were engaging in recreational heroin use.
Clifton, Julia [265] see Montoya, Amy
Cobb, Charles (Florida Museum of Natural History) and Gifford Waters (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[18]               The Catechism of Time Discipline in the Franciscan Missions of La Florida
Franciscan missions in La Florida have been characterized as struggling between an unresolved duality between their Christian obligations and their
mandated support functions for the larger colony. We suggest that there was a dialectical symmetry between these demands. Catholicism introduced a
new set of rhythms into the daily life of Indigenous communities centered on prayer, study, the sacraments, feast days, and other ongoing religious
observances. This periodization of time and behavior coincided with the requirements of missions to provision St. Augustine and the colony under the
system of repartimiento. The depiction of friars as “agricultural extension agents” underscores the ability of clergy to foster a philosophy and practice of
ecclesiastical time management that melded ontologies of surplus labor and spiritual rites. Archaeological and ethnohistorical evidence suggests that this
process was highly uneven, marked by conformity, subtle resistance, and outright revolt.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 85
Cochran, Tiffany
[29]              Beyond the Dirt: Protecting the Council Oak
This presentation examines one unique project in which archaeologists from the Seminole Tribe of Florida’s (STOF) Tribal Historic Preservation Office act
as caretakers of a living artifact; the Seminole Tribe’s Council Oak tree in Hollywood, Florida. The Council Oak evolved from a convenient shady spot for
meetings to one of the most important cultural symbols of the Tribe today. Tribal archaeologists, despite a lack of experience in arboriculture, must face
challenges such as natural catastrophes, encroaching urbanism, previous harmful moderations, and shifting tribal priorities in order to preserve this historic
living landmark for future generations of tribal members. This unique project demonstrates the need for archaeologists to examine and pay attention to
more than just what is in the dirt.
Cochran, Lindsey [191] see Gadsby, David
Cochrance, Ethan [296] see Golitko, Mark
Codlin, Maria (Boston University) and Mark McCoy (Southern Methodist University)
[227]             Social Landscapes and Kapu in the Hawaiian Islands: A Case Study from the Ka'û district, Hawai'i Island
In ancient Hawai'i, elites employed ideology as a way of acquiring and stabilizing political and economic power. Material evidence of this is found in the
numerous temples throughout the islands and in the formalized rules for constructing households. Ethnohistoric literature describes Hawaiian households
as a collection of buildings with specific functional purposes. By segregating these activity areas, the Hawaiians were seen to observe kapu, a Polynesian
ideological concept which, in Hawai'i, includes many restrictions around gender and eating practices. This was particularly vital to the elite as failure to
observe kapu could pollute mana, the divine source of authority and power. This project looks at the functional and spatial attributes of a number of
households from Manukâ in Ka'û district on Hawai'i Island to build a picture about how ideology is incorporated into households in the region. Our research
supports the idea that kapu was pervasive in the Hawaiian landscape and that its incorporation into households occurs regardless of rank.
Coe, Marion (Texas A&M University - CSFA)
[114]             Perishable Artifacts from Bonneville Estates Rockshelter (26EK3682), Nevada: A Technological Analysis of Artifacts from the Early through
                  Late Holocene
Bonneville Estates Rockshelter (26EK3682) in Elko County, Nevada, is a stratified multi-component site on the western edge of the Bonneville Basin
excavated between 2000–2009. The shelter has produced hundreds of perishable artifacts spanning from the early Archaic to historic periods, and it
provides an excellent opportunity to examine perishable technology diachronically throughout the Holocene in the eastern Great Basin. This poster
presents the results of a complete analysis of all perishable artifacts recovered from the Bonneville Estates Rockshelter excavations, covering
technological organization of coiled and twined basketry, cordage, snares, knots, moccasins, and miscellaneous fiber constructions. This study reveals
periods of major technological change throughout the Early and Late Holocene, and these are considered in the context of debates regarding the
relationship between ecological adaptation and cultural change among human populations in the eastern Great Basin.
Coello Rodríguez, Antonio [281] see Smit, Douglas
Coffey, Grant [66] see Davis, Kaitlyn
Cohen, Anna (University of Washington)
[63]              Aztec Imperial Strategies in Guerrero, Mexico: Evaluating the Greengo Collection from the Burke Museum, Seattle
Aztec presence in Guerrero, Mexico, is documented ethnohistorically, but archaeological work can be difficult to undertake in this volatile region. The Triple
Alliance provinces in Guerrero served as important sources of tribute, but also as buffers against the hostile Purépecha regime to the west. Though Aztec
imperial strategies varied in different provinces, tribute policies in Tepecoacuilco were thought to have facilitated intensification of production and
reorganization of economic activities. What did this reorganization look like and how did it impact regime-subject relations? How can material from a
museum collection contribute to this understanding? Here, I try to address these questions by examining Tepecoacuilco ceramics that were excavated in
northern Guerrero by former Burke Museum curator Robert E. Greengo. In addition, I include information from detailed field notebooks about living and
working in Mexico in the 1960s and previous research undertaken by Greengo. Considering recent and historical events in Guerrero, study of museum
collections is critical for researchers who work in volatile regions.
Cohen, Anna S. [101] see Solinis-Casparius, Rodrigo
Cohen, Rachel (University of Pennsylvania)
[184]             Landscapes of Death and Burial in the South Caucasus: The Kurgans of Naxçivan, Azerbaijan
While burials have long been an important source of archaeological information, they have traditionally been studied mainly from a site-based perspective.
This traditional view focuses on the form of the burial, the grave goods contained, and osteological evidence on the age, sex, and health of the interred
individual. By contrast, the landscape approach studies burials as part of a broader natural and cultural landscape that extends beyond site boundaries.
 This project focuses on kurgan burials in Naxçivan, Azerbaijan, dating to the Middle Bronze Age. Based on their form and location, these burials could
have been associated with either sedentary agriculturalists or mobile pastoralists, and they existed on a landscape that was used by both groups.
Comparing the Naxçivan kurgans to kurgan data from Middle Bronze Age Armenia, this project analyzes viewsheds and proximity to nearby sites to
determine the role that these kurgans played for the communities that built them. Not only does this analysis reveal information about the social, cultural,
and political significance of kurgan burials in the South Caucasus, but it also demonstrates the utility of a landscape approach to the archaeological study
of burials.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              86
Coil, Reed (University of Minnesota), Martha Tappen (University of Minnesota), Reid Ferring (University of North Texas), Maia Bukhsianidze
(Georgian National Museum) and David Lordkipanidze (Georgian National Museum)
[87]               Spatial Patterning and Site Formation at Dmanisi, Georgia
The early Homo site of Dmanisi, Georgia, offers some of the clearest insights into the first dispersals from Africa by early members of our genus. On a
more local level, the site contains very well preserved bones with excellent provenience data, which allows for an in depth look at spatial associations of
archaeological material. In this paper, we look specifically at one excavation area at Dmanisi, Block 2, where majority of the hominin fossils have been
uncovered. Using spatial analyses methods, we test different distributions of faunal sub-assemblages in order to assess the degree of behavior-related
formation processes involved in the accumulation of archaeological material, with a primary focus on the most prolific layer, B1, and its pipe/gully fill facies,
B1x, y, and z. With little evidence of post-depositional movement, bone transport, or density mediated attrition, much of the material accumulation resulted
from carnivore and hominin activity, though the latter contributed much less, and some analytical units of the faunal assemblage are spatially clustered and
segregated. Lithic distributions are more random, but are implicit in addressing hominin agency at Dmanisi.
Colaninno, Carol (Arkansas Archeological Survey)
[133]              Subsistence, Landscape, and Identity as Explored through Archaeofaunal Remains from Northwestern Florida
This paper explores relationships among subsistence, landscape, and identity on the northern Gulf Coast of Florida. Zooarchaeological assemblages from
                                                                                                             2
three Woodland-period shell midden sites (8BY1347, 8BY1355, 8BY1359), all located on a small (150 km ) peninsula in Bay County, Florida, differ in
molluscan species composition reflecting proximity to varied marine and estuarine habitats. Coastal dwellers had flexible subsistence regimens, targeting
local habitats rather than specific resources. Burial mounds associated with these same midden sites, excavated by C.B. Moore in the early twentieth
century, yielded examples of human burials with worked shell objects and/or "masses" of unworked shells. Based on Moore's descriptions, molluscan
species compositions in burial contexts generally mirror those of associated midden assemblages. Exceptions to this pattern, though rare, are important
because the types of shells that were, or were not, considered appropriate as burial accouterments do not necessarily reflect their economic importance to
people using the site. We argue that people at different sites had differential access to resources by virtue of their physical and social position within a
broader social landscape, but that specific taxa also had symbolic meanings related to place-based social identities.
[28]               Chair
Colaninno, Carol E. [28] see Compton, Matthew
Colburn, Mona [9] see Styles, Bonnie
Cole, Emily [271] see Simpson, Bethany
Coleman, Julie, T.J. Ferguson (Anthropological Research, LLC), Maren Hopkins (Anthropological Research, LLC), Lynn Robinson (San Juan
National Forest) and Leigh Kuwanwisiwma (Hopi Tribal Preservation Office)
[267]              Chimney Rock Ethnographic Partnership
The Chimney Rock Great House and associated sites are located on the frontier of the southwestern landscape that was occupied by the Ancestral
Puebloans over a thousand years ago. Memories of that time and place still exist in tribal histories and ceremonies. Current knowledge and understanding
of these resources comes from sporadic archaeological investigations conducted over the last 90 years. The cultural and traditional knowledge that
descendants of the “Ancestors” possess of this cultural landscape and associated archaeological sites and their meaning over the centuries has yet to be
accessed by the scientific community and the public. The synergistic combination of scientific archaeological research combined with native knowledge of
place and history can provide striking insights into the human experience and meaning of these landscapes. In similar studies elsewhere in the southwest,
the absence of the tribal voice “has created an interpretive silence that excludes the unique perspectives of the descendant communities.” This project
addresses this silence and gives voice to the descendants. Ethnographic researchers will collaborate with tribal members to integrate traditional
knowledge with archaeological and historic data to enrich our understanding and appreciation of this unique cultural landscape and the people who lived
there throughout the centuries.
Collins, Ryan (Brandeis University)
[77]               Commemoration or Termination? Evaluating Early Public Ritual in Yaxuná, Yucatan, Mexico through Ethnography and Ethnohistory
Through hieroglyphic, historical, and ethnographic documentation, the act of ensouling and cleansing an architectural space is a well documented ritual
activity practiced among Mesoamerican cultures. Acts that commemorate space, whether marking renewal or termination, often leave traces. As can be
attested archaeologically, the trace evidence commemorative acts are often visible on several surfaces in an architectural sequence, speaking both to the
continuity and disjuncture in such practice. Recent investigations in the Central Plaza of Yaxuná, Yucatan, Mexico, have revealed evidence of two
traditions marking the same space over the six phases of floor construction roughly ranging from 600 B.C. to 200 A.D. This paper looks at the material
evidence of surrounding both isolated and episodic burned patterns on floor surfaces and the layering of sediment in relation to known ethnographic and
historical accounts of traditions of commemoration. Coupled with each independent layer are deposits commemorating not only construction but also
termination, rendering a complex story blending both ritual and civic practice. The goals of this paper are to comparatively evaluate the evidence of past
activities in terms of known ethnographic and historic examples of commemorative architectural traditions and also to better understand ritual public
activities of this early period.
Collins, Matthew [84] see McGrath, Krista
Colten, Roger (Peabody Museum of Natural History, Yale University) and Brian Worthington (National Park Service, Southeast Archeological
Cen)
[222]              Archaic Era Vertebrate Faunal Remains from Cuba
The broad patterns of Archaic or pre-ceramic subsistence adaptations are not well known for the broader Caribbean region partly due to the ecological
variability among the islands and limited quantified faunal data from sites of appropriate age. The state of knowledge for Cuba is hampered by a limited
number of radiocarbon dated archaeological sites. In this paper, we present quantified vertebrate faunal data and radiocarbon dates from three Cuban
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 87
sites, Las Obas, Vega del Palmar, and Los Caracoles. These sites are all considered Archaic in age although Vega del Palmar contains ceramics of the
Pre-Arawak Pottery Horizon type. The three faunal assemblages are similar in exhibiting a diversity of taxa and habitats and in the importance of various
species of hutia. However, the taxonomy of these capromyd rodents varies among the sites and the proportions of other taxa also vary by site. In addition
to abundant hutia, the site’s occupants exploited an array of fish, birds, reptiles, and other mammals, including manatee. In this paper, we compare the
three sites’ faunal assemblages and discuss their ecological significance.
Coltman, Jeremy (University of California, Riverside)
[107]             Under the Cover of Night: The Liminal Landscape in Ancient Maya Thought
For the ancient Maya, the landscape was wild, untamed, and dotted with caves, which were the darkest of spaces. On an empirical level, caves can reveal
the ancient Maya experience of intimate darkness and nullified senses. Such experience belonged to the night, which was fraught with danger, temporally
distant, and inhabited by a cast of anti-social beings. These beings belonged to the wilderness and dark forests that lacked internal order and spatial
division. Much like the concept of chaos in Classical antiquity, the darkness of night symbolized the mythological past that predated the creation of the sun
and the ordered world. This paper will explore the dark depths of night and will offer a reappraisal of the Maya “underworld” by way of a liminal landscape
where basic human actions such as sleeping and dreaming intersect with the realm of creation, curing, and witchcraft, all of which coexist together under
the cover of night.
Coltrain, Joan B. [217] see Shirar, Scott
Colvin, Matthew and Victor Thompson (University of Georgia)
[108]             A Procession of Faces: Considering the Materiality of Relational Ontologies in Southern Florida
Recent materiality scholarship seeks to understand the entangled world of belief and practice. The experience of the world is both cognitive and material
and scholars are beginning to embrace the idea that there is no separation between the two. Understanding the intertwined nature of the cognitive and
material world is at the center for evaluating the nature of groups that embrace a relational view of the world. In this paper, we consider the essential role
that material culture plays in the relational worldview of the peoples of southern Florida. In particular, we focus specifically on perishable material culture
that either possesses animate properties or is animated by individuals through performance. Throughout our discussion, we explore how these particular
aspects of material culture are shaped and shaped by the histories of the people who lived in the region. We use this discussion as a departure point to
argue that the peoples of southern Florida likely had different ontological histories than those of the interior American southeast, which were likely rooted in
the aquatic landscapes they inhabited.
Colvin, Matthew [246] see Lawres, Nathan
Compton, Matthew (Southeastern Zooarchaeological Research, LLC) and Carol E. Colaninno (Arkansas Archeological Survey)
[28]              No Need for White-out: Building on Betsy's Work on Multiethnic Community Foodways in Spanish Florida
Elizabeth Reitz has had a distinguished career partially built on her efforts to document exchanges in foodways as groups came together to form
multiethnic communities. Her research investigating animal remains recovered from multiethnic communities in colonial Spanish Florida exemplify this
work. She has shown that as Native Americans and Spaniards interacted, they blended their established food traditions. Part of this blending was the
introduction of novel subsistence strategies (in both directions) and the subsequent adoption, adaptation, or rejection of the interacting society’s approach
to food production. These shifts in subsistence strategies, or lack thereof, took place in the midst of rapidly evolving societies and shifting economic
conditions that played a role in community decisions regarding the acquisition of food. We expand upon Betsy’s research into Spanish and Native
American foodways with recently excavated faunal remains from seventeenth-century deposits from Sapelo Island, Georgia. The deposits are currently
identified as the probable location of the Guale town of Sapala and Spanish Mission San Joseph de Sapala. Analysis of the Sapelo Island faunal remains
indicates the multiethnic community of Native Americans and Spanish immigrants on Sapelo Island followed a practice of blended traditional foodways very
similar to that previously observed elsewhere by Reitz.
Cong, Jianrong [173] see Lam, WengCheong
Conger, Megan (University of Georgia)
[144]             Transformations in Native and European Trade Networks Across Northern Iroquoia
 Native North Americans began to engage in exchange with European explorers, merchants, and missionaries during the mid-to-late sixteenth century.
Previous studies of these initial exchange interactions in northern Iroquoia (including the lower Great Lakes, Saint Lawrence Lowlands, and northern
Allegheny Plateau) have been narrow in spatial and social scale, focusing often on the initiation of trade relationships between Europeans and a specific
nation (for instance, the Mohawk) and the rate at which that nation incorporated European goods into their material repertoire. The timing of these nascent
relationships throughout the northeast has not been compared, nor has a regional comparison of the nature of the earliest trade goods been attempted.
Using published material culture data, I compare variation in the earliest evidence of European goods throughout northern Iroquoia. I argue that the tempo
at which European goods were accepted by Native people, as well as the specific ways those objects were used, varies throughout the project area. In
particular, I consider the effects of direct (European-Native) and indirect (Native-Native) exchange on the ways that Native people creatively used these
objects to specific, culturally-meaningful ends.
Conkey, Margaret (UC-Berkeley)
[107]             Discussant
Conkey, Meg [261] see Ashley, Michael
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               88
Connolly, Robert [71] see Malloy, Maureen
Connolly, Jocelyn (The University of Cincinnati)
[112]            Modeling Woodland Land Use in the Lower Little Miami River Valley, Ohio
This paper examines Woodland (ca. 1,000 B.C.E. to 1,000 C.E.) land use patterns in the lower Little Miami River valley of Ohio. Theoretically, two models
can be applied to the distribution of archaeological sites which date to the Woodland cultural period in this region: an ideological model based on
ceremonial and mortuary behavior and a pragmatic model based on the socio-economic optimizing and risk-reducing behaviors of human evolutionary
ecology. Archaeological data including artifact typology and composition, distance from food resources, raw material resources, and water at the time of
occupation, elevation, geographic location, geological landform, relative and chronometric age, soil type and underlying stratigraphic composition, site size
and type, and slope were collected from the Ohio Archaeological Inventory (SHPO), collector interviews, bucket auguring and soil probes, natural stream
and ditch profiles, shovel testing, and systematic and opportunistic surface survey. These data were digitized and encoded into ArcGIS 10.3.1. Land use
models were evaluated using multivariate regression analysis to understand the relationships between variables to determine and quantify variables that
influenced observed patterns of Woodland site locations.
Connolly, Robert (University of Memphis) and Elizabeth Cruzado Carranza (University of Memphis)
[206]            Co-Creation, Applied Archaeology, and Community Engagement in Ancash, Peru
Initiated through the Proyecto de Investigación Arqueológico Regional Ancash, the cultural heritage component of the archaeological research program in
the village of Hualcayán, Ancash, Peru, has taken on an increased “co-creative” perspective over the past two years. We define co-creative processes as
those where the cultural heritage professional partners with a community in projects that address the expressed needs of the local residents. This poster
reports on the process of implementing co-creative oral history and archaeological collections management projects over since 2014 in the Ancash
communities of Hualcayán, Hullanca, Caraz, and Nivin. We evaluate the outcomes from the perspectives of the meeting the expressed community needs,
project sustainability, and project relevance as applied archaeological practices.
Conti, Kevin [67] see Lea, Trevor
Cook, Jacqueline (Wanapum Band of Priest Rapids) (Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation)
[30]             Repatriation of the Ancient One - A Tribal View: Then, Now, and In-Between
The Ancient One’s 8,400 year old remains were claimed by Native American Tribes as their ancestor after eroding from the banks of the Columbia River in
1996. What began as an Inadvertent Discovery, defined in the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), turned into a 20-year
challenge to the Act, tribal culture, oral traditions, and religious beliefs.
In 2004, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a lower court ruling allowing scientific study of the Ancient One; the courts determined this individual was
not Native American and not subject to NAGPRA. Considered not a Native American, he could not be culturally affiliated. Despite court rulings, the
Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation, Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation, Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian
Reservation, the Nez Perce Tribe, and the Wanapum Band have stood by their knowledge and traditions. These tribal teachings were substantiated by
DNA studies. The Ancient One is Native American and related to the Columbia Plateau tribes. This presentation will discuss the journey the claimant tribes
made in their effort to repatriate the Ancient One, the effects on NAGPRA, and the relationships between the claimant tribes and Agencies.
Cook, Gregory
[83]             Updates on Current Investigations of the 1559 Luna Fleet
This presentation focuses on the ongoing investigations of shipwrecks from the Spanish fleet of Tristan de Luna, who attempted to colonize northwest
Florida in 1559. Fieldwork conducted during the last year has yielded exciting new insights into the expedition, and the ships that made up the fleet.
Cook, Anita [91] see Williams, Patrick Ryan
Cook, Jessica (University of Georgia) and Nathan Hale (University of Georgia)
[164]            Springs, Stone, and Shell: Recent Excavation at the Econfina Channel Site, a Submerged Archaic Site, Apalachee Bay, Florida, U.S.A.
We present here the results from recent surveys and excavations at the Econfina Channel Site in Apalachee Bay, Florida, U.S.A., a submerged prehistoric
site with a terminus post quem of approximately 5000 B.P. This site was initially identified and excavated in the 1980s in the course of a larger survey for
submerged prehistoric sites in Apalachee Bay by Faught, et al. Our relocation and new excavations at the site have confirmed the presence of chert
outcrops, a shell midden deposit, and a seep where fresh water, most likely from the Floridan Aquifer, is still discharging into the Gulf of Mexico. We will
discuss the findings in the larger context of the submerged archaeological landscape in Apalachee Bay and coastally adapted occupations along the Gulf
of Mexico coastline, as well as offer observations concerning taphonomic issues specific to submerged prehistoric sites in this region.
[164]            Chair
Cook, Robert (Ohio State University) and Sachiko Sakai (California State University Long Beach)
[292]            Examining the Fort Ancient Madisonville Horizon “Index Fossil” Pottery Type Using Optically-Stimulated Luminescence
Establishing temporally-diagnostic artifacts has long been a tradition in American archaeology. One such case is that of using the Madisonville-type
pottery, one of the most agreed upon temporal markers in the Fort Ancient region of the Middle Ohio Valley. This pottery type is often used as the defining
characteristic separating A.D. 1400–1650 Fort Ancient sites from those dating to the earlier A.D. 1000–1400 period. While this temporal marker has been
demonstrated in strict terms through stratigraphic relationships (i.e., Madisonville pottery is more characteristic of the more recent sites and vice-versa),
what has not been examined is the extent of overlap between the two pottery traditions. This is important, as sites with multiple pottery types including
Madisonville are often interpreted as having separate components, with Madisonville being the most recent. However, if there is considerable temporal
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              89
overlap, then that interpretation is not wholly correct, which means that such sites may better be seen to represent aggregations of peoples with different
pottery traditions. To examine this problem, we focused on one site (Hahn) that has clear evidence for both traditions and that are often deposited in the
same trash pits. We directly test this temporal claim through optically-stimulated luminescence (OSL).
Cookson, Corey [132] see Ames, Kenneth
Cool, Autumn
[39]              Archaeological Night-Vision: Experiments in Aerial Thermography
For several decades it has been known that aerial thermography can be used as a geophysical prospecting method. The accidental discovery of an ancient
Sinagua agricultural field complex in 1966 prompted a series of experiments throughout the 1970s and 1980s, which confirmed the effectiveness of aerial
thermography in archaeological applications. Even so, thermal imaging was rarely utilized in archaeological field research due to the extreme costs and
high level of technical expertise demanded by the method. Today, the status quo is changing as the introduction of modern high-quality, compact thermal
cameras coincides with the proliferation of affordable, user-friendly unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Aerial thermography is now within the reach of most
field researchers and can be easily employed to collect an alternative or complementary data set to other geophysical prospecting methods. However,
many questions still remain regarding the ideal timing and conditions for thermal data collection. This poster will present the methods and results of a
master’s thesis experiment designed to explore the impact of several environmental factors on the efficacy of this exciting new survey technique.
Coonerty, Nina (University of California, Santa Cruz), Susan Kuzminsky (Univ. Católica del Norte, Chile, UC Santa Cruz) and Lars Fehren-
Schmitz (Anthropology Dept., UC Santa Cruz)
[204]             A Reappraisal of Cranial Shape among Prehistoric South Americans and its Implications for the Peopling of the New World
Recent studies of South American populations have played an integral role in elucidating the timing, origin, and migration routes of the first Americans.
Much attention has centered on the cranial shape of these prehistoric populations, which some researchers have described as having two distinct head
forms. The cranial shape of early Holocene Paleoamericans has been categorized as dolichocephalic (long-headed), while later populations have been
generally described as brachycephalic (round-headed). These differences have been used to infer multiple origin models, some of which propose that the
dolichocephalic population was biologically distinct and later replaced by brachycephalic individuals. However, some recent genetic studies suggest that
prehistoric South Americans all share a common ancestral origin. Given the incongruity between genetic and cranial data, we test the hypothesis that
Holocene populations consist of two skull morphologies that coincide with the Early and Late Holocene periods. Using 3D models, we computed cranial
indices of 95 individuals from western South America that date to the Early, Middle, and Late Holocene. Our findings support genetic data and show that
many crania have an intermediate shape, with no clear transition from dolichocephaly to brachycephaly. Instead, South American crania show a range of
variation throughout the Holocene.
Coons, Aaron (University of Alberta), Kisha Supernant (University of Alberta) and Terry Gibson (Western Heritage)
[190]             Remote Sensing at the Buffalo Lake Métis Wintering Site (FdPe-1): Follow-Up Results
The Buffalo Lake Métis Wintering Site (FdPe-1), located in central Alberta, Canada, presents one of the most extensively studied examples of
overwintering practices amongst the Fur Trade-era Métis. With historical records accounting for approximately four hundred cabins being present at the
site in 1876, this site has the potential to have been the largest settlement west of the Red River at the time of its occupation. However, surficial evidence
of these cabins is now scarce as a result of modern agricultural practices. Geophysical surveys were conducted at the site during the 2014 and 2015 field
seasons, with a focus upon magnetometry and ground-penetrating radar. The results of these surveys as well as their follow-up test excavations are
presented, with a focus upon the spatial distribution of the features and their contents.
Cooper, Leslie [7] see Bates, Lynsey
Cooper, Jago (British Museum)
[222]             Discussant
Cooper, Leslie (Monticello)
[293]             Chair
Copeland, Steven [66] see Davis, Kaitlyn
Copeland, Lauren (California State University, Los Angeles), Jocelyn Acosta (California State University, Los Angeles) and Marilyn Bueno
(California State University, Los Angeles)
[93]              An Analysis of Ceramic Function from the Sacred Landscape Archaeological Project, La Milpa, Belize
In 2014 and 2015, the California State University, Los Angeles Sacred Landscape Archaeological Project carried out investigations of a collapsed chultun
at the site of La Milpa in northern Belize. Excavation revealed a heavy concentration of ceramic and artifacts immediately surrounding the collapse with
concentrations dropping precipitously only a few meters from the complex. This report analyzes the ceramic sherds recovered in excavation. The ceramics
were sorted into six categories: unslipped, unslipped striated, Tinaja Red, monochrome slipped, fine paste & special, and unidentifiable. While the
categories were supposedly defined based on surface finish, the sorting process actually created form categories as well with the first four categories being
limited mostly to jars and a small number of bowls. Functional data was also recorded with evidence of interior burning noted for all categories. Interior
burning was concentrated in the unslipped pottery, especially the unslipped striated. The implications for site function will be discussed.
Coppa, Alfredo [24] see Muzzall, Evan
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             90
Corado, Maria de los Angeles [46] see Davies, Gavin
Corbett, Debra [124] see Taivalkoski, Ariel
Corbett, Jack (Portland State University) and Jorge Rios Allier (Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia)
[231]            Comunidades y Sitios de Patrimonio Mundial: Pasos hacia una Colaboración Participativa.
En las décadas posteriors a la firma de la Convención del Patrimonio Mundial, el modelo dominante para el manejo de dichos sitios se concentró en la
formación de equipos de expertos y profesionales comisionados para manejar los procesos operativos según los marcos y prácticas establecidos por sus
pares. Si existía una poblacion local su responsibilidad consistía en conformarse con la tutela de los reconocidos por UNESCO o por dependencias
nacionales como los responsables.
Hoy en dia estamos frente un reconocimento que las voces comunitarias y las prioridades de los pobladores locales también merecen una consideración
en el manejo de los sitios. Mediante un análisis de dos casos de sitios recién-nombrados en Canadá y México podemos ver cómo sitios que a la vista
parecen muy diferentes en realidad, contemplados desde el nivel comunitario, manifestan desafíos similares. De hecho, sitios tan diferentes como la orilla
de la Bahia de Fundy y un valle semi-árido en Oaxaca han despertado expectativas entre la población local en el manejo cotidiano de los sitios
nombrados “patrimonio mundial.” Es decir, las comunidades exigen pasar de un papel de contexto pasivo a un estatus de colaboradores activos.
Cordell, Ann [8] see Donop, Mark
Cordell, Ann (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[293]            Colonowares of the Apalachee Province of La Florida
Colonowares of the Apalachee Province of La Florida consist of plain and red painted pottery made in European vessel shapes by Apalachee potters
between 1650 and 1702. This pottery, also known as “copy wares” or “mission ware,” represents hybrid products of transculturation that show elaboration
or syncretization, in which newly introduced European vessel shapes provided the inspiration for vessels made by Apalachee potters using traditional
materials and methods. Typical colonoware vessel forms at San Luis include brimmed plates and bowls with foot-ring bases, cups, pitchers, and storage
jars with handles, candlestick holders, and long-handled skillet forms. It is presumed that this pottery was made at the instigation of the Spanish
missionaries to supplement imported Hispanic-tradition tablewares that may have been in short supply. Vessel form distinguishes this pottery from most
other colonowares from British colonial sites and Spanish colonial Hispaniola. Studies of colonowares from Mission San Luis de Talimali in Florida show
that there is continuity with traditional Apalachee pottery in terms of indigenous materials and manufacturing techniques. This colonoware potting tradition
was carried on when many San Luis Apalachee residents fled to Old Mobile in French colonial Louisiana in 1704.
Corl, Kristin (New Mexico State University)
[239]            Zooarchaeological Evidence of Human Niche Construction at Cottonwood Spring Pueblo (LA 175)
Cottonwood Spring Pueblo (LA 175), an El Paso Phase (A.D. 1275–1450) horticultural village in southern New Mexico is one of the largest pueblos in the
region. Understanding what animal communities were included in the subsistence strategies people living in this village used will aid in understanding
strategies that people relied upon to support a large population in the northern Chihuahuan Desert. Were prey animals (such as desert cottontails, black-
tailed jackrabbits, whitetail deer, mule deer, smaller rodents, or birds) hunted in microenvironments created through various categories of human niche
construction? Zooarchaeological data and relative taxonomic abundance revealed three targeted taxonomic groups; rabbits, deer, and rodents.
Ethnographic evidence shows that populations of these taxonomic groups increase with the expansion of cultivated fields and other human-disturbed
environments. Use of stable carbon isotopes found in lagomorph bones provides a robust measure of the environment jackrabbits and cottontails are living
in by measuring what plants were incorporated into their diet. Results show that the increased C4 values found in cottontails is evidence that the
environment surrounding the pueblo had been modified compared to the larger ecosystem. This evidence suggests targeting of certain species through
various intensities of human niche construction.
Correa Girrulat, Itaci (Universidad de Buenos Aires), Franscico Gallardo (Center for Intercultural and Indigenous Studies. P), Mauricio Uribe
(Universidad de Chile), Michael Glascock (Archaeometry laboratory. University of Missouri Re) and Matt Boulanger (Archaeometry laboratory.
University of Missouri Re)
[57]             La cerámica de los túmulos funerarios de la costa árida del Desierto de Atacama, Chile. Química, circulación e intercambio entre interior y
                 costa
Beginning from 2,500 years B.P., coastal inhabitants of Antofagasta region began involved in the general Formative process of northern Chile. Despite
their subsistence strategies remained based on hunting, fishing, and collecting marine resources, some aspects of their material culture show notorious
changes, as it happens with the developing of burial mound cemeteries. The offerings recorded at the graves suggest exchange intensification with other
social groups. Significantly, between these offerings, we recovered ceramic vessels and fragments not previously known for this coastal population.
Recent neutron activation analyses carried on 68 ceramic fragments and six clay samples obtained from the coastal mounds and from other funerary and
domestic contexts at inland sites from Antofagasta and Tarapacá regions, together with traditional ceramic analyses permits us to evaluate with whom the
coastal products/ceramic vessels exchange was articulated during the period. Also, these analyses provide the identification of the main distribution
circuits, some of them to great distances. Furthermore, with these results we are able to discuss which ceramic types were preferred by the coastal
inhabitants and to what uses this new technology was put to.
Cortegoso, Valeria [139] see Franco, Nora
Coschino, Francesco [147] see Stewart, Marissa
Cosgrove, Richard [295] see Haberle, Simon
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                91
Costa, Benilde [145] see Wagner, Ursel
Costello, Laura (Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University), Patricia Capone (Peabody Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology), Meredith Vasta (Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology) and Diana Zlatanovski (Peabody Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology)
[265]             Research at the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University
Founded in 1866, the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology at Harvard University is one of the oldest museums in the world devoted to
anthropology. It is dedicated to the care, study, and long-term preservation of one of the largest and finest collections of cultural history found anywhere. A
primary tenet of the Peabody Museum’s mission is to support the study and interpretation of its 1.2 million objects and archival collections in the service of
research, teaching, publication, exhibition, and artistic endeavors. The Museum’s utilization of digital inventory techniques has improved accessibility of
collections to various stakeholders and audiences refocusing research questions and enhancing public education. Examples of recent projects involving
the collections include: public archaeology of Harvard Indian College, collaborative conservation and analysis of ethnohistoric Alaskan kayaks, and
research publications providing refreshed interpretations. Learn more about significant Peabody Museum collections, which include: extensive
archaeological documentation of the Maya, comprehensive collections of North American archaeology and ethnology including surviving Native American
objects obtained by Lewis and Clark, over 5,000 ancient Peruvian textiles, rare ethnographic objects from the Pacific islands and Africa, photographic
archives documenting indigenous cultures across the globe, and unique personal papers documenting the history of anthropology and archaeology.
Cotom, Julio [96] see Hiquet, Julien
Covert, Alexandra (Petrified Forest National Park)
[268]             From Ocean to Desert: Analysis of Prehistoric Shell Through Type, Use, and Trade Routes to Petrified Forest National Park
Shell jewelry at Petrified Forest National Park has been found from Basketmaker II through Pueblo IV. Since there are no local sources of marine shell, it is
important to understand how trade routes from the Gulf of California and the Gulf of Mexico directly affected how shell was traded to this region. Shell
recovered from archaeological contexts curated in the Petrified Forest National Park collections were typed according to class, genus, and species and
were sourced to the Gulf of California or the Gulf of Mexico. This analysis was conducted to determine if the use of shell was dependent on the type of
shell or its procurement location. A literature review was then conducted to determine possible trade routes from both the Gulf of California and the Gulf of
Mexico to Petrified Forest National Park. Ultimately, this project will enhance the understandings of shell use and procurement on the Colorado Plateau.
Covey, R. Alan [198] see Weinberg, Camille
Covey, R. Alan (University of Texas at Austin) and Kylie Quave (Beloit College)
[198]             Multiscalar Analysis of an Early Rival to Inca Power
Systematic regional survey research identified Yunkaray as a town at the center of a hierarchical network of villages near Maras, approximately 20 km to
the northwest of the Inca capital. A grid of more than 80 intensive collection units established Yunkaray to be larger than 20 hectares, almost all of which
was occupied and abandoned during the Late Intermediate Period (c. A.D. 1000–1400). The scarcity of Inca imperial pottery in surface collections
suggested that abandonment occurred during the early period of Inca state expansion, after A.D. 1200. In 2015, we directed excavations at Yunkaray to
study life at the center of a polity that competed for a time with the growing Inca state. Our excavations identified households and plazas, revealing aspects
of daily life and social organization at a time of regional political and economic competition. As a town first settled around A.D. 1000, Yunkaray contrasts
with other large valley-bottom settlements in the Cusco region, where Late Intermediate Period prominence followed centuries of occupation. The
abandonment of Yunkaray also contrasts with Cusco, a center that continued to grow as it conquered, becoming an imperial capital.
Cowan, Jason [155] see Hulse, Eva
Cox, Samantha [76] see Retamal, Rodrigo
Cox, Alexandra (Humboldt State University)
[110]             Analysis of Trinidad Cross Artifact
Within its collection, the Trinidad Museum has an artifact that consists of three individual wood pieces that are believed to be the remnants of the original
wooden cross erected by the Spanish in 1775 on Trinidad head in northern California. The Trinidad Museum was uncertain as to the validity of this claim
and so a thorough investigation of the artifact was undertaken to determine if in fact these wood pieces are indeed the remnants of the original Spanish
wooden cross. A number of methods were employed, including physical analysis and ethnographic research, to try and solve this mystery. The physical
analysis consisted of a dendrochonological examination done by Allyson Carroll of the Humboldt State University Department of Forestry and Wildland
Resources as well as an analysis of the nails embedded in the wood. Ethnographic research consisted of backtracking the history of the artifact itself
through historical documentation. All evidence gathered has yielded positive results in that the artifact is possibly the remnants of the original Spanish
wooden cross.
Cox, Maria (California State University, Chico), Valerie Sgheiza (California State University, Chico) and Kelsie Hart (California State University,
Chico)
[286]             A Comparison of Two Late Woodland Features: Helton 20-36 and Carter 2-15
While the structure of Middle Woodland (2050–1600 B.P.) burial mounds from the lower Illinois River valley (LIV) is widely understood in terms of ramps,
tombs, and peripheral interment facilities, those for the subsequent Late Woodland Period (1600–1000 B.P.) remain poorly characterized. To illustrate
commonalities between Late Woodland sites from the LIV, we here compare Feature 36 from Helton Md 20 and Feature 15 from Carter Md 2. The detailed
excavation notes from the Helton excavation are used to inform the Carter context, which was recorded less extensively. We here report the biased
demography recorded for both features and discuss the nature of the extended funerary rituals evident in body processing. The complex nature of both
features reflects the evolution and diversification of mortuary practices during the Late Woodland Period in the LIV.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 92
Crabtree, Pam (New York University)
[176]             Background to New Methods in Zooarchaeology: Identifying, Storing, and Recording Faunal Collections that will be used by Other
                  Researchers
In the past 15 years, we have seen significant methodological developments in zooarchaeology, including the uses of isotopic studies, aDNA, and
geometric morphometrics. However, all of these methods depend on careful identification of animal bone materials and the preservation of their
archaeological and stratigraphic context. This paper discusses basic methods of identifying, recording, archiving, and storing zooarchaeological collections
in ways that will make them amenable to research by colleagues and future scholars.
Craib, Alexander (University of Tennessee - Knoxville), Martin P. Walker (University of Tennessee - Knoxville), David G. Anderson (University of
Tennessee - Knoxville), Derek Anderson (Mississippi State University) and Stephen Yerka (University of Tennessee - Knoxville)
[98]              Uncovered Features: A Spatial Analysis of Late Woodland to Historic Activity Areas at the Topper Site (38AL23)
Multiple features, ranging from the Woodland through Historic periods, were uncovered and excavated at the Topper Site (38AL23) by the University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, summer 2015 field school. This paper presents the results of a contextual and spatial analysis of these features utilizing excavation
and GPR data from the field and the flotation analysis of the feature fill, which was conducted at UTK during the fall of 2015. This analysis further illustrates
the range of human activity at the Topper Site.
Craig, Lorena [175] see Law, Karly
Craig, Lorena (University of Montana)
[289]             Dynamics of Adaption and Diversity: A Phylogenetic Analysis of Material Culture from Fremont Archaeological Sites.
This study uses phylogenetic analysis to examine the dynamics of cultural evolution on material culture. The hypotheses assert that variation in material
culture is significantly influenced from nearness and interactions with neighbors, impacts of local environments, and adaptation through distance in time
and geographic space. However, cultural transmission processes occur differently for various types of cultural material and/or traditions. By using
phylogenetic analysis of several types of material culture—such as architecture, pottery, lithics, and basketry—allows for a more fine grained analysis of
cultural evolutionary processes. Published material culture data from selected Fremont archaeological sites, dated 400 C.E. to 1300 C.E., will be used for
analysis. An evolutionary framework for analyzing variation in material culture permits a highly integrative approach to cultural material studies. This study
adds to the growing body of knowledge of evolutionary processes and to the study of the Fremont archaeology.
Cramb, Justin (University of Georgia)
[182]             An Archaeological Pilot Study on Manihiki and Rakahanga, Two Remote Atolls in East Polynesia.
Here, I report the findings of a 2015 archaeological and oral-history based reconnaissance survey of two remote Oceanic atolls. Manihiki and Rakahanga
are located in the northern Cook Islands of east Polynesia. This dual island system has been the subject of few systematic archaeological studies. Yet, the
existing data for the atolls suggests that they may be ideal for the archaeological study of the social-ecological dynamics of sustainability and resilience in
small island environments. My fieldwork was structured as the first stage of a long-term research program on the atolls, and was aimed at the discovery of
archaeological sites via informant interviews and archaeological surface survey. This research resulted in the creation of a GIS database of all known sites
on Manihiki and Rakahanga and in the identification of multiple habitation sites that will be targeted in future excavations. Furthermore, this research
provides some initial insight into settlement patterns, resource use, and the connections that may exist between oral histories, myths, legends, and real-
world phenomena. The continuation of this research aims to understand the complexities of life on the atolls as well as the social-ecological interactions
that have facilitated the long-term occupation of Manihiki and Rakahanga.
Crandall, John (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[24]              An Exercise in Raw Power: A Bioarchaeological Perspective on American Violence & Westward Expansion
Bioarchaeologists have rarely marshalled data from historic American burial assemblages to explore the dynamics of violence in the borderlands west. This
paper considers the social dynamics of American violence under Manifest Destiny through an exploration of ballistic trauma patterns documented in extant
historical bioarchaeology literature. This study examines the lives of 42 individuals whose remains exhibit fatal gunshot wounds from across the mid-
seventeenth and early twentieth century America. Trauma data were historically contextualized and compared between region, age group, sex, race, class,
and occupation. Available data challenge prevailing ecological models in which violence results from the ‘social disorder’ of single male settlers living in
dense boomtowns. Skeletal trauma is found only among rural and pioneer families in the west. Most shootings occur as a result of political massacres and
ambushes. 38 percent of injuries occur as a result of racial or religious conflicts. No victim on the frontier is middle- or high-class. Shootouts, and the
subsequent treatment of victim’s bodies, pattern along racist, classist, gendered, and protestant lines rather than being senseless. As President Barack
Obama has observed, borderland violence is best seen as an “exercise in raw power” that transformed competing frontier communities into citizens within
America’s social hierarchy.
Crandall, James (University of Florida)
[196]             Household Practice and Spatial Fashioning in the Chachapoya Community of Purunllacta de Soloco
For the Chachapoya of the eastern Andes, the household was a primary social space of production and community life. In order to examine the
maintenance of such social spaces, this paper analyses the material continuity of household spatial production in the upper Amazonian community of
Purunllacta de Soloco occupied between A.D. 400–1583. Many Chachapoya houses were continually inhabited and were refashioned according to a
schema indicated by a particular material assemblage. I identify long-term continuities and changes in the production of social space and household
practices through an analysis of the internal divisions of Chachapoya houses. The results indicate that the production of household spaces remained
uniform while a particular localized style of Chachapoya architecture arose during the Inka and early Spanish colonial periods.
[196]             Chair
Crane, John [208] see Cannon, Kenneth
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 93
Crane, Brian
[293]            Beyond Ethnicity: Compositional Analysis and the Manufacture and Trade of Colonoware
Hand-built, low-fired pottery from South Carolina exhibit a sometimes bewildering degree of heterogeneity. Analysis of vessel form, construction technique,
temper inclusions, chemistry, and surface treatment suggests a broad range of practice and potential cultural influence. Colonoware vessel forms and
surface treatment display a complex blending of traditions that arose from the entangled lives of Africans, Native Americans, and Europeans and reveal
something of the complex cultural relationships within which colonowares were manufactured, traded, and used. But while discussion of the elements of
vessel form and surface treatment has been extensive, compositional analysis remains very limited. Neutron activation analysis (NAA) conducted on South
Carolina colonowares excavated in and near Charleston displayed a high degree of heterogeneity while also finding chemical similarities that crosscut
visual types. This is not unexpected, as historical references mention itinerant potters making and selling pots as they traveled across South Carolina.
Since vessel chemistry will relate to the place that clay for a pot was procured rather than who made it, NAA offers one way to move beyond the ethnicity
debate and explore the manufacture and trade of colonowares as they fit into local communities and the broader plantation economy.
Cranford, David (UNC-Chapel Hill)
[293]            Trends and Techniques of Catawba Colonoware, ca. 1760-1800
While surficial similarities exist among colonoware assemblages produced by different communities of potters, owing to shared colonial templates, this
ceramic tradition, like any other, reflects the specific economic and social contexts in which it is produced, circulated, and used. By the nineteenth century,
Catawba potters were well-known producers and itinerant traders of low-fired earthenware across South Carolina, but the origin and character of early
Catawba colonoware production has not been well understood. Archaeological investigations at a series of mid to late eighteenth century Catawba
settlements have revealed the rapid adoption of European inspired forms and decorations as well as the process of experimentation that shaped the
Catawba ceramic repertoire in the decades that followed. This paper presents an analysis of the earliest documented Catawba colonoware, dating from ca.
1760 to 1800, and highlights the changes and modifications that took place within this relatively short time horizon. Finally, I discuss the implications of this
case study for contextualizing colonoware more broadly.
Crawford, Sally (Institute of Archaeology, University of Oxford)
[25]             What If Children Lived Here? Asking New Questions of the Material Culture from Old Anglo-Saxon Settlement Excavations
It has been incredibly difficult to identify children's material culture in the archaeological record using the standard parameters of the last century—is it
miniature? Does it look like a (modern) toy? Was it found actually buried with an actual child? But recent developments in the theory of the archaeology of
childhood, particularly in relation to children's toys, play spaces, and activities, offer new ways of asking questions of objects to reconsider whether they
might be child-related, starting from the premise that there were always more children than adults in the past, and that children did intersect with the
archaeological record. In this paper, I will be reconsidering the material from some excavated Anglo-Saxon settlements in the context of these new theories
to see whether the range of objects which might be classed as child-related might now plausibly be extended.
Crawford, Laura (The Ohio State University), Claire Alix (Paris-Sorbonne University) and Nancy Bigelow (University of Alaska Fairbanks)
[124]            Thule Fuel Use at Cape Espenberg, Alaska, C.E. 1500-1700
We examined fuel use practices at Cape Espenberg, Alaska, between 1500 and 1700 C.E. We identified charcoal remains from two Thule-era houses of
different ages and analyzed our results with univariate statistics. Results suggest that Cape Espenberg’s inhabitants were selective in choosing fuels, and
discerned between different woody species, perhaps according to combustion properties. Furthermore, there appears to be a greater reliance on lesser-
used fuel types in the younger of the two houses. This is significant, as it has been suggested that declining driftwood supplies contributed to the
abandonment of Cape Espenberg. We suggest that the inhabitants of the younger house may have been actively conserving woody fuel, perhaps due to
lesser access to driftwood resulting from climate change.
Crawford, Dawn (Southern Methodist University) and Brigitte Kovacevich (University of Central Florida)
[235]            Preliminary Obsidian Analysis for the Site of Holtun, Petén, Guatemala 2011-2015
Holtun is a medium-sized civic-ceremonial center located in the Maya Lowlands in the central lakes region of Petén, Guatemala, that was occupied from
the Preclassic (~600 B.C.) through the beginning of the Postclassic (A.D. 1000). During the 2011, 2014, and 2015 field seasons of the Holtun
Archaeological Project, approximately 147 pieces of obsidian were recovered from a mixture of contexts including fill, plaza, ceremonial, and household.
Analyses of obsidian artifacts included typological analysis, weight, and measurement, preliminary visual sourcing, and indices of invasiveness, followed by
chemical characterization using portable X-Ray Fluorescence (pXRF). This poster presents the preliminary results of data collected for the obsidian from
Holtun between 2011 and 2015 with the goal of further understanding access and distribution through time and across various contexts of the site.
Preliminary analysis suggests San Martín Jilotepeque as the dominant obsidian source in the Preclassic Period at Holtun, followed by a replacement by El
Chayal as the dominant source during the Classic Period.
Creager, Brooke (University of Minnesota)
[70]             Colonization or Migration? Applying Colonial Theory to Post-Roman Britain
Colonial studies has long ignored early medieval Britain. However, thanks to archaeology, it is possible to reconstruct enough conditions of the fifth and
sixth centuries to understand the impact of the multiple colonizations. England experienced two distinct occupations by foreign parties before the Norman
Conquest: the expansion of the Roman Empire into Britain ending in 410 A.D. and the Anglo-Saxon migration beginning in the mid-fifth century. Neither of
these occurrences has been discussed using colonial and post-colonial theory. This paper will consider the lingering impact of the Roman occupation on
Britain in the decades preceding the Anglo-Saxon migration. Similar to the cases of India, Britain retained traces of a foreign culture long after the
departure of the occupying political force. What makes these two events important in colonial studies is that there was very little time between them and
there is evidence of residual Roman practice into the period of Anglo-Saxon occupation. The confluence of a post-colonial society becoming recolonized by
a new group in the space of only a few decades is distinctive. This paper will apply colonial and post-colonial theory to fifth and sixth century Britain to
examine the cultural environment that the Anglo-Saxons would have encountered.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                94
Creel, Darrell [267] see Romero, Danielle
Creese, John (North Dakota State University)
[18]              Late Archaic Body Worlds: Some Preliminary Thoughts
The Terminal Archaic (ca. 4000–3000 cal. B.P.) marked an important turning point in the upper Midwest. New relationships among persons, landscapes,
and material culture emerged that, in many ways, set a pattern for the next two millennia. This paper makes a preliminary effort to interpret these changes
in terms of shifting ontologies of the body. Of particular interest is the emergence of clear spatial divisions between the living and the dead on the
landscape. Other patterns include the elaborate development of the body as a site of (often) gendered display, and structured deposits which fall into the
categories of nets (unique collections of functionally diverse, exotic, and esoteric objects) and sets (caches of self-similar objects, usually biface cache
blades). These developments will be considered from a broadly relational standpoint in an effort to trace the connections among materials, landscapes,
and bodies that were articulated in Terminal Archaic depositional practices.
[248]             Discussant
Crellin, Rachel (University of Leicester (UK)) and Mark Purnell (University of Leicester (UK))
[214]             Towards a Quantitative Analysis of Aronze Axe Metalwork Wear
Bronze axes are arguably the most important objects of study for understanding the start of metallurgy in Europe; a process of material transformation that
irrevocably altered the prehistoric world. Yet we cannot accurately answer the simple question ‘what were bronze axes used for’? This paper aims to begin
to establish more clearly the way that wear develops on the blades of bronze axes. Existing studies in metalwork wear analysis have relied on qualitative
analysis of replicas used in a limited number of experiments primarily focused on tree chopping and felling. We report on a new experimental analysis in
which axes are used for a range of different tasks involving different worked materials. Quantitative analysis of surface texture using focus variation
microscopy (Alicona Infinite Focus microscope) was carried out before, during, and after the experiments in order to test the hypothesis that working
different materials generates significant differences in wear textures and to establish how wear patterns develop over time. The results increase our
understanding of how wear develops with use, and reveal the relationship between the parameters that quantify the texture of the worn surface and the
nature of the worked materials.
Cremonte, Maria, Clarisa Otero (CONICET, Universidad Nacional de Jujuy) and Catriel Greco (CONICET, Universidad de Buenos Aires)
[259]             Re-thinking Social and Chronological Palimpsest. Inka Domination in Quebrada de Humahuaca (Jujuy, Argentina)
In recent years, the scenario of Inka conquest in the Quebrada de Humahuaca includes different social landscapes that can’t be explained by traditional
positions. These new perspectives have been improved by contributions from other regions of northwestern Argentina and Collasuyu. In the case of
Quebrada de Humahuaca, a region with a lack in early historical sources, the archaeological visibility of processes of social dynamics and handcraft
production requires constant methodological challenges. From this perspective, we believe that in the mosaic of the Inka state policies implemented in the
provinces, it is necessary to outline macro-regional common paths, as well as taking into consideration different stages in the annexation process. Over a
palimpsest of local and relocated ethnic groups, of which little is known of their previous political organization, the agency of each group against imperial
requirements had to be very diverse. During a period extending from the first half of the fifteenth century until the seventeenth century, with continuations in
the patterns of domination even when the empire was gone, we seek to understand the complex local histories breaking down this chronological
continuum.
Cressey, Pamela (the george washington university)
[48]              Discussant
Cressler, Alan [131] see Yerka, Stephen
Crist, Walter (Arizona State University)
[224]             House Rules: Cultural Transmission and Egyptian Senet Games
Egypt has long been the focus of research on ancient board games, as it provides the longest history and greatest variety of games in the ancient world.
Despite this, limitations on archaeological interpretation exist because of the unprovenanced nature of the material, as well as a focus on games from
tombs of the nobility and pharaohs. Increasingly, evidence from within Egypt in the form of graffiti games on monuments and on ostraca, as well as
Egyptian games found in the Levant where Egyptians were active economically, suggest differential understandings of the game across cultural and socio-
economic boundaries.
The game appearing most often in the Egypt and the Levant, senet, is perhaps the best-known game of antiquity and provides multiple variations in
morphology that suggest differential meanings for the game between elites, non-elites, and foreign players. Examination of the particular features of the
games, informed by cultural transmission theory, will help to explain some of the mechanisms by which people played games with one another to cross
social boundaries. Since games' liminality allows for interaction across boundaries, examining the ways games change as people adopt them across those
boundaries helps to illuminate the kinds of interactions that took place.
Crites, Gary [225] see Baumann, Timothy
Crock, John [218] see Robinson, Jess
Crock, John (University of Vermont), Nanny Carder (University of Vermont) and Sebastián Castro (University of Vermont)
[222]             “Marineness” and Variability in Maritime Adaptations in the Late Ceramic Age Northern Lesser Antilles
Archaeological investigations in the northern Lesser Antilles have demonstrated Amerindians’ dependence on marine foods and maritime exchange
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               95
throughout the Late Ceramic Age. While these data confirm the assumption that small island populations were, by necessity, maritime adapted, they also
reveal subtle variability in the degree to which islanders’ depended on marine resources and the extent to which they engaged in interisland exchange
networks. We use environmental and archaeological data to discern degrees of “marineness” and explore potentially meaningful variability in the maritime
adaptations of Late Ceramic Age populations in the northern Lesser Antilles.
Croes, Dale (Washington State University) and Ed Carriere (Suquamish Tribe)
[63]              Re-Awakening a 2,000 Year Old Salish Sea Basketry Tradition: Master Salish Basketmaker and Wet Site Archaeologist Explore 100
                  Generations of Cultural Knowledge
I often invited Ed Carriere, Suquamish Master Basketmaker and Elder, to help us recover 700-year-old cedar bough pack baskets while excavating the
Qwu?gwes wet/waterlogged site, Olympia, Washington. He is the last known Salish Sea weaver still making these cedar clam baskets. While preparing to
analyze 2,000-year-old Biderbost wet site pack baskets at the U.W. Burke Museum in Seattle, I called Ed and suggested he try to replicate these baskets,
fully 100 generations back through his line of teachers. He loved the idea and we got expense funds to do the project through his Tribe’s Suquamish
Appendix X grants. We met several times at the U.W. Burke and he recognized two main types of large pack baskets, one open twined and one checker
plaited. Kathleen Hawes, a cellular ID expert, determined most of these ancient baskets were made from split cedar root. Ed has now replicated three of
the fine gauge open twine pack baskets, contributing a huge amount to our analysis in the process. Ed guided me through the process of making two of the
checker weave examples. Together we will present what we have learned through this experimental archaeology and cultural experiment.
Crombé, Philippe (Ghent University, Department of Archaeology)
[211]             Human Response to the Younger Dryas and 9.3 ka Event along the Southern North Sea basin: A Comparison
Besides the climatic deterioration, both the Younger Dryas (starting with the IACP or GI-1b) and the 9.3 ka event severely affected hunter-gatherer’s
environment. Along the southern North Sea Basin (northern France, Belgium, the Netherlands) both climatic events are connected with increased and
repeated forest fires of large stands of pine forests and major drops of the water level in rivers, lakes, and ponds. In this paper, we will investigate how this
changed environment conditioned hunter-gatherer’s life and whether there was a differential response between the YD and the 9.3 ka event. Recent
research indicates a marked change in settlement density, hunting equipment, lithic technology, and raw material distribution in response to these climatic
and environmental events.
Crones, Charles and Michael Heckenberger (Univerity of Florida)
[263]             From Maps to Lives: Participatory Archaeology and the Fate of the Amazon in the Digital Age
The collaborative turn in archaeology has had important impacts on Amazonian research over the past several decades. It uses participatory research
strategies and public archaeology to promote inclusive research partnerships. One aspect of collaboration that is still seldom addressed is the use of
digital technology in archaeological analysis and dissemination. The Xingu project, which included local digital documentation and video and a long-
standing project of archaeological GPS mapping and testing with descendant groups, provides an exceptional setting to develop co-produced graphic
digital representations. This paper discusses the rationale and results of this in developing an interactive GIS, in association with the current Kuikuro
Cultural Center project.
Cross, Benjamin (University of Memphis)
[6]               Analyzing the Use of Inter-Structure Space at Ames, a Mississippian Town in Fayette County, Tennessee
Ames (40FY7) is an Early-Middle Mississippian Period town with two dozen structures, four mounds, and plazas enclosed within a palisade located in
Fayette County, Tennessee, which dates to A.D. 1050–1300. Very little research has been done on Early-Middle Mississippian settlements in West
Tennessee; this has resulted in very little being known about the social life history of these sites. Recent research at Ames has utilized multiple lines of
evidence such as magnetometry data, surface collections, and excavation to determine the function and organization of space throughout the site.
Crow, Kaitlin [235] see Powis, Terry
Crowley, Erin
[70]              Beyond Romanization and Colonialism: Roman Influences in Ireland
Currently, models of colonial theory are being broken down with better understandings of fluid frontiers and more complex systems of culture contact.
These new frameworks offer greater insights into how groups interact and provide us with a substantial platform on which to discuss nuanced exchange
networks. With recent renewed interest in exchange during the Late Iron Age in the British Isles, there has been greater advanced scholarship in our
understanding of interactions between Rome and Ireland, not however within a colonial framework. During this period, new types of material culture were
formed and flourished, a new literary tradition developed, and new religious practices took root. In the Late Iron Age, Ireland remained outside of Roman
political control but not necessarily outside the sphere of Roman cultural influence. This paper reassesses cultural and social interaction across the Irish
Sea, engaging with the Roman material and vestiges of Roman culture present in the Irish archaeological record. By using a colonial model, we gain
greater insights into Late Iron Age Ireland as well as open up discussions of colonialism and culture contact in non-modern contexts.
Crowther, Alison (University of Queensland), Nicole Boivin (University of Oxford), Leilani Lucas (University College London), Henry Wright
(University of Michigan) and Chantal Radimilahy (Musée d’Art et d’Archéologie, l'Université d'Antan)
[223]             Anthropogenic Plant Translocations in the Western Indian Ocean: Archaeobotanical Perspectives on the Anthropocene from Madagascar
                  and the Comoros
Although Madagascar is probably best known for its unique endemic flora and fauna, humans have also played a key role in shaping biological diversity on
the island. Indeed, it is estimated that humans have been responsible for the introduction of some 10 percent of Madagascar’s flora in the centuries since
the island was first colonised. For many of these plants, the precise dates of introduction are unknown; and, while many are undoubtedly relatively recent
introductions, a number are suggested to have arrived through early Indian Ocean migration and trade from regions as far flung as island southeast Asia—
the genetic and linguistic homeland of the Malagasy people. In this paper, we outline current evidence from Madagascar as well as the nearby Comoros
islands for a range of translocated plants, including key food crops such as rice, banana, taro, and yam, as well as several lesser-known taxa from Asia
that have potentially long histories of human-mediated dispersal to the region. These plant introductions form part of a larger anthropogenic re-shaping of
Madagascar's ecology, that also included extensive deforestation and probably megafaunal extinctions, and whose systematic investigation remains in its
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 96
infancy.
Crowther, Alison [223] see Prendergast, Mary
Crumley, Carole (Dept of Archaeology and Ancient History, Uppsala University, Sweden)
[138]             Into International Waters
The remarkable career of Vernon Scarborough includes a long, lesser-known association with international programs of significance to archaeology and
anthropology. Drawing on the meticulous investigation of Maya water management strategies, Vern has taken that interest to the global level, working in
south Asia, Sri Lanka, Greece, Bali, and the American southwest. His has been an important and persistent voice in the global change community for a
quarter century, leading an enormous project on the history of water for UNESCO and as an early member of the Integrated History and Future of People
on Earth (IHOPE). His far-ranging intelligence, immense curiosity, and warm personality have gone far in convincing the global change community of the
utility of the past for the future.
Cruz, Pablo (CONICET-IIT-UBA) and Christian Vitry (Universidad Nacional de Salta)
[259]             The Mineral Heart of Tawantinsuyo: Metal Production, Power and Religiosity in Qollasuyo
Expansion into the Andean Highlands located to the south of Cuzco was a movement of capital importance in the consolidation of the Tawantinsuyu. This
southward extension permitted the Incan annexation of important political and religious enclaves, like those located on the shores of Lake Titicaca. That
region is identified by various colonial sources as the place of origin of the Incas themselves. However, beyond this, expansion of the empire to the south
provided access to the gold, silver, and copper mineral deposits in the region, including the most important ones in the Andes. Access to these deposits
entailed the disclosure of sophisticated metallurgical knowledge and technologies that had been developed by the local populations of the area. In this this
presentation, we articulate archaeological data from different regions of Bolivia (Oruro, Potosi, Lipez) and the north of Argentina (Salta, Jujuy) with
information provided by colonial historical sources in order to highlight and characterize the relations connected to metal production, power, and religion in
Qollasuyu, and their expression in the Incan sanctification of mineral mountains in the region.
Cruzado Carranza, Elizabeth [206] see Connolly, Robert
Cruzado Carranza, Elizabeth (University of Memphis)
[276]             Characterizing the Mortuary Practices in Hualcayán, Ancash, Perú: Analysis of the Content and Distribution of Artifacts in Funerary
                  Contexts
In prehistory, the Peruvian Highlands contained a complex array of mortuary practices through space and time. In the Ancash region at the site of
Hualcayán, several funerary contexts have been excavated since 2011 that demonstrate this variation in mortuary practices between 250 B.C. to A.D. 950.
This paper presents the results of a study of the archaeological materials excavated from six tombs at Hualcayán, that include the analysis of decorated
ceramics, botanical, and faunal remains, lithics, soil samples, and other artifacts. The study reports the entire analysis of excavated materials from the
chambers of the six tombs. This complete analysis of recovered cultural materials forms the basis for a model of the content and distribution of the types of
mortuary settings at Hualcayán and their variations through time and space.
Cruze, Zackery (Prentice Thomas and Assc)
[213]             From Jake's Point to Bay Point: Investigations of a 19th Century Lumber Mill
Located along the western bank of the Blackwater River in Santa Rosa County, Florida, lie the remains of a once active and flourishing lumber mill and
associated company town, known as Bay Point Mill of Pinewood, Florida. The abundance of yellow pine lumber and multiple waterways necessary to
produce water power and provide a means of transport for timber allowed the region of northwest Florida to become an ideal location for the development
of the lumber industry, growing to comprise over one hundred mill sites.
While not the oldest mill in the area, or the largest, smallest, or most complex, Baypoint Mill was unique and distinct from the other local mills in that the
location of the saw mill machinery sat upon an artificially constructed landform of brick, French terracotta roofing tile, and ballast stone which all rest
approximately one hundred meters offshore within the Blackwater River. Additionally, beginning in the late 1880s, ownership of the mill passed through the
hands of a number of Italian brothers from multiple families. This paper demonstrates the impact upon which Italian ancestry played upon the structural
design, location, and operations of a southeastern American sawmill.
Cuevas, Mauricio (Universidad Veracruzana)
[216]             Rutas y caminos de los sitios costeros de la Sierra de Santa Marta en el Clásico tardío, una propuesta teórico- metodológica
Esta ponencia se centra en la reconstrucción de las vías de comunicación en la zona costera de la Sierra de Santa Marta al Sur del Estado de Veracruz.
Presenta una nueva manera para poder reconstruir el paisaje comunicacional del área, mediante la aplicación de un esquema de comunicación
combinando los estudios de arquitectura para el periodo Clásico tardío del área con el uso de programas SIG. Es presentado como un trabajo perfectible
en el sentido que pudiera ser aplicado para reconstruir rutas a lo largo del territorio de Los Tuxtlas, inclusive de Mesoamérica.
Culleton, Brendan [129] see Hernandez Sarinana, Daniela
Cuneo, Allison (Boston University) and Michael Danti (American Schools of Oriental Research - Cultural H)
[12]              The Rowanduz Archaeological Program - Results from the 2015 Field Season
This talk presents the results from the third seasons of archaeological investigations conducted by the Rowanduz Archaeological Program (RAP) in Erbil
Province in northeastern Iraqi Kurdistan. During the Late Bronze and Early Iron Age, the project area, the modern Soran District, served as an important
buffer zone between the Assyrian and Urartian Empires, and scholarly consensus locates the Hurro-Urartian buffer state of Ardini/Musasir in this rugged
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   97
mountainous region, best known for its sacking during Sargon II’s Eighth Campaign in 714 B.C.E. In the fall of 2015, RAP conducted archaeological
investigations in the areas of modern Sidekan along the Iraq-Iran border in the Zagros Mountains. This season focused on excavations at the threatened
cemetery of Ghabrestan-i Topzawa in the Zagros Mountains near modern Sidekan, where an Achaemenid Period tomb was investigated, and the site of
Gund-i Topzawa, an early Iron Age settlement situated near the original location of the famous Topzawa Stele. A complementary cultural heritage
management program, focused on improved communication with local stakeholders, was also implemented during the 2015 season. The results of this
heritage project and long-term management plans for the Topzawa sites will be discussed within the context of the excavation results.
Cuneo, Allison [254] see Danti, Michael
Cunha, Eugénia [49] see Umbelino, Cláudia
Cunnar, Geoffrey (WCRM) and Edward Stoner
[123]            Processing, Power, Teaching and Identity, The Utilitarian and Ritual Use of Artifacts from a Middle Archaic Shaman's House in the Great
                 Basin.
In 2013, Western Cultural Management excavated a well preserved structure in the Great Basin. The structure dates to 3000 cal. B.P. and is one of few
that have been discovered of this antiquity in the Great Basin region. The house was associated with a number of artifacts. Many of the tools were clearly
associated with artiodactyl processing tasks within discrete activity areas. Other artifacts such as complete bi-point knives, complete projectile points,
quartz crystals, fulgurites, ochre, bone tubes, bone needles, and possible bone strigils are argued to have been associated with shamanistic behavior,
teaching, and expressions of identity. In this paper, the use-wear evidence and tool morphology is discussed in the context of the roles the shaman may
have had in the ancient community.
Cunningham, Jerimy (The University of Lethbridge)
[275]            Discussant
Cunningham-Smith, Petra (University of Florida)
[134]            A Preliminary Isotopic Investigation into Ancient Maya Fish Trade
The ancient coastal Maya fished for food and trade to the heavily populated cities that lay many miles inland. At these inland cities, marine fish were an
elite and symbolic product often included in burials and caches. Although the use of marine resources in both coastal and inland Maya communities has
been well documented, actual fishing and trading practices are poorly understood. This paper explores the potential of using stable isotope analysis to
answer questions related to the use and trade of marine fish from the Belize coastal and caye communities and their trading partners at near-coastal and
inland sites. Tissue and bone samples from modern fish taxa from estuary and marine environments are analyzed for variations in carbon and nitrogen
isotopes that may act as signatures of geographic distinctions in marine habitats. Archeological specimens of marine fish from coastal and inland Maya
sites are also examined for isotopic variation that may suggest the location of capture of the fish. These baseline data may lead to the identification of
important fishing areas and assist in the identification of trade routes between coastal and inland Maya communities.
[134]            Chair
Cupul Magaña, Fabio Germán [101] see Mountjoy, Joseph
Curet, L. (National Museum of the American Indian, Smithsonian Istittution)
[50]             The Archaeological Project of the Ceremonial Center of Tibes: Summary and Recent Discoveries
This paper summarizes and reviews the results obtained in the past five years of the Archaeological Project of the Ceremonial Center of Tibes. Special
attention will be paid to field discoveries, particularly to activity areas and architectural structures. The presentation will also serve as introduction to the rest
of the symposium.
[14]             Discussant
[50]             Chair
Curet, Antonio [50] see Ambrosino, Gordon
Curran, Joseph
[245]            Blunt Impact: The Role of War Clubs in Prehistoric Californian Warfare
Conflict archaeology has recently begun to focus on the effect of warfare on hunter-gatherers. A key issue in southern California revolves around the
effectiveness of indigenous weaponry. Numerous accounts describe club-like weapons as well as bows and arrows. Little archaeological evidence,
however, is available on the role and impact of these weapons on conflict. This paper reports on experiments designed to document trauma inflicted by
weapons replicated from archaeological and museum collections. The experiments utilized the weapons on pig carcasses both with and without
indigenous armor. Trauma to tissue and bone was recorded and compared with accounts from Europe, the eastern Woodlands, and Polynesia. These data
were then used to assess the impact of the weapons on severity of injury and casualties in southern California pre-contact warfare.
Curta, Florin
[161]            The Archaeology of Medieval Nomadism in Eastern Europe (10th-13th Centuries): The Current State of Research
The vast steppe corridor that begins in north-central China and ends on the middle and lower Danube has been the habitat of many communities of
nomads, and the object of intensive archaeological research. Ever since Svetlana Pletneva, research on the late nomads in the steppe lands now within
Russia and Ukraine has focused on burial assemblages, especially on burial mounds. However, new lines of research have opened in the last few
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  98
decades, which highlight new categories of evidence: stone statues (so-called “kamennye baby”), the influence of Christianity, weapons and horse gear,
and camp sites. A Bulgarian scholar has even invented a new word to describe this explosion of research that has focused particularly on the Cumans
(eleventh to thirteenth centuries): “Cumanology.” In the Republic of Moldova and in Romania, the emphasis shifted from ethnicity to the long-term study of
relations between nomadic and settled communities. An even more interesting line of research has focused on those nomads who have moved into the
neighboring Byzantine Empire or into Hungary between the eleventh and the thirteenth centuries. Pioneering research in bioarchaeology has only begun to
enrich the already complex picture of the archaeology of medieval nomadism in Eastern Europe.
[161]             Chair
Curtis, David (Yosemite National Park)
[229]             Archaeology in the Wilderness
Yosemite National Park (California) receives an overwhelming four million visitors per year. While most visitors remain in the developed areas of the park,
many people venture forth into the 704,556-acre wilderness areas for recreation and solitude—the sheer frequency of which leads to resource impacts
unprecedented in many other wildernesses. In response, park resource managers developed the “Wilderness Restoration Program” in 1987, a program
designed to directly mitigate and alleviate the on-going damages incurred by high-volume, heavy-frequency visitation and use in wilderness. The program
utilizes an interdisciplinary approach to focus on issues of ecological restoration in cooperation with cultural resource preservation and employs a process
of shared scheduling, field collaboration, crew education, data review, and project reporting. In so doing, park archaeology staff have been able to perform
site survey and inventory for over 25 years in areas normally inaccessible by funding restrictions, viz. Yosemite's backcountry, and have systematically
expanded Yosemite's archaeological record on an annual basis. This unique partnership serves as a model of a successful program that transcends
individualistic perceptions of natural vs. cultural resources in order to nurture a more comprehensive management of wilderness character.
Cusicanqui, Solsiré (Harvard University) and Luis Jaime Castillo Butters (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú)
[102]             Cajamarcan Presence in the Northern Coast of Peru during the Middle Horizon: A Ceramic Styles Approach
Around 750 A.D., the Mochica societies occupying the mouth of the Jequetepeque River, in the north coast of Peru, began a brief but intensive collapse
process that opened their borders to nearby societies; especially those settled in the highlands of Cajamarca. Materialized in plates made from kaolinite
clays, this Cajamarca presence quickly spreads throughout the valley generating different dynamics of cultural interaction reflected in the creation of new
ceramic styles (“coastal“ cajamarca), the introduction of different funeral patterns in the cemetery of San Jose de Moro, and the presence of cajamarquino
groups in the fortified settlement of Cerro Chepén. Through the stylistic, ethnographic, and petrographic studies of the ceramic vessels from the collection
of the San José de Moro Archaeological Program and the settlements located in the Jequetepeque Valley, the possible reasons of interaction between
these two social groups and the probable impact on the creation and recreation of coastal and highland identities of those who inhabited the northern coast
of Jequetepeque between 750 A.D. and 950 A.D. will be described.
Cutright, Robyn (Centre College)
[97]              The Politics of Identity and Affiliation in a Middle Jequetepeque Valley Community
This paper draws on recent research at Ventanillas, a community in the middle Jequetepeque Valley in northern Peru, to explore how local communities
negotiate ethnic identity and political affiliation at the outskirts of large scale polities. On one hand, Ventanillas could be easily understood as the
easternmost outpost of the coastal Lambayeque and Chimú states. On the other hand, elite households seem to have been drawing on coastal and
highland practices, hosting household-based feasts and other gatherings, and in this context engagement with coastal states may be seen as a locally
relevant political strategy. This paper explores how local, rural communities engage with political institutions, and how broader political and religious
institutions come to have meaning at the local level.
Cutright, Robyn [102] see Cervantes, Gabriela
Cutts, Russel [177] see Hlubik, Sarah
Cutts, Russell (University of Georgia), David Braun (The George Washington University), Sarah Hlubik (Rutgers University) and JWK Harris
[269]             Excavations at FxJj20Main-Extension-0, A Possible Fire Feature Associated with Oldowan Artifacts at Koobi Fora, Kenya
Clear evidence of hominin-controlled fire in the Earlier Stone Age archaeological record is sparse. Many indicators used to identify anthropogenic control of
fire are not present or do not preserve from Early Pleistocene sediments (e.g. hearthstones, charcoal, ash). The 1972-4 excavations at FxJj20Main and
FxJj20East localities of the Okote Mbr. (1.5-1.64 Ma) of the Koobi Fora Fm. recovered sediment features that appear to be reddened by an anomalous
oxidation process. These are among the earliest of the open-air localities preserving debated evidence of anthropogenic control of fire. Recent expansions
of these excavations (FxJj20Main-Extension-0) recovered similar features to those identified during the 1972-4 investigations. Surface collections and
subsequent excavation of the –Ext0 feature during the 2015 season have yielded data suggesting the circular one meter oxidized feature may reflect
anthropogenically controlled combustion. Here, we report on initial analysis of potentially heat-altered lithics, spatial analysis of potentially heat-modified
materials and sediments, and their association with Oldowan artifacts. We then describe preliminary analysis of a multi-proxy approach to study the
anthropogenic nature of these features. These include micromorphology of sediments, petrographic microscopy (PM) of possible heat-altered lithics,
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and thermoluminescence (TL) of siliceous artifacts.
Cyphers, Ann [44] see Murtha, Timothy
Cyril, Castanet (University of Paris 8, CNRS UMR 8591 Laboratory of Physical Geography), Purdue Louise (CNRS UMR 7264 Cultures et
Environnements, Préhisto), Lemonnier Eva (University of Paris 1, CNRS UMR 8096 Archéologie d), Nondédéo Philippe (CNRS UMR 8096
Archéologie des Amériques, Universit) and Testé Marc (CNRS UMR 8591 Laboratory of Physical Geography, Un)
[96]              Environmental and Socio-Environmental Dynamics in the Subtropical Maya Lowlands: Hydrosystems and Agrosystems of the Wetlands
                  (bajos) around Naachtun
The eco-socio-system of the wetlands (bajos) situated around the city of Naachtun is studied in relation with the water and soil resources (availability, use,
management), between environment, climate, and societies. The objectives are to characterize the evolution of the hydrosystems and agrosystems during
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               99
the last three millennia and particularly during the Classic Period. The approach is systemic and multi-scalar, based on interdisciplinary works with
geoarchaeological, geomorphological, palaeo-ecological, geomatic, and archaeological components. Fieldwork (coreholes, boreholes) are associated with
spatial analysis works (geomatics), with laboratory analysis (sedimentary, geochimical, pedological, bio-indicators, and geochronological analysis) and with
the establishment of a frame of reference. Sedimentary records archived within the north bajo of Naachtun have good potential for the reconstruction of the
past environmental and socioenvironmental dynamics (thickness, sedimentary facies variability, bioindicators content). Preliminary results indicate that this
wetland associate water and soil resources which evolved under climate and anthropogenic controls. During the Classic Period, it was changed for water
use and agriculture. The dynamic of this eco-socio-system was one of the factors which controlled the settlement and the development of the city of
Naachtun.
Czechowski, Matthias [278] see Meyer, Dominique
Daggett, Adrianne (Michigan State University) and Erica Dziedzic (Michigan State University)
[71]              Dig the Past: Evaluating a Campus-Based Public Archaeology Program
Over the 2013–2014 academic year, Michigan State University’s Campus Archaeology Program facilitated a series of public archaeology workshops called
“Dig the Past: A Hands-on Introduction to Archaeology.” Targeting both children and adults in the Greater Lansing community, these workshops aimed to
disburse fundamental information about the real practice of archaeology in lay-friendly language as well as to provide archaeology students with
opportunities to practice public engagement. The “Dig the Past” project incorporated the additional objective, unique to its role within a university-based
archaeological research program, of communicating archaeology’s contribution to understanding the history of Michigan State University and East Lansing,
and the cultural heritage of an academic community. This paper discusses the original objectives of the program, the workshops’ perceived effectiveness in
meeting these objectives from both a facilitator standpoint and a visitor standpoint, and raises a few insights gained from the experience for the
sustainability of future iterations of such a project and for public archaeology as a whole.
[177]             Chair
Dal Bo, Ernesto [247] see Schoenholzer, David
DAlpoim Guedes, Jade (Washington State University)
[106]             5500 Years of Changing Crop Niches on the Tibetan Plateau
The timing and mechanics of the spread of agriculture to the Tibetan Plateau—one of the most challenging environmental contexts on Earth—is a focus of
recent work and debate. In research on the spread of agriculture, researchers have sought evidence for the earliest, furthest, or highest occurrences of
diagnostic elements. However, the case of the Tibetan Plateau illustrates a key flaw in current work: archaeologists have often uncritically interpreted the
presence of plant domesticates at archaeological sites as being indicative of local agricultural practice. This assumption neglects the long history of food
exchange on the Plateau—as elsewhere in the world even beyond the then limits of agriculture. The cause is a fundamental lack of understanding of where
crops could be grown in prehistory. Using a formal model of the agricultural thermal niche between the 5500 cal. B.P. and the present, we argue that
agricultural niches on the Tibetan Plateau were tightly constrained to lower elevation river valleys throughout time. This pattern is confirmed by analysis of
the extent of modern crop production on the Plateau. The challenges deriving from these altitudinal constraints placed on early Tibetans largely explain
how and why the Tibetan economy developed the way it did.
[19]              Discussant
D'Alpoim Guedes, Jade [19] see Zimmermann, Mario
Dalpra, Cody, Brian Harmon (University of Arizona and National Parks Service) and Reuven Sinensky (University of California Los Angeles and
National )
[268]             Clarifying Late Archaic, Basketmaker, and Pueblo I Project Point Types at Petrified Forest National Park, Arizona
Late Archaic, Basketmaker, and Pueblo I time period projectile point types are problematic in the greater southwest because many exhibit considerable
morphological overlap. The sizable collections from Petrified Forest National Park represent an excellent test case where all of these time periods are well
represented. To characterize their considerable morphological range, we analyze over 80 projectile points from cross dated surface finds and the
excavated sites of the Basketmaker-era Flattop site (AZ Q:1:2) and the Twin Buttes Pueblo I site (AZ Q:1:3). Utilizing both qualitative and quantitative
techniques we develop a local typology that will be useful to archaeologists studying technological transitions between ca. 2000 B.C. and A.D. 900. Our
results offer an additional chronological diagnostic tool for archaeologists in PEFO and surrounding areas, which can be cross-referenced against ceramic
types and used to better date sites lacking ceramics.
Dalton, Jordan
[196]             Chincha Farmers: Understanding Inca Expansion, Strategies, and Motivations at Las Huacas, Chincha Valley
The Inca Empire was the largest empire in the New World and its ability to expand relied upon the flexibility and diversity of its methods. In some regions,
the Inca used force and installed their own loyal members imposing a direct rule; in other regions, local administrative structure and elite groups were kept
largely intact. The Chincha Kingdom has often been cited as a prime example of Inca diplomacy and peaceful incorporation, whereby the Inca gained
access to the Chincha Kingdom’s mercantile trade routes and its connections to the pilgrimage site of Pachacamac. New evidence from the important
agricultural center of Las Huacas is adding information on the role of farmers in this interaction. The 2015 survey has exposed evidence of strong Inca
influence on Las Huacas’ architecture. This presentation will look at Las Huacas in our efforts to understand Inca expansion into the Chincha Valley and
Inca expansion in general. Las Huacas will be compared to other Inca sites on the coast and in the highlands, emphasizing architecture, building
techniques, and urban planning.
Dalton, Sara
[294]             Excavation and Analysis of a Preclassic Chultun
During the 2014 and 2015 field season excavations were carried out on a chultun at the ancient Maya site of El Mirador, Petén, Guatemala. This chultun
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                100
was situated near the Grán Acrópolis, with a 10-meter pyramid located directly to the north and a large L-shaped structure directly to the east, in an elite
district. Over the course of excavations, the site was found to contain both Middle and Late Preclassic ceramics, including fragments of an elaborate
incensario in the shape of an anthropomorphic mask. The chultun, which consists of two chambers, one of which has collapsed, and the other measuring
6.5 meters in diameter also contained a number of large stucco fragments, many of which bore the remnants of red, yellow, or black paint. Additionally,
shaped stucco fragments suggestive of a wall mask were recovered from most units within the chultun. The size, location, and evidence of wall decoration
point toward elite ritual usage, with further excavation of the collapsed portion planned in order to determine the full extent of the second chamber and
establish a timeframe for the roof collapse.
Daltroy, Terence (Columbia University) and Veronica Williams (CONICET, Universidad de Buenos Aires)
[57]              Provisioning Inka Rule in NW Argentina
For all its standardization, Inka rule regularly accommodated regional circumstances. This paper uses NAA of 316 sherds to examine how activities carried
out under state auspices were provisioned in NW Argentina, and how local societies took advantage of the Inka presence for their own interests. We
address how well the organization of administrative and economic spaces coincided, and what role the region’s subject peoples played in determining the
character of material assemblages used at state facilities. The principal conclusions are that multiple circuits of production and distribution existed in the
imperial infrastructure and that both imperial and subject agents used the network for their own purposes.
[259]             Discussant
Daly, Niamh (University College Cork), Elise Alonzi (Arizona State University) and Saskia Ryan (Trinity College Dublin, Ireland)
[147]             Connecting the Baseline: Applying Radiogenic Strontium (87Sr/86Sr) Isotopes to Irish Archaeological Research
In Ireland, in the last decade we have seen a proliferation of isotopic studies in Irish bioarchaeology addressing questions such as paleodiet and
paleomobility patterns spanning from the Neolithic to Post-Medieval periods. The Irish Isotope Research Group (IIRG), an innovative multidisciplinary
group, was set up to tackle some of the limitations in this field of research in Ireland. A comprehensive strontium isotopic baseline has been established in
order to better understand the processes affecting strontium isotope variation in the natural environment, for use in the interpretation of (1) environmental
biosphere data and (2) biogeochemical data derived from archaeological material.
This poster provides an overview of the pioneering current research being undertaken by members of this group. Comparisons within the United Kingdom
and continental Europe will be illustrated to show how Irish baseline data can be applied to related studies in different environments. Ongoing baseline
research will be categorized by region, and key areas of interest in Ireland are highlighted. These data will make an original contribution to both Irish
geological and archaeological research.
Damour, Melanie [39] see Warren, Daniel
Damour, Melanie (Bureau of Ocean Energy Management), Leila Hamdan (George Mason University), Jennifer Salerno (George Mason
University), Robert Church (C&C Technologies, Inc.) and Daniel Warren (C&C Technologies, Inc.)
[83]              Gulf of Mexico Shipwreck Corrosion, Hydrocarbon Exposure, Microbiology, and Archaeology (GOM-SCHEMA) Project: Did the 2010
                  Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill Impact Historic Shipwrecks?
After the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, a rapid influx of research and damage assessment funds dedicated to studying the spill’s
impacts poured into the region; however, only one study is examining the spill’s impacts on historic shipwrecks. The U.S. Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management and study partners implemented a multidisciplinary approach to examine microbial community biodiversity on deepwater shipwrecks, their
role in shipwreck preservation, their response to the oil spill, and how that response ultimately affects these submerged archaeological sites. The diversity
of resident micro- and macro-infauna and their sensitivity to environmental change demonstrates the suitability of shipwrecks as ecosystem monitoring
platforms. To assess micro- to macro-scale impacts, the study collected microbiological, geochemical, and archaeological data at wooden- and metal-
hulled shipwrecks within and outside of the spill-impacted area for a comparative analysis. Results of the study have identified multiple lines of evidence
that sites were impacted by exposure to spill-related contaminants. In addition, laboratory experiments simulating spill exposure to metal hull materials
have yielded results that have implications for long-term monitoring efforts, submerged cultural resource management, and spill mitigation approaches.
[83]              Chair
Daneels, Annick (IIA-UNAM Mexico)
[264]             Architecture and Human Sacrifice: Political and Ideological Significance of the Ritual Deposits in Monumental Earthen Architecture in
                  South-Central Veracruz
Investigations at several of the thousands of precolumbian mounded sites along the southern Gulf coast of Mexico revealed the existence of monumental
earthen architecture. These supposedly "simple mounds" resulted to be sunken plazas, pyramids, palaces, ball-courts, tombs, and altars that were part of
an urban layout. In high-ranking sites, buildings are recurrently associated with deposits reflecting several distinct rituals involving human sacrifice. Such
findings bring added evidence for the extreme complexity of these societies' sociopolitical organization, and seem to contrast with the evidence available
for both north-central and southern Veracruz in the Classic Period.
Daniel, Chloe (University of Iowa), Shelby Putt (University of Iowa) and Robert Franciscus (University of Iowa)
[181]             Investigating Other Causes for Stone Flake Features Attributed to Handedness
Homo sapiens is the only primate species that currently displays a population level preference for right hand dominance. Previous studies have attempted
to establish methodologies to determine handedness from stone tool debris because of the link between handedness and brain lateralization of the classic
language centers, and its implications for the evolution of language. However, these experimental studies have produced varied results, and it is
questionable whether handedness can be accurately determined from flake features. We conducted an experiment in which 9 left-handed and 9 right-
handed novice flintknappers were video recorded as they made simple stone tools similar to the Oldowan industry. We used this footage to code their
flintknapping gestures, such as the angle of percussion and positioning of the core on the support, in order to test whether left- and right-handers differ in
the flintknapping gestures they use to produce flakes. A Chi-Square test revealed that right-handed individuals are more likely to utilize a horizontal position
of the core than left-handed individuals (p < 0.001). We explore the possibility that these flintknapping gestures, rather than the dominant, percussing hand,
are responsible for the flake features that previous studies have attributed to handedness.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             101
Daniel Jr., I. Randolph [218] see Moore, Christopher
Daniel, Jr., I. Randolph [159] see Goodyear, Albert
Daniels, Brian (University of Pennsylvania)
[54]              Protecting Cultural Heritage by Promoting Community Welfare in the Syrian Conflict
The recent conflict in Syria and Iraq has upended all aspects of daily life. There are now over 250,000 dead, and millions have been displaced. Famous
heritage sites embedded within the region’s cultural landscape have been damaged or destroyed. In the face of such human tragedy, what can
archaeologists do? This paper discusses the efforts of the Safeguarding the Heritage of Syria and Iraq (SHOSI) Project, which are aimed at both alleviating
human suffering and protecting heritage sites. Here, I focus on the SHOSI Project’s recent humanitarian outreach at the archaeological parks composing
the Ancient Cities of Northern Syria, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Internally-displaced Syrians have taken refuge among the surviving architectural
remains of these parks but often lack basic provisions. There is a sense among these refugees that the archaeological parks have offered real protection;
they therefore express an obligation to protect the monuments for the future. By coordinating with other humanitarian NGOs, the SHOSI Project has sought
to assist these refugees while enlisting them in emergency conservation actions. I suggest that this is one case study in which the attention of the
international archaeological community has contributed to the social welfare of Syrians directly.
Danti, Michael [12] see Cuneo, Allison
Danti, Michael (ASOR Cultural Heritage Initiative) and Allison Cuneo (Boston University)
[254]             The ASOR Cultural Heritage Initiative: Planning for Safeguarding Heritage Sites in Syria and Northern Iraq
Cultural Heritage Initiative—Planning for Safeguarding Heritage Sites in Syria and Iraq (CHI) is headed by The American Schools of Oriental Research
(ASOR) and is funded by a cooperative agreement from the U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs.              Active conflict in Syria and
northern Iraq is contributing to the damage and destruction of cultural heritage. This research project aims to: 1) raise awareness in Syria and Iraq and
among the international community about current threats to the heritage of this region through ongoing monitoring and evaluation; 2) assist in mitigating
adverse impacts; and 3) identify and plan heritage preservation projects and assistance that can be carried out in Iraq or Syria now and post-conflict. The
project developed comprehensive documentation for the current condition and future preservation needs of cultural heritage in these two areas and will
generate practices that are relevant for conflict zones in neighboring regions. This paper will present the goals and accomplishments of the project,
including assessing the impact of the conflict on cultural heritage, working with local stakeholder to monitor and mitigate threats to sites, creating a digital
map and inventory of heritage resources, and developing proposals for future preservation projects.
Darling, J Andrew (Southwest Heritage Research, LLC), B. Sunday Eiselt (Southern Methodist University), Rachel Popelka-Filcoff (Flinders
University) and John Dudgeon (Idaho State University)
[13]              Heḍt
Iron oxides and other associated minerals (“ochre”) are among the most common pigments used by prehistoric North American populations, particularly in
the Hohokam region of central Arizona where they were employed in mortuary rituals, as body paint, and to decorate pottery, basketry, arrows, and
pictographs. This paper identifies the wide variety of iron-oxides making up Hohokam, O’odham, and Pee Posh red paint (in O'odham, heḍt) and it
considers how prehistoric artisans manipulated earthy, rocky, and specular hematite for ritual purposes and craft production. Archaeological and
ethnographic specimens are matched to raw material sources using LA ICP-MS and NAA. However, in our attempt to reconstruct the landscapes and
practices of iron-oxide utilization, it comes as no surprise that geochemical definitions address only one dimension of a complex field of significance related
to the prehistoric and ethnographic utilization of iron oxide. Other cultural aspects are considered in this exploration of O'odham heḍt.
Darvill, Timothy (Bournemouth University, UK)
[34]              Beyond Hopewell: Ceremonial Centers and Their Cosmologies
In many parts of the world, massive ceremonial centers appear at key stages in societal development, especially with the emergence of stable agricultural
communities and the appearance of hierarchical or chiefdom societies. All differ in their detail, but they also share many characteristics. These include
fixing key astronomical events in the structure of the monuments (solar and/or lunar); seasonal gatherings; associations with water; representations of
ancestors or ancestral deities; burials; links to well-being and fecundity; and the use of a circle enclosing a square as a fundamental symbolic scheme.
Drawing on examples in Britain, central Europe, and China, comparisons and contrasts will be made with the Hopewell sites in Ohio, and the overarching
cosmologies and belief systems examined.
Das, Oindrilla [132] see Lulewicz, Isabelle
Dávalos Navarro, Dolores
[64]              Architecture of the Late Pueblo in Southern Southwest and Northwest Mexico
The pueblo tradition, located in the American southwest and Mexican northwest, has received greater attention in the United States than in Mexico until
recently. The present research evaluates how the Mexican northwest differs from the southern portion of the American southwest using architectural
characteristics.
The use of consecutive rooms at ground level characterizes the architecture of the puebloan communities in the study area. These room-blocks had
different construction techniques and some of them were multi-story structures. The data collected for this poster comes from 13 different sites in an effort
to trace community activities from patterns identified in architectural spaces that characterized the two sub-regions.
The differences in architectural elements revealed diverse dynamics between the two sub-regions as expressed in similar economies, organizations, and
activities that took place in different spaces and in different proportions.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               102
Davenport, James [57] see Makowski, Krzysztof
Davenport, James (University of New Mexico)
[91]             Inka Craft and Ritual Production: Compositional Analysis of Ceramic Pastes and Pigments from the Temple of the Sun, Pachacamac
In Andean South America during the Late Horizon (A.D. 1400–1532), rituals and ceremonies, both inclusive and exclusive, were a major part of the Inka
Empire’s strategy for control of its subjects. These ceremonies involved the use of distinct Inka-style material culture, which has its origins in Cuzco but
spread throughout the Andes with the expansion of territory of the empire Tawantinsuyu. The Inka required local craft producers to replicate these imperial
styles as a part of their mit’a labor obligation to the state, though occasionally these styles were sometimes imported to provincial locations from the capital
or other Inka centers. Pachacamac, on the central coast of Peru, was a major ritual and pilgrimage center before and during Inka control. This poster
examines the chemical composition of pastes and pigments of ceramics found at the Temple of the Sun, the principal Inka structure at Pachacamac, using
Neutron Activation Analysis (NAA) and Laser Ablation-Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS). This analysis is used in an attempt to
understand the level of control and influence the Inka exerted over local craft producers, as well as the role that these ceramics played in the production of
state-sponsored rituals and ceremonies.
Davenport, Christian
[246]            Belle Glade Monumental Construction Examined
Some of the densest concentrations of prehistoric monumental construction in Florida are located within the Kissimmee River Valley/Lake Okeechobee
Basin areas. Based on 1930s–1940s aerial images and limited field investigations archaeologists have created typologies for the various circle ditch and
linear earthworks. However, these studies did not examine the intra-relationships of the subcomponents that comprise the individual mound complexes,
nor the intersite relationships to the physical landscape. Since many of these sites were destroyed before they could be professionally investigated, remote
sensing has proven to be useful for exploring their extent. This presentation will examine these points through various remote sensing techniques and
firsthand field observations illustrating the geometric complexity that went into constructing these sites and potential cultural implications.
[246]            Chair
Davies, Gavin (University of Kentucky) and Maria de los Angeles Corado (Universidad del Valle de Guatemala)
[46]             Traditions and Transformations in the Southwestern Maya Highlands: Ceramic and Settlement Evidence from the Southwest Lake Atitlan
                 Basin, Solola, Guatemala
Following an intensive socialization campaign, the Lake Atitlan Archaeological Project (PALA) conducted systematic surface collections for over 50
properties within the municipios of San Pedro and San Juan La Laguna in the southwestern Lake Atitlan Basin. These investigations identified more than
30 archaeological sites including three large population centers with monumental architecture, a large number of smaller ritual and domestic sites, and
several individual rock art locations. Test excavations were subsequently conducted at four sites with the primary goal of defining the ceramic sequence for
the Classic to Postclassic transition. The initial results, presented here, indicate that the southwest Lake Atitlan Basin supported sizeable populations
during the Late Preclassic, Early Classic, and Postclassic periods. Late Classic and Early Postclassic occupations are, however, continuing to prove
elusive, suggesting a period of conservative development, population decline, or abandonment. The rich and diverse ceramic collection generated by the
PALA project covering the Middle Preclassic through to the Spanish Conquest has the potential to shed considerable light on regional ceramic
developments and to illuminate the origins and organization of the Tzutujil/Tziquinahay confederation that dominated the area during the Postclassic.
Davies, Gareth [222] see Laffoon, Jason
Davis, Kaitlyn (University of Colorado, Boulder), Steven Copeland (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center) and Grant Coffey (Crow Canyon
Archaeological Center)
[66]             Inter-Site Visibility in the Mesa Verde Area through Time
Numerous studies have pointed to a pattern of inter-site visibility in Chaco-era sites, both within Chaco Canyon itself and in other parts of the regional
system. These studies suggest inter-site visibility is one line of evidence that supports the development and operation of the regional system in much of the
American southwest during the Pueblo II Period (A.D. 900 to 1150). In the Mesa Verde region, community centers were present before the Pueblo II period
as evidenced by larger sites, some of which display public architecture. The objective of this study is to utilize site location and temporal data provided by
the Village Ecodynamics Project to assess if inter-site visibility was an important consideration in the placement of community centers prior to the Pueblo II
florescence of the Chaco regional system.
Davis, John and Steven Hackenberger (Central Washington University)
[113]            Assessing Testing Programs and Strategies for Section 106 Determinations of Eligibility: U.S. Army Yakima Training Center, WA
The U.S. Army Yakima Training Center (YTC) contains over 1,300 archaeological sites. Thirty years of inventory and archaeological testing have produced
a significant body of archaeological reports and databases. Two university programs, several CRM firms, and now the Wanapum Band and Yakama Nation
are working with the U.S. Army, studying and protecting the unique natural and cultural landscapes of the Yakima Uplands within the YTC. Synthesis of
this work for the purpose of archaeological science, tribal consultation, and proactive management is ongoing. Changing management strategies and
funding limitations necessitate a review of archaeological testing and NHPA Section 106 evaluation. Three areas of collaboration are needed: (1) analyze
sample representativeness for lithic and faunal assemblages, (2) assess cost effective testing programs, and (3) develop landscape management
recommendations. Sample sizes and artifact diversity are compared for surface and subsurface assemblages. Cost and benefits are measured for shovel
probing, test pits, and block excavations. Landscape maps show complexes of sites and assemblages that require proactive management.
Davis, Loren (Oregon State University), Alex Nyers (Oregon State University) and Daniel Bean (Oregon State University)
[113]            3D Geometric Morphometry of Western Stemmed Projectile Points from the Columbia River Plateau
We describe a digital 3D geometric morphometry approach that employs GIS-based routines to extract information about the form of Western Stemmed
Tradition projectile points from sites located in the Columbia River Plateau of the Pacific northwest. These data are used to describe a number of novel
morphometric measures and to compare the design characteristics of regional early stemmed projectile points. We explore issues of artifact use,
rejuvenation and repair, and how these aspects can be quantified in digital 3D models of projectile points. Topics of data archiving, access to 3D models,
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                103
and physical replication are also addressed.
Davis, John [120] see Chenvert, ErinMarie
Davis, Christopher
[167]            Potential Paleoindian Quarry Site in Brazil's Lower Amazon
A prehistoric Amazonian site near the town of Monte Alegre in the state of Pará, Brazil, shows evidence for potential use as a sandstone quarry by
paleolindians. The rock art site at Painel do Pilão has a wall that appears to have been reduced to a flat surface through repeated micro flaking, forming
part of a semi subterranean shelter. The flattened wall comprises a platform from which ancient artists painted mostly sky-themed paintings on the open-air
stage above. The shelter itself had subsequently accumulated sediment over the course of 13,000 or more years, interring part of the wall and some of its
more prominent "quarry" features. Excavation of the shelter floor unearthed large boulders in the lowest levels, and micro flakes in most layers. Crude
sandstone lithics and red and yellow ochre-stained stone were also disproportionately recovered from the lowest excavation levels. Evidence for quarrying
is implied by the presence of unfinished lithics and also the relative lack of medium-sized nodules. Accelerated mass spectrometry radiocarbon dating from
sediment levels covering the lowest quarry marks indicate an age of 11,212 ± 69 to 10,993 ± 62 uncalibrated years B.P. (13,286–12,685 calibrated [Oxcal
v4.2.3]).
Dawe, Bob [21] see Kornfeld, Marcel
Dawson, Tom
[210]            Scotland’s Coastal Heritage at Risk: Prioritizing Action and Connecting Research and Citizen Science at Sites Threatened by the Sea
In Scotland, there is a long tradition of archaeologists working at sites threatened by coastal erosion. Government Agency, Historic Scotland, has
sponsored a series of coastal surveys in order to locate sites; and the SCAPE Trust has worked with national and local heritage bodies to prioritize action
and produce an interactive ‘Sites at Risk’ map from the data. The map includes sites of all periods and site types, many of which contain a wealth of
palaeoenvironmental data.
The coast is a highly dynamic zone, and once a site is recorded, its condition can rapidly change. In Britain, heritage data is publically accessible, and
SCAPE is employing a citizen-science approach to gathering data. Using apps and the internet, the public are undertaking recording projects to update
records and report new discoveries.
Academic research priorities from the Scottish Archaeological Research Framework are being linked to the updated ‘Sites at Risk’ data, and the aim is to
encourage the research community to investigate some of the most threatened sites. Undertaking practical action at vulnerable sites is helping to turn a
challenge into an opportunity, and a new understanding of the past is being presented by sites threatened by natural processes.
[1]              Discussant
Dawson, Emily (University of Notre Dame) and Mark Schurr (University of Notre Dame)
[111]            Multi-Element Characterization of Early Nineteenth Century Edged Pearlware from Native American and Euro-American Sites
Edged Pearlware, a type of refined earthenware imported from England, is found at many early nineteenth century Native American and Euro-American
sites in North America. Due to the small size of sherds and the lack of sherds with maker’s marks, it is currently difficult to identify the date, location, and
manufacturing process for Edged Pearlware. This poster compares sherds from three sites occupied during the first half of the nineteenth century:
Pokagon Village, a Native American site; Collier Lodge, a Euro-American site; and McCartney’s Cabin, a Euro-American/Metis site. Utilizing micro X-ray
fluorescence (μ-XRF) to determine composition both of whole sherds and of particular pigments allows us to compare the chemical composition of various
sherds and their pigments and thus to classify the changes in the manufacturing process over time. Our results indicate differences in chemical
composition for sherds of the same pattern, suggesting the possibility of dating sherds based on chemical composition, as well as difference in pigment
composition, suggesting that the sherds differ in their manufacturers. Our project indicates that micro-element characterization has the potential to improve
information about dating and manufacturing processes not only for edged pearlware, but for other nineteenth-century earthenwares, as well.
Day, Zachary (University of Nebraska-Lincoln) and Heather Richards-Rissetto (University of Nebraska-Lincoln)
[121]            Creating Interactive Landscapes with Multi-Method Modeling
Digital reconstructions and 3D modeling have become an increasingly frequent application in archaeology for the purposes of preservation and
visualization. As part of the MayaCityBuilder Project, we are developing an immersive 3D environment of late eighth-century Copan, Honduras, that
incorporates high-resolution base models and hypothetical reconstructions into an open-world environment. Our goal is to offer users opportunities to freely
explore the models in context to their surroundings and provide linked archaeological information in the form of text, images, and maps. Using GIS and
procedural modeling software (ArcMap, CityEngine) and 3D modeling programs (SketchUp, Blender), we integrate georeference 3D models of still-
standing architecture with reconstructions of structures that no longer exist but have associated archaeological evidence. These 3D models are inputted
into the Unity gaming engine to create an immersive environment embedded in lidar-generated terrain. Detailed documentation of the workflow and the use
of procedural modeling allow the virtual reality environment to be updated with newly-acquired base models and test alternative reconstructions. As part of
this process, we seek to develop a system that enables public participation in the form of annotation, photos, and other digital media.
Day, Peter (University of Sheffield)
[140]            The Longevity of Ceramic Production Centres: Historical Contingency in the Analysis Of Pottery
Recent analytical programmes on pottery of the Aegean Bronze Age have identified compositional patterns that not only link the early third millennium to
the late second millennium B.C., but also clearly lay the foundations for production through to Roman times. Continuity in ceramic craft practice can be
understood in terms of specific choices made in raw material selection and manipulation, but also at times through the recurrence of characteristic methods
of vessel forming and even the nature, quality, and aesthetics of surface finishes.
While many chemical and petrographic studies of ceramics interpret technological reconstructions and the distribution of pottery products in terms of the
link between production organisation and political structure, such continuities call into question such simple correlations. Using a number of different,
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             104
detailed case studies which emphasise the history of practice in specific production centres, this paper questions what we are to understand by continuity
in pottery manufacture and the degree to which such practices may even mask variation in craft organisation and perceived productive complexity.
The implications of these emerging patterns for our understanding of both Old and New World ceramic production are considered.
Day, Peter [257] see Gilstrap, William
De Anda, Guillermo [46] see Garcia, Dante
De Anda Alaniz, Guillermo (Universidad Nacional Autonoma De Mexico)
[294]            Saving Our Past with Technology of the Future
The Yucatan Peninsula has become one of the most important areas of the world for underwater archaeology research. New discoveries go from extinct
mega fauna and ancient human remains from the ice age, to bones of the ancient Maya and artifacts, all in a great state of preservation. Our team has
developed a new non-intrusive survey methodology, which uses photography to document artifacts and bones. Photographs are then processed by custom
made software, which allow us to create 3D models with amazing hyper realistic results. We use these models to create a database that can preserve the
artifacts through photography and even produce exact replicas of every single materials registered. We believe that this technique might set a new way to
survey caves and cenotes with relatively low coast and amazing results.
De Carteret, Alyce (Brown University)
[27]             There’s No Place Like Otot: The Domestic Architecture of the Maya in Their Own Words
The construction of the home (‘otot’ in the language of the Classic Maya inscriptions) is one of the most important and meaning-laden events in Maya
communities, modern and ancient alike. In the Maya world, culturally-contingent notions of propriety, order, and moral rectitude guide each stage of
housebuilding, including the procurement of materials, the organization of labor, and the actual act of construction itself. Additionally, houses must be
properly consecrated before they can be inhabited. In this process, entire communities unite to collaborate in what is seen as an act of world-making in
which the universe is built anew with the house as its epicenter. This paper will examine housebuilding and the stages, materials, and people involved
therein from a linguistic perspective that situates archaeological and ethnographic data within the language the Maya themselves use to describe the
process. With the ultimate aim of providing cultural context for archaeological remains, the paper will present the results from a thorough review of Mayan
language dictionaries and other colonial documents located in the holdings of the John Carter Brown Library in Providence, Rhode Island, as well as
textual references to architecture in the ancient inscriptions.
de Carteret, Alyce [179] see Kwoka, Joshua
De Figueiredo, Marcio
[196]            Symbolic Patterns of Northern Peruvian Coast Pottery in Inca Times
The present study proposes a comparative analysis of the iconography and morphology of ritual pottery produced in the northern Peruvian Coast during
the Late Intermediate Period and Late Horizon. Ceramics produced in that region during the fifteenth century presents several changes in the attributes of
anthropomorphic and zoomorphic protagonists (here addressed as “figures of power”) when compared to those of prior periods. Such modifications in the
symbolic patterns suggests aspects of ancestry, ritual practices, and imagery promoted by Chimu and Inca elites, on their respective ruling contexts in the
Central Andes. Under the aegis of Inca rule, ritual pottery produced in the region presents a clear reduction on the representation of ancient local figures of
power. In this sense, seems that archaeological data match colonial manuscripts information on the Inca need to legitimize their “foreign” power in such an
extended territory. However, the permanence of local attributes in the representation of religious/political protagonists leaves us with some puzzling
questions about control of ceramic production and political-religious negotiation.
This communication seeks to present the results of our research and the advances proposed in our Ph.D., aiming to comprehend the context of Inca
interaction with local elites of the northern Peruvian Coast.
De La Fuente, Guillermo (Dr.), Jeffrey Ferguson (Archaeometry Laboratory, Research Reactor Centre) and Michael Glascock (Archaeometry
Laboratory, Research Reactor Centre)
[91]             Pottery Compositional Studies Through NAA and Petrography from Northwestern Argentine: A Case Study from Southern Sector of
                 Abaucán Valley (Catamarca)
Pottery production during the Late Period (c. A.D. 900–1450) in northwestern Argentina has been characterized as primarily a household industry,
becoming increasingly intensified and concentrated following the appearance of the Inkas in the region. Most pottery production in these chiefdom
sociopolitical contexts was for local consumption and distribution following different technological organization schemes expressing several degrees of
standardization, specialization, firing technology, and use of ceramic raw materials along the region. Results from the NAA and petrographic analyses
provide new data concerning local versus non-local pottery production and vessel exchange for these two prehispanic cultural periods. Chemical data
demonstrate the use of different clay sources through time until the Inka appearance in the region, when a more structured and controlled production is
observed. Petrographic analyses show a similar change in the ceramic pastes recipes used by ancient potters.
De La Rosa, Anthony [64] see Payne, Jennifer
De Leon, Jason [128] see Stewart, Haeden
De León, Jason [234] see Delgado, Andrea
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              105
De Lucia, Kristin (Weber State University)
[128]             Introduction: Why Social Archaeology Matters
Almost 25 years ago, Elizabeth Brumfiel (1992) argued that ecosystems approaches to archaeology hampered our understanding of social change by
neglecting the internal dynamics, conflicts, and negotiations that arise from gender, class, and factional affiliations. Rather than adaptive systems, Brumfiel
(1992:559) argued that "cultural systems are contingent and negotiated, the composite outcome of strategy, counterstrategy, and the unforeseen
consequences of human action." Human agency is now widely regarded as an important generative force of cultural change and archaeological research
on gender, households, class, and ethnicity has exploded in the past two decades. At the same time, social research is either underutilized or ignored in
the broader debate on the importance of archaeology in the modern world. In the past year, we have seen worldwide religious violence, increasing violence
against women, massive migrations, and nationwide protests erupting over racial inequality. Archaeologists are doing important work on these topics that
inform our understanding of the present, but are we, as a field, doing a good enough job emphasizing the relevance of this work to modern social
concerns? Is social archaeology adequately represented across the field and through funding sources? What challenges do we face and what barriers
remain?
[128]             Chair
De Lucia, Kristin [128] see Juarez, Santiago
De Maeyer, Philippe [212] see Lonneville, Britt
De Maret, Pierre and Serge Bahuchet (Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle, FRANCE)
[295]             Variety of Rain Forest Subsistence Strategies. A Comparative Overview
A large scale comparative research project on the state of the peoples living in the rain forests of central Africa, the Guyana’s in South America and in
Melanesia, has highlighted the anthropic character of tropical rain forests. It has particularly underlined the strong correlation between biodiversity and
cultural diversity and how domesticated and wild resources interact in the various subsistence systems. Activities associated with shifting cultivation
contribute to man-made biodiversity in significant ways. Agrobiodiversity, as well as the use of space and the extent to which tropical forest people have
varied in their mobility, all deserve more attention by archeologists. Territoriality is determined by resource distribution as much as by social organization.
The different kinds of local knowledge and practice are always embedded in a cultural context and are socially distributed. The extent of the knowledge of
the various timber and non-timber forest products and their possible use is telling. All of the above represents the challenge that we must face in attempting
to reconstruct the past of those populations.
De Marigny, Elizabeth (Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin)
[130]             Romanizing Production: A study of Castro Ceramics before and after Roman Imperial Expansion in Northwestern Portugal
The Civitatis of Bagunte is a fortified hilltop settlement inhabited by the Castro Culture people from the Late Bronze Age to the Roman Period. Ceramic
artifacts from the Iron Age and Roman periods have dominated the assemblages found at Bagunte over the last five excavation seasons. My graduate
research focuses on a question of broad implications for economic anthropology and social archaeology: How does colonization affect patterns of
indigenous production before and after imperial expansion, through the actions and agency of both local producers and colonizers? More specifically,
addressing this question will ask how the Roman Empire promoted or hindered local production of ceramics in northwestern Portugal after Roman
expansion into Iberia. Utilizing ceramics found in pre-colonized contexts and comparing them to those found in later, post-colonized contexts will identify
how Roman expansion affected ceramic production at Castro sites. Specifically, I will focus on comparing indigenous pottery and Roman pottery found at
sites throughout northwestern Portugal, most importantly from the Castro Culture site of Bagunte. In doing so, I will utilize macroscopic and microscopic
analyses that will answer pertinent questions concerning the economy and the role of ceramic production at the Bagunte site.
De Oliveira, Paulo [295] see Heckenberger, Michael
De Saint Pierre, Michelle (Facultad de Ciencias Sociales, Universidad de Chile)
[21]              The Old Age of Mitochondrial Linage D1g from the Southern Cone of South America Supports the Early Entry of the First Migrants
The southern cone of South America has been an important source of information regarding the early peopling of America. The discovery of Monte Verde
archeological site meant a revolution, leading to the idea and eventual acceptance of the Coastal route, also named Pre-Clovis hypothesis.
Notwithstanding the fact that many pre-Clovis sites has been discover throughout America and this hypothesis is already accepted, the debate of the real
age of the first migration still continues. Probably because the absence of very early archeological sites in North America, the genetic evidence has
become the principal support for the early ages of American settlement, however, not without controversy.
    The mitochondrial subhaplogroup D1g described in 2012 and found in Amerindian populations of southern Chile and Argentina, represents today, as
Monte Verde then, an interesting paradox that has not been discussed properly. The ages obtained for D1g, between 25,000 to 19,000 years B.P., are
extremely old for a South American mitochondrial subhaplogroup. The phylogeny of D1g gives an old frame that does not fit into the ages for the rest of
Amerindian mitochondrial haplogroups; and invite me to ask, is this linage the evidence to finally support the old age of the pre-Clovis migration?
De Smedt, Philippe (Ghent University) and Marc Van Meirvenne (Ghent University)
[197]             A New Prespective on Landscape Archaeology through Electromagnetic Induction Survey
While electromagnetic induction (EM) instruments have been used for archaeological prospection since the 1960s, until recently their implementation
remained rare. Only during the past decade, EM sensors, which allow capturing both magnetic and electrical properties of the subsurface, have become a
more standard part of the archaeo-geophysical toolbox. Weighing heavily on applications in soil science, EM surveys are now proving their worth in
discerning both human and natural variations. Through integrating archaeological and pedological information, EM prospection data provide a broad basis
in understanding human-landscape interactions in different environments, from prehistory to modern times.
Here, we elaborate on how EM surveys can provide a robust foundation for studying past landscapes. Illustrated with studies from Late-Glacial
palaeolandscape mapping to researching medieval wetland areas, over recent high-resolution and square mile-prospection datasets from Stonehenge
(UK), we discuss the potential and pitfalls of EM for landscape archaeology.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 106
De Vore, Steven
[34]              Magnetic Survey of the Mound City Group at Hopewell Culture National Historical Park in Ross County, Ohio
Mound City Group is a Hopewell mound and enclosure site located in south-central Ohio. The site was originally mapped by Ephraim Squier and Edwin
Davis in 1846. The prehistoric earthworks consisted of 24 mounds within a square embankment wall and surrounded by eight borrow pits above the right
bank of the Scioto River. In 1917, the mound group was leveled by the U.S. Army during the construction of the World War I training camp of Camp
Sherman, except for Mound 7. After Camp Sherman was razed in the 1920s, the Ohio Historical Society excavated the site and reconstructed the
Hopewell earthworks and mounds. The National Park Service conducted additional archaeological investigations at the site from the 1960s to the present.
Between 2010 and 2013, a magnetic survey of the entire site was conducted by the Midwest Archeological Center in order to obtain a baseline data set of
buried archeological features at the site. A dual fluxgate gradiometer was used to conduct the magnetic investigations. The analysis of the resulting data
revealed the presence of numerous features associated with the World War I training camp. Several magnetic features appear to be related to the
Hopewell activities at the site.
De Wulf, Alain [121] see Verlee, Jotka
Deagan, Kathleen [28] see Scarry, C. Margaret
Dean, Carolyn
[99]              Intersubjectivity in Inka Visual Culture
The Inka of western South America, who reached the height of their power in the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, identified certain rocks as sharing
many characteristics with human beings. Such rocks were sentient and some of them had the ability to speak and move. Some rocks were said to eat and
drink the foods and liquids humans eat and drink, dress in human clothing, and speak Runasimi, the language spoken by the Inka. The Inka, in recognizing
the sentience of certain rocks, practiced intersubjectivity. Their intersubjectivity, in turn, requires modern interpreters of Inka visual culture to re-think
traditional art historical dichotomies such as subjects and objects.
Dean, Rebecca
[111]             Community-based Research in the Archaeological Classroom
This poster focuses on the pedagogical challenges and educational outcomes of including excavations at a nineteenth century cemetery in an Introduction
to Archaeology class. The research project was initiated by a local family when their cemetery was destroyed for farmland. Community-based research is
archaeology for, by, and of local communities, a collaboration between community members and researchers. The Anthropology program at the University
of Minnesota Morris (UMM)—a small, public liberal arts college in the rural western prairie—incorporates extensive community-based research in our
classrooms. As an American Indian serving institution, UMM has both the obligation to train Native students in the study of the past, and the opportunity to
learn from their perspectives. Learning through action, and reflection through service, are key tenets of our educational approach. Student feedback and
more objective measures of learning show that community-based research significantly improved educational outcomes.
Dean, S.D. [137] see Shreve, Nathan
DeAngelis, Joseph
[38]              Large Bones, Small Bones, Big Bones, Little Bones: A Quantitative Analyses of Sampling Bias in the Early Paleoindian Zooarchaeological
                  Record
It has been suggested that the Early Paleoindian archaeofaunal record is biased against small mammals because larger mammals are easier to detect in
the archaeological record. It has also been suggested that remains of small mammals would have been more abundant if careful excavation procedures
would have been employed. For this poster, I present a quantitative analysis of the Early Paleoindian archaeofaunal record in the continental United States
by testing the hypothesis that the zooarchaeological record is biased against small mammals. I do this by analyzing taxonomic and body size diversity of
Early Paleoindian zooarchaeological assemblages based upon the year in which they were excavated. If the Early Paleoindian record is bias against
smaller mammals, then it would be reasonable to suspect that sites excavated earliest would consist mainly of large bodied mammalian remains while
more recent sites that may have been more carefully excavated would consist of numerous types of taxa of all body sizes. The results show that this is not
the case with numerous different types of taxa of all body sizes present in some of the earlier excavated sites while sites with large and small mammalian
remains have been consistently excavated throughout time.
DeAngelo, Rebekah (Yale Peabody Museum) and Robert Gal (National Park Service)
[217]             An Inadvertent Endowment: Giddings’ Contribution to Resource Preservation in Northwest Alaska
James Louis Giddings was not only a pioneer in Arctic archaeology but he also contributed significantly to the protection of areas of archaeological
importance, enabling the continued research of subsequent generations. I explore his direct and indirect roles in establishing federal protection for Alaskan
archaeological sites and related lands during and after his life. His research and writings contributed to the establishment of four National Historic
Landmarks (NHL), one National Monument, and a National Park that together protect over 3,700 square miles (2.4 million acres) of parklands in northwest
Alaska. The sites of Ipiutak and Iyatayet both received NHL status in 1961, the first such designations in Alaska. His excavations on the beach ridges of
Cape Krusenstern formed the scientific basis for its 1973 NHL designation and eventual recognition as a National Monument in 1978. His exploration of
Onion Portage contributed to its 1978 NHL designation and helped establish the importance of the resources of Kobuk Valley National Park in 1980.
Although it was not the focus of his field work, and much was accomplished by others, the protection of archaeological sites and related resources in
northwest Alaska is an undeniable component of his legacy.
Deats, Jennifer (University of Colorado)
[115]             Ceramic Analysis at Chief Looking's Village (32BL3) in Bismarck, ND
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              107
Chief Looking’s Village (32BL3), also known as Ward Earth Lodge Village, is located near downtown Bismarck, North Dakota. This site, occupied for a
relatively short period in the mid-1500s, displays two distinctly different house types, one “local” and one “foreign” in design. Potential storage pits within
two house outlines at Chief Looking’s Village, identified through remote sensing, were excavated by the Paleo Cultural Research Group during the 2015
summer field season, and the artifacts analyzed throughout the school year. My thesis project centers on the ceramic artifacts of this site, analyzing
construction and decoration of ceramic artifacts to identify the “local” vs. “foreign” distinctions as well as contrast the assemblages recovered within each
distinctive house type.
DeBlasis, Paulo [167] see DeSouza, Jonas
Deckard, Nicholas [216] see Follensbee, Billie
Decker, Michael (University of South Florida)
[161]             Byzantine Archaeologies
The past 20 years have witnessed important research in the core areas of Byzantium, especially in Asia Minor, as well as in territories governed by
Constantinople prior to the Arab conquests of the seventh century. Byzantine archaeology has long remained conservative and often the preserve of those
interested in art history or nationalist agendas. Nonetheless, many aspects of Byzantine archaeology remain unexplored or neglected, in part because of a
lack of academic resources and especially because Byzantium does not lend itself readily to nationalist agendas of current nation states.
In this paper, I will examine recent developments in Byzantine archaeology and material culture, including current active areas of research, major problems
that occupy Byzantine scholars, and the role of archaeology within several important debates within Byzantine studies. Among the topics which I will
explore are the question of the decline of the classical city and its continued centrality within the discipline which has created an oversimplified concept of
space and meaning within landscapes. Additionally, I will examine some of the current challenges to Byzantine archaeology and promising areas of new
research.
Declet-Perez, Mariela (Centro de Estudios Avanzados de Puerto Rico y el Caribe)
[50]              Results of the Analysis of the Coral from Tibes Ceremonial Center, Puerto Rico
This work presents and discusses the final results of an investigation focused in the strategies for the acquisition and transportation of coral by indigenous
societies, analyzing the material obtained from the Tibes Ceremonial Center, Puerto Rico. This study was focused on the “chaîne operatoire,” to
demonstrate the utility of this type of material in archaeological studies in the Caribbean. With this approach, we were able to identify the collection areas
and methods, the manufacture and use of the material, since these are fundamental in the “chaîne operatoire.” This aspect of the study gives a more
accurate view of the “coral element” and how this element was integrated in the activities of the indigenous societies.
Dedrick, Maia [26] see McAnany, Patricia
Deere, Bobi (University of Tulsa)
[98]              Following the Shell: Pxrf Analysis on Engraved Busycon Whelk from Spiro and Cahokia
Marine shell was ubiquitous in the Mississippian southeast. In an effort to shed light on where the shell originated, X-Ray Fluorescence analysis was done
on a sample of Spiro engraved shell, and on Cahokian engraved shell. As a second line of questioning, results were separated by previously assigned
styles, including Braden and Craig. At this point, sourcing with the Pxrf only points to either the Gulf of Mexico or the Atlantic Coast. However, interesting
questions have arisen in the data about trade routes and interaction among the prehistoric Mississippian people.
deFrance, Susan (University of Florida)
[28]              The Historical Zooarchaeology of New Orleans in Comparative Perspective
The zooarchaeology of historical contexts in New Orleans has benefited significantly from analyses conducted by Dr. Elizabeth Reitz and her students and
colleagues. Several of these analyses were conducted as part of cultural resource management projects that were primarily site specific. I present a
comparative analysis of various zooarchaeological projects from New Orleans contexts to examine the contribution of Reitz and others to our
understanding of past food practices, animal economics, and urban provisioning. In addition to placing the various projects in comparative perspective, I
describe recent faunal research projects from French, Spanish, and hospitality contexts in the French Quarter that date to the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. These contexts include the once public space of St. Anthony’s Garden, the Ursuline Convent grounds, and the Rising Sun hotel. I also compare
the zooarchaeology of New Orleans to that of other urban assemblages in the southeastern United States, particularly Charleston, South Carolina, and
later assemblages from Saint Augustine, Florida. These intra-city and inter-city comparisons demonstrate how zooarchaeological analyses of topics
beyond subsistence can be used to advance our knowledge of past behavior.
[219]             Discussant
deFrance, Susan [222] see Kamenov, George
DeFrancq, Jelle [206] see Gerdau-Radonic, Karina
DeGiovine, Michael [155] see Knell, Edward
DeGraffenried, Jennifer [200] see Kaiser, Bruce
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 108
Degryse, Patrick [79] see Vandam, Ralf
Delaere, Christophe
[233]             Contribución al estudio de la ocupación Tiwanaku (A.D. 500-1050) e Inca (A.D. 1430-1530) en el lago Titicaca, Bolivia: aportación de la
                  Arqueología Subacuática
El lago Titicaca se encuentra en el corazón del paisaje cultural Tiwanaku. Las excavaciones subacuáticas realizadas en 2014 a lo largo del espacio litoral
de la Isla del Sol (Puncu) sitúan al lago como nexo de comunicación y de intercambio de toda la cuenca lacustre. En el plano ritual, este mar interior
formaba parte de la vida cotidiana y como tal ha jugado un papel preponderante en la relación que mantenía el hombre con el territorio en el que vivía;
racionalizándolo para comprenderlo, elaborando objetos simbólicos para representarlo y creando ritos para mantener esa relación. Si bien la élite dirigente
de Tiahuanaco desapareció en el siglo XI, el Titicaca fue colonizado desde el siglo XV por los Incas, quienes lo convirtieron en su lugar mitológico de
origen como nuevo grupo étnico dominante. Sin embargo, el registro arqueológico y la distribución de las ofrendas subacuáticas, documentadas en 2013
(Khoa), indican que las ofrendas Tiwanaku e incas responden a mecanismos rituales diferentes. La percepción actual del espacio sagrado no es
únicamente una herencia Inca, sino que la percepción de las geoestrategias de ocupación del territorio se encuentra actualmente truncado por las
variaciones históricas del nivel de las aguas del lago.
DeLance, Lisa (University of California, Riverside) and Jaime Awe (Northern Arizona University)
[288]             Building a Typology: The Formative Period Figurine Assemblage from Cahal Pech, Cayo, Belize
Nearly every excavation at the site of Cahal Pech has recovered ceramic figurines. The ubiquitous nature of these figurines in a multitude of stratigraphic
levels illustrates the importance of a figurine industry during the Formative Period. A comparative analysis of figurine attributes in this collection, in addition
to collections found at neighboring sites in the Belize River Valley, reveals a unique style of figurine representation not found in any other regional figurine
style in Mesoamerica.
This paper discusses the unique attributes found on figurines from the Upper Belize River Valley and compares them to other, contemporary, figurine
assemblages throughout Mesoamerica to illustrate the exclusivity of the attribute combinations found in this region. Taken together, the stylistic attributes
associated with ceramic figurines such as eye style, mouth style, and ear spool demarcation form a unique typology of figurine representation that can be
understood as diagnostic to the Upper Belize River Valley in general, and Cahal Pech in particular, during the Formative Period.
Delgado, Mercedes [57] see Makowski, Krzysztof
Delgado, Mercedes, Paula Olivera (Lab. de Fluorescencia de rayos X - Instituto Peru), Eduardo Montoya (Lab. de Fluorescencia de rayos X -
Instituto Peru), Jorge Bravo (Laboratorio de Arqueometria - Universidad Nacional) and Miriam Mejia (Laboratorio de Arqueometria - Universidad
Nacional)
[57]              Characterization of Ceramics of the Lima Culture – The Villa El Salvador Site
Ceramic samples from the Villa El Salvador site (Early Intermediate Period, 100 B.C.–100 A.D.), located at the Central Coast of Peru, have been analyzed.
The goal is the study of production techniques and interchange patterns. The techniques of neutron activation analysis, energy dispersive X-ray
fluorescence (EDXRF), and Mössbauer spectroscopy were applied to characterize the ceramic samples. Multielemental composition techniques and
multivariable analysis allow us the identification of group clusters. The application of the non-destructive technique of EDXRF to a group of whole vessels
has allowed us to determine their multielemental composition; these results were compared with those obtained from the ceramic sherds. We present the
results obtained at MURR Archaeometry Laboratory, which were compared with those obtained at the Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute (IPEN) and at the
San Marcos University Archaeometry Laboratory. The goal was to establish a collaborative program among these laboratories. The data obtained allow
discussing about pottery production with provenance data involving local and non local production, and vessel exchange at a regional level.
Delgado, Andrea, Jason De León (University of Michigan), Cameron Gokee (Appalachian State University) and Haeden Stewart (University of
Chicago)
[234]             En Las Vías: Suffering and Triage on the Central American Trail
Undocumented Central Americans migrating to the United States must first cross the entire country of Mexico. In order to make this clandestine crossing,
the majority of people ride on the tops of deadly freight trains and walk along train tracks that traverse hundreds of miles of remote Mexican wilderness.
This perilous journey can last anywhere from weeks to several months. During this stage of migration, people suffer from a variety of injuries and ailments
including (but not limited to) physical and sexual assault, exhaustion, dehydration, infections, lacerations, and broken bones. Drawing on archaeological
and ethnographic data collected by the Undocumented Migration Project in Chiapas, Mexico, in the summer of 2015, we examine how Central American
migrants deal with pain, injuries, and illness while en route through an analysis of pharmaceutical artifacts found along train tracks and at migrant camp
sites. Comparing this suite of pharmaceuticals with those recovered from undocumented migrant camp sites along the Arizona-Mexico border, we posit
that the archaeological record of these two stages of undocumented migration reflect unique environmental and social contexts, as well as distinct
differences between the level and types of violence and suffering experienced by Central American and Mexican migrants.
Delgado Espinoza, Florencio
[97]              Crafting and Ordering the Sacred Space: Landscape, Religion and Political Organization of the Manteño Society of Costal Ecuador
Powerful chiefly elites seem to have been always concern with “crafting“ themes of ideological order to convince followers of their divinity character and
justify being at the top of social and political hierarchy. This concern in some instances has resulted in the “institutionalization of belief systems forged by
these elites. In coastal Ecuador, prior to the Spanish conquest, the Manteño society developed a religion system that was based on the creation of a
sacred landscape, around which they organized their settlements. Placing temples on elevations with clear view to the ocean, and configuring islands as
pilgrimage places, are some of the main ways Manteños ordered the space. In this presentation, I will focus on discussing the development of the Manteño
religion landscape.
Delgado Espinoza, Florencio [282] see López, Andrea
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              109
Delle, James
[126]            Plantation Life Beyond the Village: Examining Evidence for Residence in Provision Grounds
The archaeology of the enslaved experience on Caribbean plantations has traditionally focused on life in the plantation village. These spaces, often
crowded and providing little privacy, were but one place on the plantation landscape inhabited by enslaved workers. As has long been known, in the British
West Indies under slavery, workers were required to grow their own food to supplement the mostly meager rations provided sporadically by plantation
managers. The small farms tended by the laborers, known in the British West Indies as "provision grounds," were located in areas of estates thought to be
of marginal use to the planters. Five seasons of archaeological investigations at Marshall’s Pen, an early nineteenth-century coffee plantation in Jamaica,
have resulted in the identification, excavation, and analysis of five house platforms associated with provision grounds outside of a village context, as well
as five house platforms within a more traditional plantation village. This paper will use this archaeological data to reconsider the meaning of plantation
space by considering the landscape of the estate from the perspectives of the enslaved people who lived both within and beyond the plantation village.
[126]            Discussant
Delle, James [126] see Clay, Elizabeth
Delpuech, André
[141]            On the Trail of Calinago Ethnographic Objects from the Lesser Antilles in European Museums
From the first contacts with the Amerindians, conquerors, voyagers, missionaries, and so on have brought back to Europe numerous attributes of the New
World: natural curiosities as well as manufactured objects. Various historical sources attest to the presence in France of seventeenth and eighteenth
century Amerindian objects from the Lesser Antilles in some cabinets of curiosities. Today, paradoxically, not a single object in contemporary collections is
attributed to the Calinago or so called “Island Caribs” anymore. However, several French museums hold seventeenth and eighteenth, and even sixteenth,
century collections of the American continent, some of which certainly contain pieces from the Caribbean region. The majority of these pieces is until now
recorded as originating from the lowlands of South America. Nevertheless, these attributions are not based on any exact information; being poorly or not
documented at all, the precise origins of these collections (clubs, basketry, feathered apparel, bows and arrows, etc.) remain to be determined. It is likely
that some of these objects originate from the Lesser Antilles and are thus testimony to the material culture of the Amerindians who occupied the islands
upon the arrival of the Europeans.
DeLuca, Anthony (University of Colorado Denver)
[27]             An Architectural Energetics Analysis of Ceremonial Architecture from the Shaft Tomb Culture of the Highland Lakes Region of Jalisco,
                 Mexico
During the Late Formative to Classic Period (300 B.C.–550 A.D.) in the highland lakes region of Jalisco, Mexico, a number of concentric circular
ceremonial monuments known as guachimontones were built by the shaft tomb culture. The largest site in the region is Los Guachimontones near the town
of Teuchitlan. The site is thought to have been governed by competing familial groups within a corporate framework rather than a single powerful ruler. The
platforms that are a part of a guachimonton are thought to correspond to one, or possibly more, of the ruling competing groups based on previous analysis
of recovered material culture from excavations. Whether or not competition was evident based on the structures themselves was unknown. This study
performed an architectural energetics analysis of one of the monuments at Los Guachimontones to address this issue. Based on the analysis, questions on
quality of construction between platforms, significant difference in sizes of platforms, and how labor was organized between these competing groups were
addressed and whether these answers fit with existing models for the site.
Delvaux, Thomas [156] see OMansky, Matt
Delvaux, Matthew (Boston College)
[161]            Globalizing Graves: Necklaces and Networks of Consumption during the Viking Age
Viking Age graves typically contain two types of exotic goods: coins and jewelry. Coins have long dominated discussions of early medieval economics
because they have been understood as being closely linked to exchange. Two factors militate against this one-sided approach. First, coins appear
alongside jewelry either as pendants worn singly or as parts of necklace groups. Second, ornamental objects appear in coin hoards, and beads in
particular are attested in written sources as a means of payment. Bead assemblages therefore offer an important means for reassessing the long-distance
dimensions of early medieval life.
This paper will survey the issues at stake in introducing beads to these discussions, presenting a summary of current research agendas and highlighting
the significance of long-standing questions about early medieval economics. The majority of this paper, however, will focus on developing a methodological
approach to challenge and complement the prevailing currents of previous scholarship. Building on recent studies that have argued that medieval
exchange and production sites developed not as cores with local peripheries but rather as nodes in both local and long-distance networks, I will argue that
beads represent points of consumption that likewise functioned as nodes in networks embracing both local and interregional contacts.
Demarest, Arthur (Vanderbilt University)
[26]             “Commodification,” Exchange, and Changes in Maya Political Economy on the Eve of the Classic Maya Collapse
Initial hypotheses on the port gateway city of Cancuen envisioned it functioning within a “normal” Classic Maya economy, albeit with a particular emphasis
on import/export of sacred goods, (e.g., jade, pyrite, probably quetzal feathers). After 15 years of excavation and intensive lithic and ceramic studies,
however, it appears that after 760 A.D. Cancuen shifted to a different form of economy almost entirely based on commodities production and long-distance
exchange. Evidence demonstrates massive obsidian importation, processing, and exportation, yet with little consumption at Cancuen outside of its
peninsular epicenter. After 786/790, jade preforms were produced there but treated as a standard commodity, not a sacred nor an inalienable good, and
jade preforms were for export with remarkably little local consumption in any area of the city. These seemingly counter-intuitive patterns are actually the
norm in economics with change in the value and even ideological significance of many commodities along the chain of extraction, production, and
exchange systems. The “commodification” of even jade and the distributional evidence on architecture, ceramics, and lithics in the 760–800 period also fit
common patterns of control of commodities by elite merchants and suggest changes in political economy that may have profound implications for the
“Classic Maya Collapse.”
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               110
[26]             Chair
DeMarrais, Elizabeth (University of Cambridge)
[105]            Understanding Heterarchy: Landscape and Community in the Northern Calchaquí Valley, Argentina
This presentation explores landscapes of heterarchy, investigating the ways that past peoples inhabited a south Andean landscape. In the northern
Calchaquí Valley of Argentina, before the Inkas, power relations were predominantly decentralized and spatially extensive. As a consequence, lived
experience, the built environment, and the wider landscape both constituted and reproduced a distinctive social order and cultural logic. Using data from
regional survey, I argue first for a habitus that emphasized face-to-face interactions and informal alliances on one hand, and movements to foster long-
distance exchange relationships on the other. Second, I show that rituals and collective activities (and their settings) assembled far-flung communities,
creating shared experiences that helped to foster solidarity. Third, I highlight the ways that social relationships were mediated across distances, using
elaborately decorated objects, especially pottery and textiles. Broader theoretical aims include a deeper understanding of the dynamics of heterarchy
through new insights into lived experience in this Andean landscape.
[248]            Discussant
Dematte, Paola (RISD) and Paola Demattè (Rhode Island School of Design)
[175]            Ritual Landscapes in Prehistoric China
In China, rock art is often found in areas considered peripheral to the so-called cradle of Chinese civilization. However, its patterns of landscape and space
use are not remarkably different from those of established religions or political institutions whose artistic production in the landscape is generally not
understood as “rock art.” Historic Taoist or Buddhist rock carvings and Confucian cliff inscriptions are also associated with travel routes (land, sea, or river)
or remarkable landscape features (mountains, cliffs, shores) that have acquired religious or political significance. An analysis of these sites will show that
the creation of religious landscapes follows similar patterns in all this cultural manifestations.
Demattè, Paola [175] see Dematte, Paola
DeMuth, R. Carl (Indiana University - Bloomington)
[284]            Finding the Children in Communities of Labor – Initial Results from the Coal Heritage Archaeology Project
This paper reviews recent archaeological research at Tams, West Virginia—a former coal company town—which revealed a significant number of
children's toys such as marbles and dolls/figurines. Artifacts such as these can offer important insights into the lives of children in company towns, an
aspect that is often overlooked in labor archaeology. In terms of community involvement, these artifacts are both important as well as interesting. Most
former residents interested in the project only lived in Tams as children, and these artifacts can speak directly to their experiences.
This research was carried out as part of the Coal Heritage Archaeology Project, a collaborative multi-institutional effort aimed at using community
archaeology to construct positive alternate narratives of Appalachian heritage to replace common negative stereotypes of the region. This paper
contributes to these goals through the examination of children in former coal company towns.
Dennehy, Timothy, Jacqueline Fox (Arizona State University) and Michael Smith (Arizona State University)
[171]            Housing Inequality in Premodern Cities
We calculate Gini indices for house size in two samples of premodern cities. The first sample consists of several cities included in the transdisciplinary
comparative project on spatial inequality called “Service Access in Premodern Cities.” That project examined the relationship between inequality and a set
of systematically coded contextual variables—such as economic development and governance mode—in a sample of ancient and historical cities. The
current study uses only those cities that have household-level data allowing calculation of a Gini index for house size. Our second sample consists of a
number of additional early cities that also provide comprehensive household level data, but which were not included in the earlier study. Taken together,
our analyses of these samples reveal considerable variation in the degree of wealth inequality in premodern cities, and allow us to suggest some of the
contextual factors associated with divergent levels of inequality. Finally, we experiment with using the Gini index in a novel way to characterize inequality in
spatial access to service facilities.
Dennis, L. Meghan
[287]            Bad Behavior and Good Guidelines: Applying the Society for American Archaeology’s Principles of Archaeological Ethics to the
                 Performance of Archaeology in Videogames
Within videogames, archaeology is often not itself a focus, but provides a flavor or character-defining style based on pre-existing stereotypes of the
discipline as presented in other forms of popular culture. This frequently results in utilizing the practice of archaeology as a form of secondary content,
designed to provide a financial or game-play bonus to the player character, while allowing access to objects of cultural patrimony and license to commodify
those objects. Through an application of SAA ethical guidelines to current examples of archaeological practice in videogames, public perceptions of how
archaeology and archaeologists function can be analyzed, and potential mitigations can be devised.
[250]            Discussant
Dennison, Meagan (University of Tennessee, Knoxville), Mark Freeman (University of Tennessee, Knoxville ) and Jeffrey Navel (Tennessee
Valley Authority )
[84]             Digital Archive of Archaeological Dog Burial and Metric Data of the Americas
Integrating large amounts of data into streamlined, coherent datasets is a popular trend among archaeologists today, as these large datasets allow for the
recognition and analysis of regional temporal and spatial trends. This paper presents an overview of a large dog burial dataset for the southeastern United
States, where dog burials have been encountered on archaeological sites dating from about 8,000 years ago through the historic period. The information
recorded includes contextual information concerning the burial environment, temporal component, and demographic information for both dogs and
associated humans. Here, we present a cultural historical framework that focuses on the geographic and temporal trends of this practice in the
southeastern United States.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                111
[84]              Chair
Dennison, Mark [129] see Hirth, Kenneth
Dennison, Rory (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[252]             Connected Kilns: Examining Interconnections of Trade in Southern China and the Philippines using LA-ICP-MS
This research, part of an ongoing dissertation project, examines a network of maritime trade between imperial China and southeast Asia by considering
issues of both production and distribution through the comparison of the chemical signatures of paste from porcelain samples obtained through Laser
Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectroscopy (LA-ICP-MS). Porcelain samples have been collected in the Philippines, and porcelain and clay
samples have been collected from kiln and habitation sites in southern China. This is a vast network, so the scalar nature of this work, looking at local,
regional, and interregional systems is important in explaining the process involved. While part of a larger discussion on the larger network and connections
involved therein, this research will, in particular, present results examining the differentiation and overlap of kiln sites from southern China (such as Dehua,
Lulin, Gou Tou Shan, and Zhangzhou wares), as well as from an associated habitation site. This research highlights the potential of such an approach and
produces results which show the interaction of local kilns within a larger regional framework.
Depalmas, Anna (University of Sassari) and Francesco di Gennaro (Archaeological Superintendency of Calabria)
[125]             Supper’s Ready. Preparing and Cooking Food in Italian Protohistory
The paper focuses on some aspects of food production and preparation of meals in the poorly equipped context of the protohistoric village in Italian
territory. Some arrangements that have already been observed or reconstructed on archaeological basis, specifically when connected to particular found
tools are discussed. With specific reference to the Italian protohistory, research on these items has been sometimes supported by ethnographic
comparisons. In this search, some already stated hypotheses, like those regarding the equipment of the “apennine civilization” are taken into account as
well as aspects related to the production of specialized vessels in Nuragic Sardinia. In several Bronze Age settlements, examples of cylindrical pots with an
inner continuous strip have been found; among the excavation findings is even more evident the presence of pottery cones with hollow bases and densely
perforated walls. In archaeological literature, such vessels—in association with cones—are considered functional to the boiling of the milk or of a liquid,
however, that, during the boiling process, tends to spill from the container. Other observations will be made about specialized pottery shapes which allow to
hypothesize some specific functions of preparation and/or cooking foods as the probable distillation stills.
Des Lauriers, Matthew [245] see Merrick, Dustin
Des Lauriers, Matthew (California State University, Northridge) and Dustin Merrick (California State University, Northridge)
[277]             Feedback Loops, Demographic Circumscription, and Changing Labor Organization on Isla Cedros, Baja California, Mexico
Discussions of resilience theory (see Redman 2005; Folke 2006; and others) and its application to ancient human ecological systems view the process of
cultural change as perpetually dynamic and involving patterns reliant upon a wide range of underlying factors constantly altered by a variety of catalysts
and forces. This differs from more linear arguments of transformation by unidirectional external forcing. One such complex transformation occurred on Isla
Cedros Baja California, in the Late Holocene between a period of village formation around A.D. 400–600 and a period of heightened population
aggregation and alteration of basic labor organization from ~1150–1732. Montero Phase villages were built at ideal locations for access to water, ecotonal
boundaries, and ease of travel to a variety of insular terrestrial resource zones. Houses during this period show dramatic differences in size and are
relatively large (~6-13 m in diameter). Following a period of dramatic change, later Huamalgüeño Phase villages are located in completely different
landscape settings and show virtually no variation in the size of their small houses (3.5-4 m in diameter), while demonstrating dramatic population
aggregation. Some Huamalgüeño villages contain literally hundreds of these small house features. We critically examine several hypotheses to explain this
transformation.
DeSantis, Larisa [205] see Tung, Tiffiny
DeSouza, Jonas (University of Exeter), Mark Robinson (University of Exeter), Jose Iriarte (University of Exeter), Francis Mayle (University of
Reading) and Paulo DeBlasis (Universidade de Sao Paulo)
[167]             Understanding the Occupation History of Oversized Pit Houses in the Southern Brazilian Highlands: Bayesian Modelling and High
                  Resolution Chronology of the Baggio 1 Site
The function of the oversized pit houses constructed by southern proto-Je groups in the southern Brazilian highlands has been a matter of debate for
decades. In this paper, we contribute to the debate by presenting a unique sequence from House 1 of the Baggio 1 site in Campo Belo do Sul, Santa
Catarina state. For the first time, we obtained a large number of radiocarbon dates for twelve occupation floors in an oversized pit structure. We applied
Bayesian modelling to develop a fine-grained chronology of the occupation history of House 1. This allowed us to tie observed changes in material culture,
maintenance practices, and abandonment modes in House 1 to an absolute, high resolution chronology.
Desrosiers, Sophie (EHESS-CRH, Paris)
[135]             Textile Conceptual Ideas as Mobility Indicators between Highlands and Coast, Central Andes, c. 200 B.C.–600 A.D.
Textiles are important artifacts when looking at mobility since they constitute a matrix of complex conceptual ideas, are important identity markers, and they
travel easily with their owners. Precolumbian textiles have seldom been preserved in the wet Andean highlands, making it difficult to evaluate their past
diversity and to identify them among the vast quantity of pieces discovered on the arid coast of Peru. Nevertheless, combining the study of present
highland weaving practices with the observation of precolumbian artifacts, it has been possible to demonstrate that part of the famous Paracas Necropolis
embroideries and of the Lima culture iconography respectively found on the south and central coast of Peru are reinterpretations of textile designs woven
in the highlands at the end of the Early Horizon and during the Early Intermediate Period. These two cases indicate that people and their textiles moved
between somewhere in the highland and the coast. Recent archaeology and linguistic studies will be utilized to localize and identify the highland weavers
whose art met so much success on the coast.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 112
Detry, Cleia [49] see Dias, Rita
Devenport, Dael and Shelby Anderson (Portland State University)
[210]            GIS Predictive Modeling to Identify Archeological Vulnerability to Climate Change Along the Coasts of Western Arctic National Parklands in
                 Alaska
A GIS-based predictive model helps guide archeological inventories and mitigation measures by identifying areas of archaeological interest subject to
climate change threats. This multi-year, large-scale inventory and vulnerability assessment of coastal archeological resources at Bering Land Bridge
National Preserve and Cape Krusenstern National Monument is designed to rectify the lack of basic inventory knowledge and complete a vulnerability
assessment. The remote 1,600 km-long coastal areas of the Western Arctic National Parklands in northwest Alaska are experiencing accelerated
environmental changes such as rising sea levels, storm surges, thawing permafrost, and erosion. Such changes adversely impact some of the most
significant archaeological sites in North America. Loss of these resources is important not only because of damage directly to them, but also because
information contained in these archeological records provides invaluable insight into the dynamics of how humans interacted with their environment and
adapted to change across a broad timescale. We used a combination of archaeological and environmental spatial data to develop a regional predictive
model, which was subsequently tested and refined by field work. This combination of field and desk based research resulted in a model that can be used to
focus future archaeological research in this region and further afield.
Devio, Jessica (University of Texas at San Antonio) and M. Kathryn Brown (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[270]            New Evidence for Late Classic Maya Food Processing at Xunantunich, Belize: Preliminary Results of Starch Grain Analysis
At Xunantunich, Belize, thousands of worked chert bladelets were found in Late to Terminal classic deposits near residences in Groups D and E. Initially,
these implements were thought to represent tools used in craft production of slate or other materials. However, little crafting debris or debitage was
encountered within deposits where the tools were recovered. Edge-wear analysis suggests the tools were used on organic material, either hardwood or
softer materials like tubers. Starch grain analysis was employed to determine whether the tools were used to grate manioc or other tubers. Underground
plant products are difficult to identify archaeologically due to poor preservation of macroremains and are underrepresented in discussions about Maya
subsistence. Fortunately, starch from these plant parts often preserves on stone tools. The large number of washed and unwashed worked bladelets
recovered from Xunantunich provides an ideal assemblage for study. The residues extracted from the chert bladelets were compared to experimental chert
flakes used to grate manioc, macal, sweet potato, and cocolmeca. This paper presents the surprising results of this study. We argue that these tools were
not the product of crafting activities, but rather, the remains of subsistence related activities, specifically intensive tuber processing.
Devlin, Sean (University of Minnesota)
[70]             The Value of Colonialism as a Model for Anglo-Caribbean Material Practices at Emancipation
Archaeologies of colonialism have presented models that draw out the complex political interactions of meaning making via material practices that take
place at the intersection of daily lives between populations of colonized and the colonizer. Traditional approaches to the archaeology of slavery within the
Anglo-Caribbean have tended to transpose these categories onto enslaved Africans and white settlers. The result is a tendency to emphasis meaning
making through material in terms of disciplinary, imposed by whites, or resistive, traditional African, practices. This project seeks to problematize this
classification, by exploring the socio-political dynamic that occurred within these societies in the decades leading to Emancipation in the late eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries. Rather than resorting to a bifurcated model, this project attempts to draw out multiple arrangements of identities between
the interests and identities of the planters, the enslaved, and metropolitans represented by missionaries. This more complex model suggests alternate
meanings for materials traditionally associated with disciplinary practices using initial evidence derived from a village site associated with a Barbadian
sugar estate.
[70]             Chair
Dewan, Eve [90] see Harrington, Katherine
Dezi, Gina (Mashantucket Pequot Museum and Research Center) and Kevin McBride (University of Connecticut)
[61]             The Battlefield Archaeology of Domestic Sites: Wartime Production during the Pequot War (1636–1637)
The Calluna Hill Site (59-73) is a small Pequot Village burned down by the English allied forces during their withdrawal from the Battle of Mystic Fort.
Recent excavations and metal detector surveys indicate the site was occupied for only a few weeks prior to its destruction on May 26, 1637. The site’s
setting and faunal assemblage suggests the site was re-located away from the coast in anticipation of an English attack on Pequot territory. The artifact
assemblage of re-processed brass and iron trade goods indicates the production of brass and iron projectiles, many examples of which were recovered
from the battlefield. The site provides a unique opportunity to examine the relationship between battle-related objects and domestic sites during the Pequot
War.
di Gennaro, Francesco [125] see Depalmas, Anna
Dias, Rita (ICArEHB-Universidade do Algarve)
[49]             The Use of Fish Vertebrae and Otoliths for Sclerochronological Analysis of a Mesolithic Shell Midden: Advantages and Limitations
The onset of the Holocene in the Iberian Atlantic Coast is associated with the appearance of the Mesolithic shell middens, which reflected new subsistence
patterns that have been commonly characterized by the intensification of aquatic resources exploitation. Recently, sclerochronological analysis of shell
midden faunal remains has been seen as fundamental to infer climatic and environmental changes, human settlement, resource exploitation, and seasonal
occupation.
However, fish bone, and especially otoliths, as a consequence of their chemistry and ultrastructure require certain conditions to survive. Methodological
concerns and specific methods have to be used in archaeological sclerochronological analysis to address certain taphonomic and diagenetic processes
and to ensure unbiased results.
Nevertheless, both structures offer a unique and valuable source of information to reconstruct human occupation patterns (season of capture) during the
Mesolithic of shell middens in the Iberian Atlantic Coast.
[49]             Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             113
Diaz, Francisco (San Francisco State University)
[149]            The Szőlő of Wrath: Hungarian Vineyards and Land Use in the 20th Century
Understanding the land use history of an archaeological site is necessary for understanding the contextual state of the archaeological artifacts recovered
through systematic excavation. Bronze Age cemetery excavation at Békés 103 in eastern Hungary presents some challenges, however, because multiple
landowners and a long and varied history of land use parcels the site into archaeological deposits of differing and varied degrees of disturbance. Oral
history provides an important source about land use history for explaining the present archaeological conditions and helps to inform excavation decisions.
This paper consolidates information about known cultivation methods and property ownership using QGIS, providing a visual and spatial reference for
further investigation. This undertaking not only provides information to help decide future excavation, but benefits public relations and provides a tool for
outreach for the BAKOTA project to inform the present-day residents and stakeholders about the archaeological undertaking in their community.
Diaz, Diana (California State University, Northridge) and Danielle Kurin (University of California, Santa Barbara )
[206]            Discerning Site Distribution and Settlement Patterns in Andahuaylas (Apurimac), Peru
Archaeological scholarship in the Andahuaylas region of south-central highland Peru has documented the presence of three critical cultural occupations:
Wari, Chanka, and Inka (ca. A.D. 700–1400). Previous investigations claim that environmental change may have influenced collapse and played a decisive
role in resettlement patterns. Using spatial data from 86 surveyed sites, this study investigates how state collapse, reorganization, and environmental
transformations influenced settlement patterns in the region. Nearest neighbor analysis and other GIS applications are marshaled to evaluate how regional
site density, settlement location, agglutination, and cultural occupation varied over time. Preliminary results are used to address the nature of site
abandonment as well as motivations for population aggregation. The study emphasizes the role social agency as findings suggest human settlement on
the landscape may be strongly predicated by the social milieu than macro climactic conditions alone.
Dibble , Harold [177] see Steele, Teresa
DiBenedetto, Katelynn [64] see Ferguson, Jeffrey
Dijkhoff, Raymundo [220] see Kelly, Harold
Dillehay, Tom [31] see Prieto, Gabriel
Dillehay, Tom
[107]            Past and Present Andean Night Moon Rituals
Two nighttime rituals, one archaeological and the other ethnographic, are presented for the Andean region of South America. The archaeological case is
the 7,500–4,000 year old littoral mound site of Huaca Prieta on the north coast of Peru where a very dense accumulation of charcoal resulting from fires
and rituals formed the site. Recovered at the site were reed torches suggesting nighttime rituals. Today, shamans or curanderos from the north coast still
occasionally use the site at night under a clear moon to make coca offerings (pages) and to pray for productive fertility from the sea and the land. The
ethnographic case is the Mapuche shamans or machis of south-central Chile who perform nighttime rituals to communicate with the gods and ancestors.
The wider political and community and interactive implications of these two cases, set within the Andean world and within broader anthropological
concepts, are discussed and compared.
Dillian, Carolyn (Coastal Carolina University) and Charles Bello (FEMA)
[159]            Charles Conrad Abbott and the Evolution of Humankind
Charles Conrad Abbott is most well known for his participation in the “Great Paleolithic Debate” of the late nineteenth century, in which he used
archaeological evidence to propose an independent evolution of humans in the New World and the Old World. His theories were soon dismissed as
incorrect, but for a brief time, he gained scientific renown for his scholarly publications. However, his theories must be examined within the framework of
scientific thought during this time. In 1859, Charles Darwin published On the Origin of Species, which had wide-reaching implications for the scientific
world. Charles Conrad Abbott, who was a nephew of paleontologist Timothy Conrad, would have been immersed in this literature at a relatively young age
and strongly influenced by the scientific debates on human antiquity. The context and influences that affected his decision to pursue a life as a naturalist
and archaeologist are explored here, and the scientific milieu of the late nineteenth century provides an important starting point for understanding Abbott’s
infamous, and for a brief time influential, theories about the origins of modern humans in the New World.
Dillon, James [217] see Huang, Yongsong
Dilyard, Jeffrey [112] see Redmond, Brian
DiNapoli, Robert (University of Oregon)
[296]            Resource Structure, Economic Defendability, and Conflict in Rapa Nui and Rapa Iti, East Polynesia—An Agent-based Modeling Approach
East Polynesian populations are closely related both culturally and genetically, yet their islands are environmentally diverse. The common ancestry and
strong environmental differences make East Polynesia uniquely suited to the study of divergent sociocultural evolution. Following human colonization,
populations diverged in subsistence practices, settlement patterns, ritual architecture, intensity of competition, and social organization. Here, we explore
differences in the intensity of conflict on two marginal East Polynesian islands—Rapa Iti and Rapa Nui—where conflict and territoriality varied dramatically.
We argue that a human behavioral ecology ‘economic defendability’ model (EDM) explains these differences. EDM predicts degrees of territoriality will
emerge in ecological settings where resources are both dense and predictable. We test these predictions using an agent-based model incorporating
archaeological data on the location and productivity of subsistence resources examining the explanatory expectations of the EDM.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                114
[296]              Chair
Diserens, Kasey (University of Pennsylvania), Tiffany Cain (University of Pennsylvania) and Richard Leventhal (University of Pennsylvania)
[54]               Heritage That Gives Back: Community Development and Heritage Preservation in Tihosuco, Mexico
The Heritage Preservation and Community Development Project in Tihosuco, Quintana Roo, is a community-based anthropological program that seeks to
combat the visible economic and social inequality in the region. Such inequalities exist both between the tourists and laborers as well as between the larger
economic centers and peripheral indigenous communities. While the project seeks to bridge some gaps by creating jobs and a small-scale tourism market,
we also explore ways to have an impact upon the social disparity and to empower the community with a strong voice that reinforces their claim on the
history of the Caste War as a central part of their heritage.
This paper attempts to move the discussion surrounding the preservation of heritage out from the margins of the discourse on economic and social
development. Generating strategies for the protection and management of cultural assets, both tangible and intangible, can lead to sustainable models of
development for communities like Tihosuco.
This project moves away from the seasonal labor model of archaeological fieldwork and economic growth. By shifting out of that structure, we work with
Tihosuco to create a project with long-term benefits to the community and region.
Disque, Candice [67] see Lea, Trevor
Disque, Candice (New Mexico State University)
[289]               Social Organization within a Tower Complex in Southeast Utah: A Landscape Approach
Through architecture, the Ancestral Pueblo people expressed their ideas and beliefs in many different ways. Towers have long been an enigmatic
presence in the southwest when role and function are in question, though focus should not be placed solely on a single explanation if one is to understand
the people. Rather, interpreting the entirety of a site allows for a more holistic view into the social landscape. Ongoing research is being conducted at site
42SA4998 in the Alkali Ridge region of southeast Utah to understand the function of tower complexes with regards to social organization. By examining the
architectural layout and masonry of the towers, interpreting the relationship between the towers and accompanying structures, and spatially analyzing the
complex with respect to nearby sites, we begin to understand that it is not just the tower which conveys ideas, but that the complex as a whole
disseminates information about social organization. Additional analysis into the function of the tower complex includes artifact density and distribution to
detail site activities, and extensive survey and mapping of the site. This paper explores the multi-faceted function of tower complexes and how ideas about
social organization can be extrapolated through a landscape approach.
Dixon, Christine (Green River College)
[32]               Rising from the Ashes: Power and Autonomy at Cerén, El Salvador
On the side of a road in El Salvador in 1978, the life of Payson Sheets and the remains of the Classic Period Maya settlement of Cerén fatefully
intersected. When Sheets first understood the actual antiquity of the site buried by volcanic ash to be 1,400 years old, what could not have been known
was the decades of research that would ensue, nor the wide-ranging impacts that such findings would have for household archaeology, commoner studies,
and archaeological method and theory. Sheets has directed research at the UNESCO World Heritage site of Cerén for over three decades. Through his
dedication, 11 earthen structures that sit among their agricultural fields have been excavated. Theoretical and methodological contributions of more recent
work at Cerén are discussed through the lens of key findings. This paper pulls together recent research at the site, initiated in 2005 with geophysical
explorations, followed by major research projects in 2007, 2009, 2011, and 2013. Our understanding of ancient Maya lifeways has been enormously
enhanced through the discovery of manioc fields and an earthen sacbe, allowing us to better reconstruct social and political power and autonomy within the
community.
[53]               Chair
Dixon, Christine [107] see Gonlin, Nan
Dixon, E. James (Maxwell Museum)
[249]              Discussant
Dobereiner, Jeffrey (Harvard University)
[178]              Are Two Heads Still Better than One? Considering a Unified Origin for American Social Complexity
For half a century, scholars have listed Mesoamerica and South America alongside the Near East, Egypt, China, and India as independent loci of emergent
social complexity. Yet, recent scholarship has placed an increasing emphasis on the role of multi-regionalism and mobility in the emergence of world
civilizations. These theoretical shifts, alongside suggestive findings of agricultural, material, and ideological unity in the Formative Americas, require us to
ask: Were pathways to complexity in Mesoamerica and South America truly independent? How does treating the Americas as a unified locus of social
complexity impact comparative approaches to civilizations of the Old and New Worlds? In this paper, I explore the theoretical shift toward regional
approaches to primary Old World civilizations, and how expanding their application is poised to transform how we understand the Americas. This offers a
unifying anthropological narrative to the diverse papers of this session and contextualizes their contribution to studies of emergent social complexity
worldwide.
[178]              Chair
Dobney, Keith [160] see Weyrich, Laura
Dockrill, Stephen [210] see Bond, Julie
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               115
Dodge, Robyn (The University of Texas at Austin)
[27]             Hun Tun Household Context and Social Complexity
The ancient Maya site, Hun Tun, is located in northwestern Belize and serves as a platform of inquiry into social complexity at the household level. This
paper addresses ancient Maya commoners in household contexts while discussing data that are pertinent to ideas of household identity, social formation,
and household production by re-evaluating conventional notions of domestic space. The analysis of everyday objects in domestic contexts contributes to
this discussion. Major archaeological features and monuments at Hun Tun will be discussed as they pertain to hinterland settlements and household
contexts. Particular features such as those found at Hun Tun challenge existing ideas about the function of hinterland domestic space. A discussion of
function is crucial to understanding the role of households at Hun Tun in forming social complexity. In tandem with features, material culture is also
discussed in context. Knowledge about the function of domestic activity areas serves to tie Hun Tun with the larger ancient Maya polity at La Milpa.
Ceramics, various lithic material assemblages, and small find material culture, are among the recovered artifacts discussed here. These data suggest a
broad range of access and exchange of materials at Hun Tun.
Dodrill, Taylor, Mila Lassuy (University of Oregon), Nicholas Jew (University of Oregon) and Scott Fitzpatrick (University of Oregon)
[182]            Stable Oxygen Isotope Analyses and Paleoenvironmental Reconstructions from Mollusks in Palau, Micronesia
In Palau, Micronesia, marine resources, such as shellfish, played a vital role in subsistence for millennia. At the Chelechol ra Orrak site, nearly 100
shellfish species have been identified in archaeological assemblages, but there is a dearth of data on nearshore paleoecology or prehistoric shellfish
foraging practices. To address these issues, we employed stable oxygen isotopes (δ18O) on select shellfish species, which has been successfully applied
in many coastal regions to reconstruct paleoenvironments and sea-surface temperature (SST). In this study, modern shellfish samples were collected from
intertidal zones near the site and ambient SST recorded. We then used X-ray diffraction on the samples to identify the skeletal biomineralogical
composition, which provides the necessary information to select the proper isotope-to-SST conversion formula. Calcium carbonate samples were milled
from modern shells and the δ18O results paired with ambient water temperatures using several δ18O-SST conversion equations. Using the most
appropriate formula, these equations were then applied to δ18O samples from several prehistoric shells to reconstruct a high-resolution SST. Results
provide useful baselines for examining a host of issues related to prehistoric subsistence strategies in Palau and how environmental changes may have
influenced the availability and productivity of various molluscan taxa through time.
Doering, Travis (University of South Florida - AIST)
[264]            Ritual Deposits at El Marquesillo, Veracruz: Examples of Long-Term Collective Social Memory
The settlement of El Marquesillo in southern Veracruz was inhabited during the Mesoamerican Early Formative Period, emerged as an Olmec center
during the Middle Formative Period, and remained occupied throughout the remainder of the precolumbian period. During the late Middle to early Late
Formative Period, an Olmec monumental tabletop throne was ritually terminated and deposited. This interment was accompanied by two substantial
offerings suggestive of a feasting event. More than a millennium later, during the late Classic Period, three more meticulously placed offerings were cached
nearby. Based on various lines of evidence, these later offerings appear to have been expressions of long-term social memory designed to recall the
Formative Period Olmec activities. This paper reviews the details of these depositions and their potential relationships.
Doering, Jaclyn, David Hyde and Krystle Kelley
[273]            Expansion of an Eastern Shrine at the Tapir Group of the Medicinal Trail Community in Northwestern Belize
Excavations within the Tapir Group at Medicinal Trail, a Maya hinterland community in northwestern Belize, have revealed evidence for multiple phases of
expansion of both Structure B-1, a large pyramidal structure on the eastern side of the courtyard group, and the plaza platform on which it rests. The Tapir
Group is a relatively large, formal Plaza Plan 2 courtyard group (as defined by Becker). Excavations indicate that Structure B-1 was expanded at least
twice and, in order to accommodate the enlarged shrine, a new platform extension was constructed off the eastern side of the plaza platform. Additionally,
there appears to have been a final construction made off the southern side of the shrine, possibly by later inhabitants, using reclaimed cutstones from the
courtyard group. This poster will summarize the various phases of construction and discuss the importance of eastern shrines in the Maya Lowlands.
Dolan, Patrick (Washington State University), Colin Grier (Washington State University), Markussen Christine (Center for Advanced Spatial
Technologies - Univers) and Katie Simon (Center for Advanced Spatial Technologies - Univers)
[124]            Magnetic Gradient Survey of a Hunter-Gatherer Plank House Village at the Dionisio Point Site, Northwest Coast of North America
We present the results of magnetometry survey of four houses at the Dionisio Point site, a 1,500-year-old settlement in the Gulf Islands of southwestern
British Columbia, Canada. Intensive excavations have uncovered much of one of five substantial houses. It is the remains of a shed-roof plank house, the
winter residence of a large multi-family corporate group. We suggest that the rest were contemporaneous households organized in a similar fashion and
that Dionisio likely constituted an example of the large, permanent, winter villages that are known on the coast archaeologically and ethnographically. We
draw upon the results of the magnetometry survey to further evaluate this possibility. The survey reveals strong anthropogenic magnetic anomalies at
Dionisio Point. Their distribution corresponds to the expectations of a behavioral model of shed-roof house organization. The spatial distribution of
anomalies supports the thesis that the Dionisio Point settlement was a residential community comprised of large multi-family shed-roof households. Over
the course of its roughly two-century occupation, this village was composed of five large dwellings built on common architectural principles, supporting
previous inferences concerning the social and economic centrality of the domestic group in local community organization.
Dolan, Sean (University of Oklahoma)
[168]            Blue Birds and Black Glass: Traditions and Communities of Practice during the Coalition to Classic Period Transition on the Pajarito
                 Plateau, New Mexico
Multiple lines of anthropological evidence demonstrate people moved from the northern San Juan region into the Pajarito Plateau in the late thirteenth and
early fourteenth centuries A.D. This Coalition to Classic Period transition was a time of immense demographic and social reorganization that shaped the
historical and cultural trajectories for the future of Ancestral Pueblo people. As a consequence of the influx of diasporic households, how did this
transformation affect traditions of obsidian source-use on the Pajarito Plateau prior to, during, and after the transition? I discuss the results of previous XRF
analyses on obsidian artifacts from projects at Los Alamos National Laboratory and Bandelier National Monument to put the data into the larger social
context of the northern North American southwest. Using multiscalar perspectives, I demonstrate that people started new traditions of which obsidian to
use after the transition in the northern Tewa-speaking region near Los Alamos, whereas earlier traditions persisted to the south in the Keres-speaking
region in Bandelier. This could reflect changes in communities of practice as a result of transformations in circumscribed social and territorial boundaries of
Jemez obsidian procurement and technological agency.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               116
Dollarhide, Eli (New York University)
[143]             Impressions of an Early Urban Landscape: Interpreting a Bronze Age Ceramic Motif from ‘Amlah, Oman
This paper explores one prominent material correlate of an interconnected ancient Near Eastern world: a category of ceramic vessels termed incised
greywares. Archaeological excavations have revealed a significant corpus of incised greyware vessels from across the mid-third millennium B.C. Near
East; they are found in contexts as diverse as the ancient city of Susa to small, communal tombs across the Omani peninsula. The primary focus of this
paper lies in investigating an assemblage of this ceramic type from the site of ‘Amlah, located along the Wadi al-Ayn in the interior of Oman.
This research analyzes the physical characteristics of the ‘Amlah greyware assemblage and finds evidence for two different groups of production that share
common forms, texture, and decoration. Examining one of these motifs—the sagging lintel—in detail, I offer a reading of the incised greywares as bearers
of a uniquely Mesopotamian architectural form, referring to recent work on the earliest urban, littoral landscape in the southern marshlands of the Tigris and
Euphrates. The ‘Amlah incised greywares offer insight into the movement of an environmentally-specific image across radically diverse landscapes and
provides evidence for deep levels of interconnectivity across even the smallest settlements of third millennium B.C. Oman.
Domeischel, Jenna (Eastern New Mexico University)
[265]             Eastern New Mexico University Archaeological Collections
Home of the Clovis type-site and the Blackwater Draw Museum, as well as the Agency for Conservation Archaeology, Eastern New Mexico University
serves as a repository for varied collections from within the state of New Mexico and from farther afield. Numerous well-known and respected
archaeologists have held positions at the university and conducted fieldwork in the region, leaving their archaeological materials in trust. Additionally, the
USDA Forest Service and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers store many regional collections in the curation facility, including collections from bordering
states such as Arizona and Texas. Materials housed in the repository are both regionally and temporally diverse; from the Paleoindian Period through the
Historic Period, and from the western borders of the southern Plains to the heart of the southwest, including Ancestral Puebloan sites. Collections are not
limited to artifacts; many contain associated paperwork, including field notes and journals, as well as photographs, slides, and other media. Research
potential is enormous; in the past, these collections have been accessed to provide data for theses, dissertations, and independent research resulting in
professional publications. Additionally, a variety of current research projects are ongoing.
Dominguez, Ma. del Rosario [179] see Folan, William
Domínguez, Miriam (University of Florida)
[204]             After 3,000 Years, the Enduring Site of Potrero Mendieta is Still Overlooking the Jubones River Basin
The archaeological study of intercultural encounters in the context of a geographically interstitial zone, such as the Jubones River Basin in present-day
Ecuador, elucidates the interconnectedness of multiple historical processes and evaluates the notion that such convergences have existed since antiquity.
Preliminary archaeological fieldwork and analysis of the material culture from Potrero Mendieta revealed monumental architecture, and ceramic and lithic
traditions that denote cultural associations with both the Formative populations from the Pacific coast of Ecuador and those of the eastern lowlands. It is a
platitude to assert that after a three-season program of archaeological investigation at the site, there is no resolution on the nature of Potrero Mendieta.
This poster illustrates just a glimpse of the tip of the iceberg.
Donahue, Randolph (University of Bradford), Daniela Burroni (Leeds Beckett University) and Anders Fischer (Agency of Culture, Denmark)
[214]             Microwear and the Resolution of Post-Depositional Modification of Danish Underwater Mesolithic Deposits
It has been shown that the amount of rounding of a dorsal ridge of an unused flake is a good proxy measure for the amount of post-depositional
modification by sediment movement. The technique has been applied often by the Lithic Microwear Research Laboratory to assess the suitability of an
assemblage for study of tool use. Here, we report on the application of the technique to a unique problem. Orehoved is a port located in southern Denmark.
The repositioning of a bridge carrying traffic between Hamburg and Copenhagen impacts on access of the port channel to ships. The channel is to be
repositioned and an archaeological assessment was undertaken to assess the impact of different access routes to the port. The harbor and channel routes
                                          3
were test pitted with the sediment (2 m ) from each test pit brought onboard the vessel to be sieved. Artifacts came from at least two distinctive layers.
Ridge wear analysis demonstrates that the artifacts showed a variety of conditions from appearing extremely fresh to showing extreme rounding. Spatial
and statistical analysis shows that there are horizontal and vertical differences in the quantity of high quality material. The analysis provides a guide for
current underwater excavation.
Donahue, Randolph [269] see Evans, Adrian
Donop, Mark (University of Florida), Neill Wallis (Florida Museum of Natural History) and Ann Cordell (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[8]               Production and Provenance of Weeden Island Mortuary Effigies from the Woodland Gulf Coast
Technofunctional analysis, neutron activation analysis (NAA), and petrographic analysis were employed to map the origins of rare mortuary effigies from
Palmetto Mound (8LV2) on the Gulf Coast of Florida to better understand how the production and distribution of Weeden Island (ca. A.D. 200–1000)
religious paraphernalia was related to social interactions and emergent complex societies. Palmetto Mound is a mortuary facility composed of mounds and
ramps on a small island directly west of the large, arcuate Shell Mound (8LV42) dated primarily to the Weeden Island Period. The relationship between
religious practices and the heightened social complexity in the region indicated by increased communal aggregation, burial treatment differentiation, and
monumentality is poorly understood. Weeden Island ceramic effigies of plants, animals, and humans were limited to mortuary contexts and produced at
unknown and possibly restricted locations. Limited production and access to these mortuary items may indicate that incipient social inequality was tied to
religious practices. Fourteen effigies from the Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH) were measured for technofunctional characteristics and 3D
imaged, then sampled for NAA and petrographic analysis to determine elemental composition and paste characterization. The results were used to create
a map that illustrates a ritual network of interaction.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             117
Donovan, Erin [112] see Nolan, Kevin
Doolittle, William (University of Texas)
[130]            Discussant
Dorland, Steven (University of Toronto)
[85]             Practicing Informal Apprenticeship: A Study of Learning Landscapes in 15th-16th Century Potting Groups in Upstate New York
Pottery vessels that are produced by younger community members are highly effective avenues for addressing learning structures and social interactions
of Great Lakes potting groups. Yet, learner actions are often isolated by archaeologists from the actions of experienced potters in the belief that variation is
random and does not follow similar stylistic and manufacturing practices. Furthermore, traditional belief portrays pottery learning as passive transmission of
knowledge, an interpretation that hinders understanding of potting interactions and removes the role of children in cultural production. This paper discusses
the application of a proposed methodological framework to address learner vessels. Pottery samples from the A.D. 15th–16th century villages of Garoga,
Klock, and Smith-Pagerie in upstate New York were assessed to systematically identify the relation between adult vessels and learner vessels. Rather than
grounding indicators of skill in decorative aesthetics, the author evaluates shaping and modification methods and fine motor-skill execution. The author
argues that Great Lakes potters participated in active forms of informal apprenticeship to acquire the needed knowledge to maintain longstanding potting
traditions.
Dorland, Martha [225] see Turner, Daniel
Dorshow, Wetherbee [218] see Robinson, Jess
Doucette, Dianna [42] see Jeremiah, Kristen
Doucette, Dianna (The Public Archaeology Laboratory (PAL))
[42]             Chair
Douglass, Matthew [94] see Wandsnider, LuAnn
Douglass, Kristina (Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History)
[269]            Resource Exploitation Patterns in the Velondriake Marine Protected Area, Southwest Madagascar, ca. A.D. 800-1900
This paper discusses resource exploitation patterns at coastal archaeological sites located in the Velondriake Marine Protected Area in southwest
Madagascar. In particular, it assesses the selective reliance of coastal communities on a variety of local habitats and taxa. The data are derived from
regional survey and the excavation of five archaeological sites, including small rock shelters and open-air sites, ranging in date from ca. A.D. 800 to 1900.
The data describe multiple narratives of human-environment interaction, each resulting in a distinct “impact” on the environment. Velondriake’s
environmental history is characterized by frequent movement of people in and out of its coastal desert environment, both seasonally and over longer
periods of time. Particularly considering the harsh and unpredictable climate of the region, this pattern of selective resource exploitation and frequent
migration offers a long view of the resilience of socio-ecological systems in coastal southwest Madagascar. On-going research into the impact of human
predation on populations of now-extinct elephant birds suggests that these ratites co-existed with human communities in the region far longer than
previously thought.
Doumani Dupuy, Paula [134] see Hermes, Taylor
Downes, Jane [210] see Mainland, Ingrid
Downey, Jordan (University of Western Ontario)
[45]             The Rise of Authority and the Decline of Warfare in the Virú Valley
The Salinar Period (400–200 B.C.) has long been considered a time of extensive warfare on the north coast of Peru. In the Virú Valley, fortifications and
defensible settlements were common during this period, and warfare is thought to decline in the subsequent Virú Period (200 B.C.–A.D. 600). While Virú
Period settlements were commonly built in open and undefensible locations, a new type of monumental fortification, the Castillo, first appeared during this
time. These structures clearly served a strategic purpose and were a potent symbol of power, but they also housed large towns with public spaces. Was
warfare actually less common in the Virú Period compared to Salinar, or did the nature of warfare in the valley change? Using a GIS-based approach, I
show that the valley did indeed experience less warfare in the Virú Period and hypothesize that the changing nature of fortified settlements in the Virú
Period can be explained by the development of a strong, centralized authority that unified the valley command and ensured that warfare was not conducted
within the valley itself.
[45]             Chair
Downs, Lauren [67] see Van Pool, Todd
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 118
Downs, Lauren
[275]             Habitual Postures of the Medio Period Casas Grandes People: A Comparison of Visual Art Representations and Skeletal Data
One of the most distinctive forms to come out of the Medio Period (1200–1475 A.D.) Casas Grandes ceramic tradition was human effigy vessels. These
vessels exhibit primary and secondary sexual traits, and the males and the females are seated in different postures. The males are usually seated in a
squatted position, whereas the females typically sit with their legs straight out. To see if these vessels reflected real-life habitual postures, Medio Period
skeletal remains from Paquimé were examined. Habitual actions leave markers on the skeleton, and one such marker is squatting facets. These facets
occur on the tibia and talus, and as the name suggests, are indicative of habitual squatting. Given the postures of the male vessels, it was expected that
the male skeletal remains would have a higher frequency of squatting facets. This is not the case. Instead, the female remains have a significantly higher
frequency of squatting facets. This is possibly due to the posture assumed when grinding corn, a traditionally female activity. Perhaps the positions
assumed by the vessels are the typical postures for social or ritual activities, and this is what is being depicted by the ceramic effigy vessels.
Doyle, James (The Metropolitan Museum of Art)
[59]              E-Groups and the Origins of Ancient Maya Exchange
 Many communities in the Maya Lowlands began when residents banded together to create E-Groups by leveling bedrock, paving over large plazas, and
building modest pyramidal architecture. This presentation traces the spread of E-Groups after 700 B.C. as a product of two trends: the replication of a
primordial place characterized by solar movement and a central living mountain, and the social and commercial gathering of peoples to exchange goods
and ideas on a regular basis. The people producing and exchanging things in E-Group communities built their practices into the architecture of the E-Group
itself. The physical remnants of activities such as freshwater shell consumption, lithic biface reduction, and solid figurine making was purposefully
deposited in the fill of buildings to imbue them with the lifeblood of exchange. Potters in the Middle and Late Preclassic periods (e.g., Mamom and Chicanel
spheres) clearly shared information over vast distances, perhaps by traveling to and from different E-Group gatherings, judging by similar paste recipes,
formal changes, and surface decoration techniques. E-Groups, then, can be viewed as the matrix from which Maya Lowland exchange arose and
flourished during the time of the Classic divine rulers.
Doyon, Luc (Université de Montréal & Université de Bordeaux)
[176]             Morphometric Analysis of Aurignacian Bone, Antler and Ivory Projectile Points
This study examines the morphometric variation of Aurignacian bone, antler, and ivory projectile points, the first continental-wide occurrence of hunting
armatures made from animal material during the Early Upper Paleolithic. Morphometric analysis is a powerful instrument that separates and quantifies
variation of both shape and size, thereby allowing exploration of both functional and stylistic variation of an object. Applied to armatures from the Western
Mediterranean region (Grotte de l’Observatoire, Reclau Viver, L’Arbreda Cave) and the northern slopes of the Pyrenees (Aurignac, Tarté, Saint-Jean-de-
Verges), morphometric analysis suggests the presence of three main volumetric templates replicated by the prehistoric artisans. Each template is
associated with specific proximal and/or distal damage types. This suggests that morphometrically similar implements were hafted and used in similar
ways. As would be expected, sites where the manufacture of projectile points is attested yield a greater number of complete points as well as specimens
showing little sign of use. On the other hand, the specimens from assemblages from sites without evidence of primary manufacture and that are located at
the extremities of the region are smaller and more fragmented, suggesting a higher intensity of use and resharpening prior to deposition.
Dozier, Crystal (Texas A&M University)
[255]             Maize Starch Taphonomy in Chicha Production: Experimental Results
Starch granules can be recovered from a variety of archaeological contexts and have been used to interpret cooking technologies. This set of experiments
investigated some taphonomic considerations to interpreting chicha (corn beer) production from starch granules. The first experiment examined how far the
maize starch granules travelled from the grinding station. Starch could be recovered as far as 10 meters from the grinding site, with dense starch
collections happening less than 40 centimeters from the mano and metate. The three conditions of grinding (outside, with wind; outside, against wind;
inside, no wind) highlight the importance of context in interpreting the starch record. The second experiment examined the morphological changes in the
starch granules through the malting, boiling, and fermentation stages of chicha production. Malted maize starch granules gelatinized at a much lower
temperatures than non-malted cereal starches observed in other experiments. Due to the rapid gelatinization of malted maize starch granules, it is unlikely
that chicha-related starch would be recovered in boiling, fermentation, serving vessels, dental calculus, or within the digestive system. Studying the chicha
production stream, however, indicates that starch could be recovered from the grinding materials; morphologically, malted starch granules may be
indicative of brewing technologies.
[40]              Chair
Dozier, Crystal [40] see Sonderman, Elanor
Draeger-Williams, Cathy [287] see Parsell, Veronica
Drake, Stacy (The University of Texas at Austin) and Dorothy Ann Riegert (Texas State University)
[235]             Curation and Best Practice with Human Remains in Northwest Belize
As of the summer of 2015, approximately 135 burials have been recovered and investigated through the Programme for Belize Archaeological Project
(PfBAP) in Northwest Belize. Within the 270,000 acres of land on which the PfBAP operates, approximately 60 archaeological sites have been recorded
and investigated. As the number of burials increases with new site identification and investigation, a need for data consolidation and accessibility has
arisen. We aim to make this data more attainable through consolidating the burial records and inventory into a more accessible database. This coincides
with an effort to practice best preservation methods, maintenance, and curation protocols as it relates to human remains. We are currently working to
establish analysis and storage standards and a running accession process for the PfBAP human remains collection. Here, we address the beginnings of
this project, the accomplishments and mishaps experienced during the first year of its development, and the hopeful plan and intention for the project as it
develops in the future.
Drennan, Megan
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              119
[119]              Pharaonic Power and Architectural Labor Investment at the Karnak Temple Complex, Egypt
Labor investment studies, based on the notion that the energy of people is quantifiable, give an invaluable and unique insight into the architectural pursuits
of past societies. This labor study of ancient Egypt provides a better understanding of authority among Egyptian pharaohs as represented by their legacy of
monumental architecture. A site of profound importance to Egyptian society was the Karnak Temple Complex, specifically the precinct of Amun, which was
aggrandized by pharaonic architectural attention over a span of 2,000 years. The primary objective of this research is to compare the leadership and
expense invested in the building of Karnak over time, as it reveals the significance of these projects and therefore the power of each pharaoh. Investment
was calculated using the volume of material used for each structure that composes the complex and was compared to pharaonic variables. I will present
how variables of time, warfare, and the centralization of the government were strongly correlated with monumental building at Karnak. I argue that the
results demonstrate that rulers with greater sociopolitical power expressed it through their successful building programs at Karnak. Likewise, it served as a
justification for their authority, role, and military actions.
Drennan, Robert [171] see Peterson, Christian
Druc, Isabelle (University of Wisconsin-Madison) and Gabriel O. Prieto (Universidad Nacional de Trujillo Peru)
[31]               Social Interactions at Gramalote: A Ceramic Production Perspective
Recent petrographic analysis of ceramics and comparative samples from the Formative site of Gramalote, on the north coast of Peru, allows us to brush a
tentative portrait of ceramic production at or for Gramalote. Considering ceramics as part of a socio-economic network, the identification of different paste
groups yields information relative to some of the interactions occurring at that time period in the Gramalote region.
[102]              Discussant
Duarte, Carlos (University of Cantabria), Eneko Iriarte (University of Burgos), Igor Gutiérrez-Zugasti (University of Cantabria) and Pablo Arias
(University of Cantabria)
[49]               Carbonate Microfacies in Shell Middens of Northern Iberia: Implications for Holocene Environment and Mesolithic Settlement
In the Cantabrian region (northern Spain), the exploitation of marine resources is well known. This is especially true during the Mesolithic, as attested by
the particular record of carbonate-cemented shell middens in caves and rockshelters, although only a few sites have shell middens in stratigraphic position,
allowing archaeological excavation.
Recent investigations at three sites, El Alloru, El Mazo, and La Fragua, demonstrated that these deposits record a complex accumulation of calcium
carbonate forms, with juxtaposed microfacies resulting from both human inputs of Ca (e.g., combustion features and the shells themselves) and the
posterior carbonate cementation by karstic hydrological activity. In addition, postdepositional processes led to the precipitation of secondary carbonate
crystals throughout the deposits. Differentiation between each form of calcium carbonate is possible through petrographic (thin sectioning), mineralogical
(FTIR), and geochemical (SEM) analysis. This approach permits the identification of carbonate forms such as tufa, stromatolitic structures, calcitic ash, and
secondary recrystalizations, achieving great detail in their spatial and chronological interactions.
It is concluded that microcontextual multitechnique approaches to the carbonate microfacies of the shell midden are highly informative regarding a higher-
resolution record of local Holocene conditions, the integrity of the human activities, and therefore, the functionality of these deposits.
DuBois, Erin, Tony Waldron (University College London), Kate Bowers (University College London) and Carolyn Rando (University College
London)
[187]              An Examination of the Spatial Distribution of the Tissue Fragments Created during an Explosive Event
In the field of forensic science, the investigation that follows an explosive attack is one of extreme importance. There are, however, few universally
accepted methods for the location and recovery of human remains after an explosion, especial in the cases of an IED or suicide bomb attack. This explains
the paucity of available research and guidance on the subject. The research presented here aims to improve practice both in terms of recovery of the
victims and in determining the characteristics of the explosive device in a way that would enhance counter-terrorism intelligence. The question that has
been posed is whether there are recognizable patterns in the location of forensic evidence following an explosive event associated with contextual
conditions? If so, can those patterns then be used to identify these conditions after the explosion has taken place? To explore these requirements, pilot
studies were undertaken using data from controlled explosions using pig carcasses undertaken in the U.K.. These studies charted the spatial distribution of
tissue debris following an explosion through the use of Archaeological GIS techniques.
DuChemin, Geoffrey
[50]               Zooarchaeology of the Vertebrate Fauna of Tibes: Uniformity in Transition
This paper presents the results of a recent zooarchaeological analysis of vertebrate remains from the Tibes Ceremonial Center near Ponce, Puerto Rico.
Two excavation units contained intact and undisturbed deposits with the potential to provide information pertaining to social dynamics and socio-cultural
change at the site. Radiocarbon dates from the two units indicate that each archaeological deposit occurred during times of perceived dynamic social and
cultural activities on the island. During these transitional periods, there were discernible changes in material culture—especially ceramic styles. The
vertebrate fauna contained in these assemblages pertain to the consumption and distribution of animal foods, as well as other ways in which animals were
used at the site. This includes the possible use of animals in ceremony. The results of this study, combined with previous zooarchaeological studies at
Tibes, demonstrate that changes in material culture through time do not always correlate to changes in human behavior regarding food and animal use.
DuChemin, Geoff [222] see Kamenov, George
Dudgeon, John [13] see Darling, J. Andrew
Dudley, Meghan J. [200] see Ankele, William
Duff, Andrew [194] see Safi, Kristin
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              120
Duff, Andrew (Washington State University), Ashenafi Zena (Washington State University/Hawassa University), Addisalem Melesse (Hawassa
University) and John Wolff (Washington State University)
[269]             Recent Research on Megalithic Stele sites of the Gedeo Zone, Southern Ethiopia
This presentation discusses a new research effort to identify, document, date, and better understand the numerous megalithic stele sites of the Gedeo
Zone in the Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples’ Regional State (SNNPRS) of southern Ethiopia. The Gedeo Zone is home to numerous stele,
features that occur as isolates, in small groups, and as localities with numerous stele. Stele range from 1 meter to over 5 meters in length, and though
some remain standing, most have collapsed. Stele are sometimes undecorated shaped stone, but most are carved and have been classified as phallic
and/or anthropomorphic. Previous research includes Joussaume’s excavations at Tuto Fela, a cemetery, and several documentation efforts. In 2015, we
initiated testing at Chelba Tutiti, which includes the largest concentration of stele documented in the region. We discuss the results of test excavations at
the base of stele at Chelba Tutiti, the site’s chronological placement, and our efforts to source the stone used to make stele. We contextualize our findings
in light of what we know of stele sites in the region, efforts to document and protect these sites, and we outline plans for continued work in the coming
years.
[269]             Chair
Duffy, Paul (University of Toronto)
[149]             Studying the Past with Fragments from the Fire: Student Research on an NSF-REU Field School
Significant population increases, the intensification of craft production, and new forms of agricultural output characterize a major transition between the
eighteenth and seventeenth century B.C. on the Great Hungarian Plain. Many archaeologists consider these changes hallmarks of an emerging social
class. Yet research from different parts of eastern Europe suggests that societies were organized in a variety of ways during this regional florescence. This
session describes recent investigations into a Bronze Age community buried at the cemetery of Békés 103 in eastern Hungary, including an international
team of undergraduate students funded by the National Science Foundation and the Central European Institute at Quinnipiac University. During the 2015
summer field season, a team of 15 students conducted independent research projects on a range of datasets from the cemetery and surrounding area,
focused on understanding patterns in trade, identity, and cremation burial practice. In this session, the students present their findings related to the site, the
funerary customs, and how the cemetery population fit into the trade, population movement, and new identities emerging in Bronze Age Europe during the
mid-second millenium.
[149]             Chair
Duffy, Paul [149] see Parditka, Györgyi
Duffy, Lisa (University of Florida) and Ann Laffey (University of Florida)
[235]             Distribution of Organic Residues in a Pottery Vessel from Cerro Maya, Belize
A reconstructed pottery cooking vessel dating to the Late Preclassic Period from the ancient Maya site of Cerro Maya, Belize, was sampled for absorbed
organic residues. Samples were taken from multiple locations to look for differences in their distribution. Three interior regions—rim, mid-body, and base—
were sampled along with one from an exterior basal location as a control to evaluate for possible contaminants. Samples were processed using a high
pressure liquid extraction technique for evaluation with gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry
(LC-MS). The differential distribution of residues, such as lipids and alkaloids, has implications for sampling strategies of food-preparation vessels and also
reflects specific vessel uses. A region of fire-blackening on the lower exterior surface of this Poknoboy Striped round bottomed jar suggests its use as a
cooking pot. The residues recovered aid in the interpretation of the possible functional and social roles of this food preparation vessel, as well as the overall
utility of using museum curated pottery artifacts for residue analysis.
Dufton, Andrew (Brown University)
[33]              Discussant
Duggan, Ana T. [85] see Harris, Alison
Duin, Renzo
[23]              The Pot Calling the Kettle Black: Archaeological Assemblages and Ethnographic Communities in Guiana and the Lower Amazon
Ceramic analysis is essential to understand identity and regional interaction in precolumbian (before A.D. 1492) Amazonia. Underpinning existing ceramic
analysis are time-space graphs developed and established in the second half of the twentieth century by Irving Rouse and José Cruxent (Orinoco and
Caribbean) and by Betty Meggers and Clifford Evans (Amazon and Guiana). These time-space graphs are grounded in the concept of a culture-historical
mosaic, aimed at fixing peoples in time and space by a set of reference points measured in terms of socio-culturally meaningful events such as migrations,
contact, and conquest. Nevertheless, the development of archaeological and deep-historical research in the twenty-first century has demonstrated that
both Amazonia and the Caribbean are more heterogeneous and dynamic than anticipated from the constraining definition of the twentieth century tropical
forest culture model. Reconceptualization of social and historical processes is required since recent socio-cultural anthropological studies have
demonstrated that social phenomena occur in complex dialectical relationships of negotiating discontinuities and contested practices. To understand the
kaleidoscope in pottery styles (some pan-Amazonian others local, some long-term others short-lived, with in-between all types of variants, hybrids, co-
existence of styles, and sloping horizons) a dynamic multi-scalar relational alternative to the static space-time graph is anticipated.
Dulanto, Jalh (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú)
[56]              Political and Economic Dynamics of Maritime Communities of the South Coast of Peru During the First Millenium BC: The Excavations of
                  the Paracas Archaeological Project at Disco Verde and Puerto Nuevo
Extensively excavated by Frederic Engel in the 1950s and 1960s, Disco Verde and Puerto Nuevo are very well known in the archaeological literature of the
south coast of Peru for their occupations dating back to the first millennium B.C. Recent excavations by the Paracas Archaeological Project in these two
sites have resulted in the recovery of crucial information to improve our understanding of the role maritime communities played in the expansion and
intensification of long-distance exchange networks during this critical period in the history of complex societies in the central Andes. In this paper, I focus
on the compelling evidence we have found of long distance exchange networks of prestige pottery vessels along the Peruvian Coast.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 121
Dumas, Ashley (University of West Alabama)
[225]             Interpreting Prehistoric Eastern U.S. Salt Production Using Ethnographic Analogy
The manufacture of salt by agricultural peoples in the eastern United States has been documented at dozens of salt springs. Archaeologists have
produced detailed inventories of specialized features, vessels, and other tools common to these sites and have mapped variations in their distributions, but
the precise processes in which these tools were applied, particularly in the Early and Middle Mississippian periods, remains largely speculative. This paper
situates the evidence within the limited possible iterations of the evaporative process and in recent ethnographies of salt-making to construct a set of
plausible, testable explanations for the process in the prehistoric eastern U.S.
Dunbar, James (Aucilla Research Institute, Inc.)
[159]             The South-Eastern Warm Thermal Enclave and Perturbations of the Late Pleistocene
For decades, late Pleistocene climate events prior to the Younger Dryas (Heinrich 0 ~12.9 ka cal. B.P.) were ignored by archaeologists because the Clovis
First paradigm implicitly supposed nothing was earlier. Since 2005, attitudes have changed and the importance of understanding the effects of major
climate shifts is now important to archaeology. This presentation will focus on the timing of late Pleistocene climate events and the subsequent expressions
of habitat change in the coastal southeast. Landscapes since Marine Isotope Stage 3 will be considered, as will the cultural expressions that, potentially at
least, once occupied the south-eastern Warm Thermal Enclave.
Duncan, Neil (University of Central Florida), Peter Siegel (Montclair State University), John Jones (Archaeological Consulting Services),
Nicholas Dunning (University of Cincinnati) and Deborah Pearsall (University of Missouri)
[222]             Caribbean Landscapes during the Late-Precolonial and Early-Colonial Periods
People in the Caribbean have been interacting with their landscapes for at least 8,000 years (Trinidad), sometimes in ways that leave only subtle traces of
actions and in others the evidence is dramatic. Over this span we see variable trajectories of landscape engagements, ranging from early relatively intense
activities followed by abandonment to continuous occupations throughout prehistory to places occupied late in the historical sequence. First colonizers to
the Caribbean modified and eventually managed landscapes to create places recognizable to them as home. Later groups of people built on and further
modified these constructed places so that by today, the landscapes contain a cumulative record of anthropogenic history. In this paper, we address
paleoecological evidence for the late precolonial and early European colonial occupations on and impacts to selected landscapes in the eastern Caribbean.
Dungan, Katherine (University of Arizona, Archaeology Southwest) and Leslie Aragon (University of Arizona)
[17]              Two Houses, Both Alike in Dignity: Visibility, Material Culture, and Contrasting Histories at Two Chaco Halo Communities
The communities that surround the neighboring great houses of Kin Bineola and Kin Klizhin contain broadly similar kinds of sites—including the great
houses themselves, small habitation sites, and shrines—and are both located in the "Chaco Halo," the region immediately surrounding Chaco Canyon
itself. Nevertheless, the two communities differ in their composition, spatial structure, and histories. Intervisibility between habitations and public or religious
architecture provides one possible measure of the roles played by such specialized sites within the daily life of the community. In the Kin Bineola
community, for example, the shrines are very highly visible from small habitation sites, while the great house itself is not. The comparison of visibility
networks with material culture networks generated using the Chaco Social Networks Project data allows greater insight into the relationship between
habitation sites and public or religious spaces, as well as providing a means to test the degree to which visibility between habitation sites was related to
shared social connections. This project offers a "meso-scale" approach in focusing on comparison within and between two communities, but the material
culture considered within the network analysis equally helps to place the communities within the context of the larger Chacoan World.
Dunn, Shannon
[243]             Pragmatism in Practice: Advocacy, Ethics, and Impediments in Compliance
The practice of “compliance archaeology” within existing structures requires practitioners to constantly weigh ideals against practicalities. What we think
should be done, and how, is often limited by shortfalls in budgets, labor, time, and access. It is evident that few cultural resource stewards or managers
have the resources they need to sufficiently address the requirements of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, much less compliance with
any other legislation, guideline, or agreement. Even where ethics, professional standards, and investigative protocols are clearly defined, data sufficient to
moving through the “Section 106 process” is often not recovered or fully presented and distributed; ultimately, the archaeological community, local
populations, the general public, descendants, and other affiliated groups—as well as relationships between and among these—suffer as a result. In this
presentation, I will utilize case studies of both successes and failures during my time as a compliance archaeologist to highlight opportunities for advocacy
within applied contexts; to illustrate how ethical arguments can supplement rational ones to work toward compromise when consensus is not attainable;
and to outline the impediments archaeologists may continue to face in the implementation of compliance work in the foreseeable future.
[243]             Chair
Dunning, Nicholas [26] see Beach, Timothy
Dunning, Nicholas (University of Cincinnati)
[162]             Ancient Water Collection and Storage in the Elevated Interior Region of the Maya Lowlands
The Elevated Interior Region (EIR) of the Maya Lowlands posed especially difficult challenges for year-round ancient human occupation and urbanization.
Accessible surface and groundwater sources are rare, and a 5-month dry season necessitated the annual collection and storage of rainwater in order to
concentrate human population. Here, we review ancient Maya water storage adaptation in the EIR, including urban and hinterland reservoirs as well as
residential scale tanks and cisterns. Large reservoirs were devised as early as the Middle Preclassic Period and continued to be an important adaptation
for urban centers in the EIR throughout their occupation. Residential scale tanks and cisterns may also have early origins, though these have been less
investigated. Considerable inter-regional variation existed in water management strategies.
[96]              Discussant
Dupey, Elodie (Instituto de Investigaciones Históricas, UNAM) and Jamie Forde (University of Pennsylvania)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 122
[15]              New Content for New Audiences: The Repainted Pages and Life History of the Codex Vaticanus B
In this paper, we discuss the life history and prehispanic modification of the understudied Codex Vaticanus B, commonly attributed to the Borgia group
codices. Seven of the manuscript’s 96 pages were covered over with a new white background, composed of different materials than the original, and
repainted with several chromatic palettes, likely by different artists. While the manuscript’s structure largely follows that of other Borgia group divinatory
almanacs attributed to Nahua peoples from Central Mexico, it is primarily in these repainted pages where the codex deviates from that structure. Through
comparative analysis with the corpus of precolumbian codices of Mesoamerica, we argue that the repainted scenes exhibit affinity with manuscripts from
the more distant regions of southern Puebla and Oaxaca, which were populated by different ethno-linguistic communities. Thus, while the manuscript
certainly changed hands over time, it may have circulated more broadly among different cultural groups in doing so. In sum, we suggest that these
repainted scenes may reflect appropriations of the ritual knowledge found within the codex and of the power inherent to its material instantiation, while at
the same time the manuscript was altered to bring it more in line with particular socio-cultural sensibilities.
[172]             Discussant
Dupras, Tosha [24] see Groff, Amanda
Dupras, Tosha (Department of Anthropology), Gytis Piliciauskas (Lithuanian Institute of History), Rimantas Jankauskas (Vilnius University) and
Giedre Piliciauskiene (Lithuanian Institute of History)
[134]             Understanding the Neolithic Transition: Stable Carbon and Nitrogen Isotope Analysis of Subneolithic and Neolithic Animals and Inhabitants
                  of the S.E. Baltic Coast (3200–2500 cal. B.C.)
The Neolithic transition in the boreal zone of the Baltic region deviated significantly from the “classic” European model, and in 2014–2015, a
multidisciplinary research project targeting why this occurred was undertaken. Twenty-one 14C AMS dates were obtained for 11 Late Mesolithic–Early
Bronze Age (7000–1000 cal. B.C.) graves and for six human bones found in settlements or refuse layers. Stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes analyses of
bone collagen were conducted for 40 human bones and teeth from Subneolithic Šventoji coastal sites and the inland Neolithic Benaičiai site. Forty-two
contemporaneous animals were also analyzed, and previous published data from 18 Lithuanian Stone and Bronze Age graves and 42 animals are also
included. Stable isotope values confirm fresh/brackish water fish as the main source of protein for coastal Subneolithic people, while marine resources
were of much less importance (δ13C from –21 to –18.8‰; δ15N from 14.4 to 15.6‰). Intra-individual stable isotope variation indicates limited changes in
diet throughout life. A clear shift towards terrestrial foods is demonstrated for individuals from the Neolithic Benaičiai site. This dietary shift is roughly
contemporaneous with the drainage of lagoonal lakes at Šventoji, as well as with a spread of Corded Ware Culture in 2700–2500 cal. B.C.
Durán, Víctor [139] see Franco, Nora
Durusu Tanriöver, Müge [79] see Johnson, Peri
Dussol, Lydie [96] see Purdue, Louise
Dussol, Lydie (University of Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne)
[96]              Charcoal Analysis to Reconstruct the Ancient Wood Economy of Naachtun
Researchers have long considered that the relations between ancient Maya societies and their tropical forested landscape significantly affected social and
environmental development throughout the Maya Lowlands. The lingering debate contrasting the hypothesis of a massive deforestation during the Classic
Period with a model of careful environmental management has not been resolved, and places forest resources exploitation at the center of the rise and
development of ancient Maya cities. In particular, wood is an essential resource, abundant in such environments but still exhaustible, and can therefore
constitute a key economic and ecological indicator in the study of ancient societies.
The systematic and diachronic anthracological study of Naachtun aims to understand the global wood economy of the site as well as the impact of human
activities on the evolution of local forested areas through time. Charcoal assemblages are interpreted in terms of firewood collection strategies, sources of
supply, and sylviculture practices. Furthermore, issues related to the representativeness of the charcoal records are discussed. This theoretical framework
allows greater understanding of the co-evolution between Naachtun’s society and its environment.
[96]              Chair
Dussubieux, Laure [13] see Brooks, Alison
Dustin, Headley [204] see Alfonso-Durruty, Marta
Duwe, Samuel (University of Oklahoma)
[66]              The Emergence of Tewa Pueblo Society
This poster explores the emergence of Tewa Pueblo society in northern New Mexico and uses archaeological methods to understand the ways in which
disparate communities (of migrants and autochthonous people) coalesced to create a novel social, ceremonial, and residential organization—the hallmarks
of Tewa village life —in the mid-fourteenth century. While recent research demonstrates where and when these changes occurred, archaeologists know
little about why and how the ancestral Tewa collaborated, contested, and negotiated their new society. To address these questions, I focus on the Wiyo
phase (A.D. 1300–1350), a dynamic but poorly understood time period immediately preceding the coalescence of ancestral Tewa communities and the
creation of village life. I attempt to determine the history of these small communities (their origins, identities, demographics, and settlement patterns)
through synthesizing architectural, landscape, and pottery data to better understand how the historical contingencies of settlement and interaction led to
the development of a homogenized, but unique, Tewa identity. Examining the Tewa’s early history provides an excellent case study for understanding how
(and why) people converge to create new worlds and new social systems, not just in the American southwest, but in small-scale societies worldwide.
Dye, David [6] see Lima Hooven, Alex
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  123
Dysart, John [284] see Lobiondo, Matthew
Dyson, Alexis [120] see Chenvert, ErinMarie
Dziechciarz, Pawel (University of Warsaw) and Dylan Kelly (University of New Hampshire)
[149]             Geophysical Investigations at the Bronze Age Site of Békés 103 in Eastern Hungary
In archaeological research, both non-invasive and weakly invasive methods are often employed without, or prior to, excavation. Surface collection,
geophysical survey, and shovel testing are the methods that have been employed at the site of Békés 103. Despite the difficulty imposed by the soil
conditions and the nature of the targets themselves (cremation graves), geophysical measurements employing a variety of techniques (gradiometry, soil
resistivity, and electromagnetics) were applied in tandem with surface collection methods to detect potential targets for guiding subsequent excavations.
This report merges geophysical data collected in 2015 with the data from the 2011 and 2013 field seasons, comparing the geophysical survey anomalies
with the corresponding excavation data. We build a signature archive for cemetery features based on these methods, and through correspondences we
isolate potential targets for future excavation. Finally, we tentatively conclude which geophysical prospection methods are optimum for the detection of
human burials in this region.
Dziedzic, Erica [71] see Daggett, Adrianne
Eager, Heidi [223] see Prendergast, Mary
Earley, Frank Lee [123] see Huffman, Thomas
Earley-Spadoni, Tiffany (The Johns Hopkins University)
[174]             Light the Beacons! GIS Analysis of Fortress Inter-Visibility in Iron Age Armenia
GIS analysis can helpfully intervene in highly-theorized debates about archaeological landscapes by allowing archaeologists to empirically evaluate
assertions about (inter)visibility. In recent decades, visibility studies have clarified the sociocultural significance of structures such as tombs, settlements,
signalling installations, and other landscape markers. However, it is often difficult to evaluate inter-visibility and challenging to distinguish intentionally-
constructed inter-visibility from spurious patterns that are the result of chance. This paper evaluates the regional distribution of Early Iron and Urartian
fortresses in the environs of Lake Sevan, Armenia, utilizing survey data collected by an Italian-Armenian expedition. The investigation employs Social
Network Analysis (SNA) metrics and random simulation to test scenarios regarding chance-versus-intentional placement, concluding that the placement of
fortresses was the result of careful planning that ensured inter-visibility. This approach situates GIS analysis within a theory framework that includes
landscape archaeology and highlights the potential of geospatial techniques to illuminate human agency in the past.
Earnshaw, Jacob
[148]             Cultural Forests of the southern Nuu-chah-nulth: Indigenous Bark Tending on Vancouver Island
Culturally Modified Trees are British Columbia, Canada's most common archaeological site type. Data related to these indigenous forest management sites
have been collected for a few decades now through CRM work in the area, though little research has encorporated this archive. My M.A. thesis focuses on
creating regional chronologies of bark stripping and logging dates for the southwest coast of Vancouver Island, to better understand forest usage and
population dynamics around the contact period. In addition to data collected from consultant reports, many dates have been collected from recent old
growth clear cuts in the field. This work has shown that roughly half of all dates collected from field contexts can be found within ancient cedar trees that
have healed over and hidden their cultural scars, effectively making the oldest age class of CMT's invisible to archaeological consultants and thus
unrecorded/protected prior to industrial logging. The dates collected in field contexts are found to be more representative of the full range of cultural
modifications on cedars over the tree’s full lifetime. The oldest recorded living CMT has also been found on this project, dating to 1,108 years.
Ebert, Claire [237] see Fox, Steve
Ebert, Claire (Pennsylvania State University), Nancy Peniche May (University of California-San Diego), Jaime Awe (Northern Arizona University),
Brendan Culleton (The Pennsylvania State University) and Douglas Kennett (The Pennsylvania State University)
[288]             Timing the Development of Household Complexity at Cahal Pech, Belize
Understanding the settlement and growth of ancient communities into spatially, demographically, and socio-politically complex polities is one of several
critical research issues in Maya archaeology. The major polity of Cahal Pech, located in the Belize River Valley, provides a unique case study for
understanding the development of complexity because of its long occupational history, from the Early Preclassic (~1200–1000 cal B.C.) until the Terminal
Classic Period Maya “collapse” (~cal A.D. 800–900). In this paper, we present the results of high-resolution AMS 14C dating of organic and human remains
from several hinterland residential groups associated with the Cahal Pech polity. Our chronology provides a framework for measuring differences in
architecture and artifacts between domestic contexts over time, allowing us to identify trends related to changing social status and wealth. We compare our
results to similar social and political developments taking place within the Cahal Pech elite monumental core, and at polities elsewhere in the Belize Valley.
Echenique, Ester and Florencia Avila (Instituto Nacional de Antropologia y Pensamiento L)
[255]             From Ethnography to Archaeometry: Ceramic Production and Styles in the Río Grande de San Juan Basin, Bolivia
The Yavi-Chicha phenomenon in the circumpuneño Andes has been extensively discussed; however, little systematic research has focused on systems of
ceramic production. Consequently, multiple questions remain unanswered regarding the organizational systems of Chicha communities during the Late
Intermediate Period (ca. A.D. 1000–1450). Today, the core region of the Chichas is an exceptional area of ceramic production. Nearly 70 percent of the
inhabitants of the town of Chipihuayco are actively producing pottery during the dry season. An ethnographic perspective coupled with archaeometric
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             124
analyses of the operational chain of ceramic production of three women potters provide a unique entry point to explore how production practices are
intertwined with technological styles at the household level. This work explores the ethnographic record of the entire operational chain of ceramic
production, combined with a detailed characterization of raw materials, in order to determine paste recipes and manufacturing processes. The results will
provide new insights into the organization of ceramic production, especially regarding how technological choices and styles are dependent on multiple
factors. Additionally, a better understanding of the operational chain of contemporary potters will provide the fundamental basis to develop research
questions and hypotheses about past production processes.
Echeñique, Ester [57] see Vidal Montero, Estefania
Eckersley, Jaclyn [39] see Lambert, Stephanie
Edgar, Heather (Maxwell Museum of Anthrop) and Christopher Toya (Pueblo of Jemez)
[266]             Context and Collaboration: The Maxwell's Repatriation to Jemez Pueblo
The Pueblo of Jemez and the Maxwell Museum of Anthropology have been working together since 2007 to document human skeletal remains in
preparation for repatriation. Challenges presented in preparing for repatriation included a paucity of field notes and other records, as much of the material
came to the Museum from 1930s field schools, and a loss of information about which burial objects were originally with which burials. Despite these
challenges, over 700 individual skeletons have been repatriated over the past five years. Coupled with a grant from National NAGPRA, the collaborative
relationship developed over this period has allowed for an accurate estimate of the minimum number of individuals represented and a deeper
understanding of the demography and health of Jemez’ ancestors. Despite reburial, the potential for future learning continues as the Museum curates
samples for potential ancient DNA studies. These samples are curated at the Pueblo’s request and are owned by Jemez.
 This poster will describe the working relationship between the two institutions, present a timeline of the repatriation process, and detail the information
provided by the documentation of the human skeletal remains.
Edinborough, Kevan [132] see Martindale, Andrew
Edinborough , Kevan [218] see Griffiths, Seren
Edwards, Wendy [6] see Austin, Robert
Edwards, Briece (Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde)
[29]              New Directions of THPOs: The Perspective from One Tribe
Tribe’s perspective and understanding of practice, place, and context is as unique and diverse as Tribes themselves. The roles of Tribal Historic
Preservation Offices (THPOs) are equally diverse between Tribes but all have one consistent thread—they, like states, are charged with the identification,
recordation, and protection of cultural resources. Tribes are integral to the ‘Section 106’ process and are often required to reacquaint individuals with the
state and federal laws and procedures that govern the protection of these limited resources. Beyond these legally defined roles, THPOs are actively
engaged with other cultural heritage concerns such as research design, management practices, and policy development. Since cultural resources often
include materials, actions, and places associated with ongoing and active practices, it is important to develop tools and mechanisms to insure their
continued use. This may mean finding ways to maintain place anonymity, or evaluate potential impacts resulting from climatic change and shifting weather
patterns. It also involves providing understanding and Tribal perspectives to future generations of professionals.
[203]             Discussant
Edwards, Erin and Anastasia Poulos
[153]             Dental Health of the Delmarva Adena–Hopewell Native American of Pig Point Site in Lothian, MD
I examined the dental health of Delmarva Adena-Hopewell Native Americans from a mortuary ossuary pit at the Pig Point Site in Lothian, Maryland, dating
to the Middle Woodland Period (300 B.C.–A.D. 900). The Pig Point Site is a site of impressive ritual mortuary features, five distinct secondary burial
ossuary pits, indicating that this was an area of significance to local prehistoric populations. Douglas Owsley carefully examined the dental remains of the
first burial ossuary pit and I compared Owsley’s analyses of the Pit One dental remains with the dental remains of the fourth burial pit. I established the
minimum number of individuals (MNI) represented in Pit Four and assessed the dental health of the population through the occurrence of dental diseases,
such as dental caries and enamel defect hypoplasia. In most prehistoric forager societies, the frequency of dental caries is low, while the frequency of
linear enamel hypoplasia is high. My results concluded that the populations buried at Pig Point Site were in overall good health, with slight variation
between Pit One and Pit Four. I hope my research will contribute to an understanding of the subsistence practices and daily life of local Delmarva peoples.
Edwwards, Luke [94] see Hitchcock, Robert
Eerkens, Jelmer [13] see Van Gijseghem, Hendrik
Egan, Rachel (University of Colorado at Boulder)
[32]              The Volcano That Went Boom: Payson Sheets’ Contributions to Understanding the Tierra Joven Blanca Eruption of the Ilopango Caldera,
                  El Salvador
Payson Sheets’ seminal work on the Tierra Joven Blanca (TBJ) eruption of the Ilopango Caldera, El Salvador, was one of the first projects to address the
impact of large-scale disasters in Mesoamerica. The on-going research on this eruption has been important for understanding the event as well as
developing method and theory for reconstructing the cultural impact(s) of sudden massive stresses. While originally dated to A.D. 290±110, the TBJ
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             125
eruption has been re-dated to the mid fifth–sixth century and its scale increased to a VEI 6+. As a result, Sheets and colleagues propose that the eruption
was not simply a local phenomenon but may be casually linked to the world-wide A.D. 536 climatological event. This paper explores the role Dr. Sheets
has played in understanding the differential development of resilience and vulnerability both within and between societies specifically related to the TBJ
eruption of the Ilopango Caldera.
Egerton, Victoria [183] see Harvey, Virginia
Eichner, Katrina (UC Berkeley)
[251]             Memories of Women's Work: Investigating the 19th Century U.S. Army Laundresses' Quarters at Fort Davis, Texas
The nineteenth century U.S. army encampment at Fort Davis is commonly remembered for its association with the enlisted men and officers who served
the U.S. government. However, the fort also employed and rationed a group of hispanic and black female laundresses, who too often are made invisible in
modern interpretations of the site. Using an assemblage of domestic materials collected during the summers of 2013 and 2015, this paper aims to highlight
the work—including physical labor, cultural brokering, and domestic family maintenance—that these women contributed to the fort community. Moreover,
by focusing on how these women have (not) been represented in the archival and historic record, this paper will ask how, why, and for whom does
archaeological investigation help restore memories of the past.
[251]             Chair
Eigenherr, Gustav (Documento Group) and Lais Müller (Documento Group)
[255]             Cultural Inclusion and the Use of Technology
The presentation intends to show the work and results achieved with local communities from Brazil. Those communities are culturally related to
archaeological work near inhabited areas or in indigenous lands. The presentation intends to show how those communities are included in the
archaeological project and what tools are used in order to reach positive outcomes. This paper highlights the technological tools used in order to be more
efficient in teaching the communities and making the archaeological research more engaging and tangible to the public audience. Such tools being
responsive software, games, virtual and augmented reality, and laser scans. This presentation also wants to show that the success of the archaeological
research can be positively affected by the community participation.
Eiselt, B. Sunday [13] see Darling, J Andrew
Eiselt, B. Sunday (Southern Methodist University) and Patrick Livingood (University of Oklahoma)
[69]              Gear Selectivity and Mass Harvested Minnows: Evidence from the Northern Great Basin
Madsen and Schmitt’s seminal 1998 article challenged the assumption that small animals and fish in archaeological assemblages of the Great Basin
provides evidence for diminished foraging efficiency. Energetic return rates for density dependent species instead may be a function of harvesting
technique. The Northern Paiute of the Great Basin exploited seasonally aggregated tui chub minnows (Gila bicolor) using gill nets, seines, and scoops.
This study presents a simulated mass harvesting experiment and gear selectivity curves for comparrison to prehistoric archaeological fish assemblages.
Technological choices are relevant to foraging returns and can be reconstructed to provide insights on the energetics of past fishing and the ritual
dimensions of equipment.
Ek, Jerald (Western Washington University)
[256]             Archaeological and Epigraphic Indices of the Political Domination: A View from the Northwestern Periphery of the Kaanu’l Hegemonic State
The past decade has witnessed a revolution in our understanding of Classic Maya geopolitics, particularly in reconstructing asymmetrical interpolity
relationships dominated by expansionist states. Employing variable political strategies, including both direct and indirect rulership, the Kaanu’l Dynasty
dominated a large network of kingdoms across the Maya Lowlands. This paper examines the impacts of the expansion and dissolution of the Kaanu’l state
in western Campeche, within the northwestern frontier of its vast political network. Implementing a strategy of indirect political control, the powerful Kaanu'l
rulers of Calakmul incorporated this region through patronage of the large capital of Edzná as a proxy, facilitating control over the strategic route to the
northwest via the Edzná canal system and the Río Champotón waterway. The decline of Calakmul as a major geopolitical power in the mid-eighth century
A.D. in turn ushered in a period of political chaos, with emergent groups with strong links to the western Gulf Coast rising to prominence within the ensuing
power vacuum. Drawing on both archaeological and epigraphic data, this paper examines the impacts of incorporation into the Kaanu’l state, as well as
the major changes that took place within the region following the decline of the Snake Dynasty.
[109]             Discussant
Eklund, Elizabeth (University of Arizona - School of Anthropology) and Lisa Palacios (University of Arizona - School of Anthropology)
[226]             "Collaborative" Archaeology: A Proposed Rubric-Based Assessment of Archaeological Projects with American Indian Communities
In Transforming Archaeology, Atalay et al. (2013) have identified benefits of collaborative projects for both the discipline and participating communities. A
well-designed collaborative project has the potential to both foster the application of standard archaeological research methods to questions of interest to
various tribes and apply Indigenous research methods to standard archaeology inquires. We propose a standardized evaluation scorecard (rubric), to
examine outcomes to American Indian communities participating in archaeological projects. Developing a rubric to assess archaeological projects reveals
some benefits to American Indian communities participating in archaeological projects, including control of data, how information is understood or
interpreted, and building of community capacity to engage in archaeology in the future. Revealing these benefits will demonstrate if the project contributes
to strengthening tribal sovereignty and allows members a wider opportunity to engage in archaeology. This project studies collaborative methodologies
assessing if the promised outcomes are fulfilled. We apply the rubric we developed to the University of Arizona’s Bureau of Applied Research in
Anthropology (BARA) research with Blackfeet archaeology, and the School of Anthropology and Arizona State Museum’s archaeological project at Mission
Guevavi. Our rubric allows us to visualize benefits and identify issues that have yet to be addressed.
[226]             Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                126
el-Behaedi, Raghda [277] see Reber, Eleanora
Elera, Carlos [207] see Hurtubise, Jenna
El-Hajraoui , Mohamed [177] see Steele, Teresa
Ellenberger, Katharine (Binghamton University)
[71]               Satisfying and Reflecting on the Urge to Evaluate in Public Archaeology
The only way to know if archaeological outreach and community engagement is working is to ask. We need to ask the right questions, to the right people,
and incorporate that feedback into our work. Yet evaluation is a fraught pursuit. When directing our projects directly at, and working with, the public, our
projects are ever more embedded in the politics of cultural heritage and reverberate throughout the communities where we work. Archaeologists and
heritage workers have been struggling with this balance for the past several decades; this session is aimed at bringing a diverse group of these
professionals together to discuss what is and should be done. In this paper, I will present concepts of ethically engaged evaluation from archaeological,
heritage, museum, and science communication literature. The objective of this paper is to contextualize the topic of the session within the ethics and theory
of archaeology broadly, setting the tone for the case studies and methodological suggestions of the rest of the authors.
[71]               Chair
Elliott, Gail [25] see Halcrow, Sian
Elliott, Daniel
[213]              Get the Lead Out: Towards Identifying Lead on Eighteenth- and Early Nineteenth Century Battlefields and Settlements
Small arms ammunition in America, throughout the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, consisted of round soft-metal balls. These were mostly lead,
although archaeologists have documented other metals such as pewter and silver as additives. Available small arms and related ammunition varied by
military unit, and included pistols, rifles, trade guns, carbines, fowlers, and large caliber wall guns, as well as American, French, and English muskets.
Macroscopic identification of associated bullets alone limits battlefield interpretations. I suggest a formalized regimen of lead ball analyses that combines
elemental characterization (portable X-Ray Fluorescence, or pXRF) along with traditional descriptions and quantitative measurements. Traditional analysis
documents diameter, weight, firing condition (impact evidence, rifling, worming, ramrod impact, casting evidence), alterations (chewing, cutting, carving),
other post-depositional damage (rodent gnawing), and archaeological context. The pXRF information shows promise in identifying ore sources,
contaminants introduced, firing condition, age, and military association. If combined with pXRF data from lead ore sources, baseline information can be
developed for comparison among battlefields and incorporated into a global dataset with the purpose of better understanding the geographic distribution of
military supplies and military strategy at macro global and regional levels, as well as at micro battlefield levels. Get your lead out!
Ellis, Chelsea
[123]              Subadult Mortality at McLemore: An Unexpected Culprit
This study focuses on the subadult skeletal remains excavated in 1960 from the Late Prehistoric-age McLemore site (34WA5) in southwest Oklahoma.
Past analyses of this skeletal collection primarily focused on the adults, and what they could contribute to the overall understanding of the health and
lifestyle of the individuals who inhabited McLemore. The goal of this study was to reexamine the skeletal collection in light of new methodologies in
diagnosing pathology, focusing on the subadult remains, as little to no information was obtained regarding this age class in past analyses, aside from basic
demography. The application of regression equations to determine the developmental age of newborns identified near-term, term, and infant age classes,
indicating a varied group of subadults present in the cemetery. The results of this project provide a better understanding of the McLemore site, as well as
new information concerning the presence of scurvy and its possible affect on infant mortality on the southern Plains. In addition, this project clearly exposes
the necessity of studying every age class of an archaeological population with diligence, as the subadult population truly contributed a wealth of knowledge
to the overall understanding of the health and lifestyle of this population.
Ellison, Leigh Anne [9] see Brin, Adam
Ellison, Leigh Anne (The Center for Digital Antiquity) and Adam Brin (The Center for Digital Antiquity)
[261]              tDAR (the Digital Archaeological Record): A Domain Repository for Archaeology
The Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR) is a domain repository for archaeological information maintained by The Center for Digital Antiquity (DA) at
Arizona State University. Our mission is the long-term preservation of documents, data sets, images, geospatial information, 3D scans, and other digital
files, to provide access for current and future uses. tDAR provides a secure location for sharing information on the web, enabling the user to protect site
location and other sensitive information. tDAR adds value to resources in the repository because the information is more discoverable and accessible in an
internet searchable digital format. Robust metadata associated with each piece of digital information in tDAR ensure that files can be effectively managed
and easily discovered. In addition, digital files in tDAR are preserved in original formats, and will be forward migrated to new industry standards as they
develop so that information remains accessible for future users. As digital tools used to collect and analyze information change quickly, it is critical that
tools like tDAR are integrated into archaeological workflows so that archaeological information is available and accessible for widespread current and long-
term uses.
Ellyson, Laura (Washington State University), Timothy Kohler (Washington State University) and R. Kyle Bocinsky (Washington State
University)
[65]               Evaluation of the Village Ecodynamics Hunting and Domestication Models
The Village Ecodynamics Project simulation (“Village”) incorporates paleoenvironmental and archaeological data to understand the human and
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 127
environmental interactions that occurred during the Ancestral Pueblo occupation of portions of the Colorado Plateau of the U.S. southwest. Village predicts
the available populations of deer, jackrabbits, and cottontails across the simulated landscape—as well as the sample of those fauna hunted by
households—and how these vary with such parameters as household protein requirements and hunting radius. When turkey domestication is
implemented, Village predicts protein yield from maize-fed turkey. Previous evaluations of these hunting and domestication models have explored system-
level patterns of population density and settlement in the archaeological record. In this study, we evaluate the goodness-of-fit between animal-use
predictions from the simulation and zooarchaeological data from sites located on the simulated landscape.
Elquist, Ora (Public Archaeology Laboratory, Inc.)
[42]              Susquetonscut Brook 5 Site: Residential Base Camp in an Upland Interior Setting?
The Susquetonscut Brook 5 Site located in Lebanon, Connecticut, consists of Archaic to Woodland Period deposits within an upland interior setting. Such
upland interior sites are typically associated with small campsites of a temporary nature. Data recovery excavations at the site in 2015 revealed numerous,
large, and complex features, such as storage pits, postmolds, and roasting pits, that are more typically associated with larger, more residential campsites
located within lower-lying floodplain or coastal settings. The data from the site potentially transforms what is currently known about settlement in upland
settings in Connecticut.
Elston, Robert [94] see Gil, Adolfo
Emery, Kitty [134] see Thornton, Erin
Eng, Charlotte [121] see ONeil, Megan
Engelbrecht, William (Buffalo State College) and Bruce Jamieson (McGill Univesity)
[144]             Bone versus Stone Arrows and the Movement of the St. Lawence Iroquoians
In the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, St. Lawrence Iroquoian populations gradually decline and disappear from their homeland at the same period
that the Wendat and Iroquois Confederacies are evolving. One of the most striking differences between St. Lawrence Iroquoian assemblages and those of
surrounding groups is the general absence of stone arrow points on the former. This paper considers the advantages and disadvantages of bone or antler
versus stone tipped arrows. We argue that long, thin stone Madison points were more effective in warfare than the bone and antler arrows of the St.
Lawrence Iroquoians. However, the ultimate cause for the movement of the St. Lawrence Iroquoians was likely their failure to develop a confederacy.
Englehardt, Joshua (El Colegio de Michoacan)
[264]             New Perspectives on Gulf Coast Olmec Iconography and Scripts via the Mesoamerican Corpus of Formative Period Art and Writing
The rich visual culture of the Formative Period Gulf Coast Olmec has long been recognized as playing a foundational role in the origins and development of
subsequent Mesoamerican writing systems and artistic traditions. Nonetheless, Formative Period visual cultures remain relatively understudied, as does
their role in and impact on the emergence of regional script systems, the developmental dynamics of which continue to elude adequate explanation. To
advance the field’s understanding of script development, since 2010, the authors have been constructing a comprehensive database of Middle Formative
iconography and scripts. This database builds on the work of colleagues to expand—and expand access to—the known corpus of Formative Period art and
writing. Further, the Corpus project is developing a mobile device application and website for visualizing complex relationships among datasets, including
multimedia, spatial, and temporal information. Finally, the project has employed new imaging and digitalization techniques on archaeological objects, which
has, in some cases, revealed previously undetected iconographic details on monuments such as La Venta’s iconic Altar Four. This paper presents
examples of ongoing work, project outcomes, and insights gleaned from efforts to date.
[101]             Chair
Englehardt, Joshua [101] see Sumano, Kimberly
Enk, Jacob (MYcroarray)
[121]             Target Capture for Ancient DNA: Temperature, Time, and Tiling Density
Bait-target hybridization (a.k.a., "target capture") is rapidly replacing PCR as the enrichment method of choice for ancient DNA sequencing projects.
Though very successful in recent years, ancient DNA target capture outcomes vary substantially and could be better understood. Here, we performed a
series of experiments to measure how three commonly-varied parameters—temperature, time, and bait tiling density—impact enrichment of short, rare
targets embedded in complex DNA backgrounds. We found that specificity (percent on-target) and sensitivity (unique target reads recovered) varied with
these parameters, sometimes in unexpected ways. Temperature was particularly impactful across the range typically employed in ancient DNA research
(~45-65ºC), and should be carefully considered when designing or optimizing an ancient DNA enrichment project.
Enloe, James [94] see Marks, Theodore
Enloe, James (University of Iowa) and James McGrath (University of Iowa)
[121]             A GIS Approach to Stratigraphy in Visually Homogeneous Rockshelter Deposits: Results from Woodpecker Cave
The sediment stack at Woodpecker Cave (13JH202) does not possess an easily discernable stratigraphic sequence. Woodpecker Cave’s deposits are a
combination of visually homogeneous colluvium derived from glacial loess mobilized from above the rockshelter and variably-sized tabular roof fall blocks.
The lack of visible stratigraphy has necessitated the creation of a digital model from which to analyze the spatial provenience of a variety of mapped
objects in order to differentiate between sections of the sediment stack that may have originated from different anthropogenic and geogenic inputs. Of
principal interest to this study are the spatial positions, orientations, and densities of plotted finds, two-shot plotted finds, and mapped roof fall. This study
suggests that while the matrix composition remains the same throughout the sequence at Woodpecker Cave, patterns of intrusive geogenic and
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              128
anthropogenic materials change through time and space and are detectible in GIS.
[121]              Chair
Enote, Jim [30] see Watson, Adam
Enverova, Deniz [199] see Kaya, Deniz
Epitropou , Anastasia [166] see Giblin, Julia
Eppich, Keith (Collin College)
[26]               Commerce, Autarky, Barter, and Redistribution; The Multi-Tiered Urban Economy of El Perú-Waka’, Guatemala
The ceramic database from El Perú-Waka’ contains the record of the production, distribution, consumption, and disposal of some 50,000 sherds and 200
whole vessels. Patterns and fine details of the Classic Maya economy emerge from this expansive dataset. These include, but are not limited to, the
marketing distribution of monochrome ceramics and the redistributive gifting of high-quality polychrome vessels. Unexpected patterns appeared as well,
such as the apparent autarky of monochrome blacks in the late eighth century and the smattering of irregularly scattered thin-slipped ceramics of the
Terminal Classic. In short, the ceramic database of El Perú-Waka’ revealed a diverse set of economic relations. These patterns encompass commerce,
autarky, barter, and redistribution. All of this hints at a Classic Maya economy of surprising complexity. This paper explores these complexities, especially
noting how such patterns change through time as the Maya economy moved from its Late Classic heights to its Terminal Classic demise.
Epstein, Emily (University of Wisconsin -Milwaukee)
[244]              Household Climate: Great Basin Response to Climate Change Reflected by Intrasite Zooarchaeology
Intrasite spatial analysis reveals zooarchaeological remains indicative of Great Basin hunter-gatherer household behaviors. Results indicate the presence
and spatial distribution of activity types. Analytical techniques facilitated evaluation of ethnographic models to find the best match to the zooarchaeological
situation. Households associated with disparate climatic regimes, while contextually equivalent, exhibit variable zooarchaeological signatures for
subsistence, social, and spiritual life.
Erb-Satullo, Nathaniel (Harvard University)
[87]               Metal Production on Late Bronze-Early Iron Age Fortified Hilltops in the South Caucasus, c. 1500-600 B.C.
    One of the challenges facing the study of technological change and craft production during the Late Bronze and Early Iron Age in the Near East is a lack
of information about the spatial and social contexts in which metal production occurred. A new program of survey and excavation aims to explore these
issues in an ore-rich transitional zone between lowland and highland areas of the South Caucasus.
    Fortified hilltop settlements dot lowland valleys as they narrow and rise towards the highlands. Surface survey identified traces of metal production at
several of these hilltop sites. In 2015, excavations began at Mtsvane Gora, where surface survey in 2014 revealed metallurgical slag and Late Bronze–
Early Iron ceramics in close proximity to a large wall encircling the site. Test excavations confirmed the associations apparent in surface collections,
uncovering metal working implements and debris inside the walled area. These discoveries reveal the site's potential for assessing the relationship
between craft production and other segments of society. In addition, the location of Mtsvane Gora on a major interregional route offers the possibility to
examine links between technological change and the movement of people and materials through regular patterns of transhumance.
Erdman, Katherine (University of Minnesota - Twin Cities)
[11]               Continuing Heritage Education: Reaching Adult and Senior Learners
Continuing education and adult enrichment courses offer readily accessible opportunities for archaeologists to engage a non-traditional learning group who
are often already curious about archaeology and are relatively informed. Adult and senior students in these settings prefer discussions and debates to
strictly information transmission; such an environment is conducive for presenting issues of cultural heritage and preservation. In 2015, these topics were
introduced to two such audiences through different courses in the Twin Cities metro. This paper will examine qualitative and quantitative data gathered by
the instructor through brief questionnaires given to participants before and after each course. The results will demonstrate what informed adult learners
already know about heritage stewardship and what they take away from such courses, what they see are critical issues for preserving the past, and their
suggestions for raising awareness of cultural stewardship more broadly. Such information will offer professionals insights for improving stewardship
education and creating advocates of the general public.
[11]               Chair
Erek, Cevdet Merih [184] see Basiran, Alper
Erlandson, Jon [55] see Braje, Todd
Ernenwein, Eileen G. [137] see Shreve, Nathan
Ernenwein, Eileen (East Tennessee State University), Jeremy Menzer (University of Arkansas) and Frederic Surmely (Université Blaise Pascal)
[145]              Ground-penetrating Radar and Photogrammetry in Medieval France: Results from the Auvergne
The Medieval Period in Europe is well known from archaeological sites and historical records, including England’s Domesday Book. The Auvergne of
southern France, however, is a poorly studied upland region. This rugged environment of volcanic peaks contains a rich, yet mostly unknown medieval
history. A research program is underway that includes archaeological survey, excavation, and geophysical survey at sites across the region. GPR survey in
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               129
June 2015 focused on unexcavated portions of Les Yvérats, the only medieval (eleventh–twelfth centuries) hamlet ever studied in the region. Additional
test surveys were conducted at a nearby “comb” site, one of many 3-4 room pastoral structures visible in aerial imagery but poorly understood, and the
medieval hillfort at Brión. GPR data were topographically corrected using photogrammetrically derived terrain models. Finally, GPR was used to explore a
medieval tunnel site approximately 100 km to the south, where tunnel entrances are known but passageways are obstructed by sediment. Medieval
tunnels were used as hiding places during times of war and to store cereals. Two previously unknown tunnel passageways were discovered, which will
guide preservation efforts and help target excavations to better understand the site. GPR results will be presented in this poster.
Ertsen, Maurits (Water Resources / Delft University of Technology)
[138]             The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly in Ancient Water Systems. Comparative Remarks along the Axes of Small-Large and Dry-Wet
In Scarborough’s comparative work, when explaining the differences between Old and New World water systems, the differences between small-scale,
local and imperial, large systems are important focus points for defining these differences. Furthermore, much of Scarborough's work suggests that the
wetness and dryness of these worlds matter as well. Building on these key notions of the importance of environmental conditions in building understanding
of water systems, this paper discusses the growing body of evidence that small, large, wet, and dry, are complex and cannot be easily associated with
each other. It includes a critical discussion of the early over-arching models from “archaeology of power,” more specifically Wittfogel’s model of hydraulic
civilizations. True, several later ancient states encouraged the spread of irrigation systems by exerting power over vast areas, but new evidence on early
water systems in the ancient Near East suggests the importance of smaller-scale community-based systems. A re-appraisal of the Hohokam irrigation sites
along the Gila and Salt rivers in the same bi-axial comparison will provide additional material to discuss a fruitful comparative approach to ancient water
systems.
Ervin, Kelly (Washington University St Louis) and Cameron Wesson (Lehigh University)
[4]               Spatial Literacy and Geostatistics in Archaeology
Spatial frameworks of cultural activity can be quantified using a number of geostatistic computations available in Geographic Information Systems (GIS).
These, too commonly “deterministic” models identify and display trends within a dataset. Although these results can be compelling, they also pose
problems for archaeological interpretation by not including room for the ambiguity and unpredictability of human decisions and actions. Human behavior
can be understood by the choices people make, but can human agency be revealed by numerically structured geospatial analyses? Bridging the gap
between current GIS methodology and archaeological social theory, this paper discusses geostatistics as a mathematical method for giving meaning to the
past, assumptions of the algorithms, and the importance of culture history in such archaeological studies.
Esdale, Julie [217] see Odess, Daniel
Espinosa, Alicia (Université Paris 1 - Panthéon Sorbonne), Nicolas Goepfert (CNRS-Paris1, UMR 8096 Archéologie des Amériques) and Vincent
Chamussy (UMR 8096 Archéologie des Amériques)
[45]              Territoriality and Ceramic Distribution of the Virú-Gallinazo Populations on the Northern Coast of Peru: New Insights Using Spatial Analysis
Since the Virú Project, the use of Castillo Decorated as the principal chrono-cultural element to characterize the Virú-Gallinazo presence laid to a
“Gallinazo illusion.“ Unfortunately, it appears that our knowledge about the Virú-Gallinazo populations is still limited, and most of the time we define them
through the prism of the Mochicas. In order to understand who these groups were, we analyzed the spatial distribution of the following ceramics styles
trough the northern coast using GIS: Negative (Gallinazo and Carmelo Negative), Castillo Decorated, and Gallinazo White-Red-Orange. These styles
compose the Virú-Gallinazo complex as it was defined by Bennett, Ford, and all the member of the Virú project. We registered 476 sites between the Piura
and Huarmey valleys. These data allow us to present in this paper the principal results of an intra-site, regional, and macro-regional analyses. With this
research, we identified three patterns of site distributions at the regional scale, and specific associations between the ceramic styles and their relation with
mochica’s artefacts.
Espinosa-Pesqueira, Manuel E. [179] see Medina-González, Isabel
Esplin, Nathan [207] see Toyne, Jennifer Marla
Estabrook, Virginia Hutton [39] see Sobel, Elizabeth
Estrada-Belli, Francisco (Tulane University) and Alexandre Tokovinine (Peabody Museum, Harvard University)
[256]             Nested Hegemonies in the Holmul Region
The recent finds at Holmul has opened a narrow window on the hitherto largely unknown dynastic history of this medium-sized kingdom in eastern Peten
and on the complexities of Late Classic lowland Maya hegemonic relations. We now have a royal tomb, a palace, and a funerary temple with dedicatory
texts that can all be attributed with a certain degree of confidence to a single Late Classic ruler with ties to Naranjo and Kaanul (Snake Kingdom). This set
of contextual information allows us to reconstruct in some detail the political situation of this kingdom in the decades before and after the all-important
capitulation of Tikal at the hand of the Snake Kingdom in the sixth century. The texts also inform us about how familial ties between rulers were integral to
the strategies of assimilation, cajoling and/or conquest favored by the Snake kings. The emerging new pattern of regional ties suggests that nested
hegemonies may have been a more common phenomenon in Late Classic political organization than previously thought.
Etnier, Michael [296] see Fitzhugh, Ben
Eubanks, Paul (The University of Alabama)
[98]              Caddo Salt Production in Northwestern Louisiana
During the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, northwestern Louisiana was known as a major hub of the salt trade. However, recent
excavations at the Drake's Salt Works Site Complex suggest that this reputation may have been earned relatively late. These excavations have also raised
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              130
the possibility that many of the salt producers at this saline were non-locals who visited northwestern Louisiana primarily for its salt resources. While the
salt makers at Drake's Salt Works would have been able to exploit the European demand for salt and salt-treated commodities, there is little evidence that
making salt was more than a seasonal or short-term activity. Thus, it would appear that these salt producers were able to meet and profit from the local
demand for salt without the need for full-time economic specialization.
Eusebio, Michelle (University of Florida), Philip Piper (The Australian National University), Fredeliza Campos (The Australian National
University), Andrew Zimmerman (University of Florida) and John Krigbaum (University of Florida)
[134]              Using Organic Compound-Specific Stable Isotope Ratios to Identify Animals in Prehistoric Foodways of Southeast Asia
Recent advances in isotopic analysis have enabled archaeologists to move beyond subsistence and diet toward the full chaîne opératoire of foodways that
includes inference of past culinary practices. Together with faunal identification, isotopic analysis of organic residues derived from ancient pottery helps to
create linkages between material culture (i.e., pottery) and how animals were prepared and consumed, which, in turn, may be used to infer aspects of
identity. Isotopic databases of modern animal fats have been established to differentiate organic residues by faunal category. However, these databases
may be area-specific. For example, variations in carbon isotope ratios may result from myriad extrinsic factors. Southeast Asia has modern databases for
assessing bulk carbon and nitrogen stable isotope ratios from charred surface residues on pottery, but none for the carbon specific organic molecules from
both surface and absorbed residues. Thus, this paper presents compound specific isotopic analysis of palmitic (C16) and stearic (C18) acids of extracted
lipid residues from modern pots with known cooking histories and modern faunas from southeast Asia. This database will be compared with others, and its
ability to assist in interpreting southeast Asian prehistoric foodways in the region will be discussed.
Eva, Lemonnier [96] see Cyril, Castanet
Evans, Victoria [65] see Lail, Warren
Evans, Adrian (University of Bradford)
[269]              Crowd Sourcing Archaeological and Palaeontological Survey
Fossilfinder.org is a citizen science project that enables the public to engage directly with palaeo/archaeological research. Data, in the form of images, was
collected from research areas to the east of Lake Turkana. The regions studied are those well known as fossil bearing regions dating to periods of interest
in human evolution studies (up to 4 million years old in parts). In the first two seasons of research, 1 million images of the ground surface were captured at
a resolution of 30 pixels per cm (on the ground). Images were collected using two methods, 1) rectangular areas in predefined locations, and 2) transects
cutting across varying geological exposures. This resolution was selected to correspond with normal visual acuity for standing or partially crouched
position. The images were presented through an interactive website and users were encouraged to answer a series of questions about each image. These
questions were aimed to produce data pertinent to the localised geological variation and specific locations where fossils were eroding. This paper presents
the first five months of data collected through this citizen science project and discusses how those findings have influenced our data collection methods
and how they can assist with palaeo/archaeological research.
[214]              Discussant
[214]              Chair
Evans, Amanda (Tesla Offshore)
[249]              Discussant
Everhart, Jennifer (Stony Brook University)
[184]              Cracking Concretions: Methods for Removing Carbonate Encrustations from Faunal Remains
Calcium carbonate encrustations of faunal materials are a problem that limits analysis of faunal materials from a wide variety of regions and time periods.
In many locations they are associated with climates with persistent or increased precipitation. This precipitation percolates through the sediments of the
stratigraphic column, mixing with calcium carbonate. This mixture is then gradually deposited throughout the stratigraphic column, encasing archaeological
materials in hardened carbonate concretions. These accumulations, which may surpass one centimeter in thickness and completely surround remains,
often make identification as well as studying surface features such as cut marks virtually impossible. Using a large Terminal Pleistocene faunal
assemblage from the Levantine Epipaleolithic Period, this poster reports the results of multiple experiments using a variety of chemical and mechanical
techniques to efficiently remove carbonate deposits while avoiding significant osteological degradation.
Evin, Allowen [176] see Linderholm, Anna
Fagan, John L. [155] see Hulse, Eva
Fairley, Helen (US Geological Survey), Joel Sankey (US Geological Survey) and Joshua Caster (US Geological Survey)
[254]              Sustaining Sites in a Sediment-Deprived System: Designing a Monitoring Program to Assess Glen Canyon Dam Effects on Downstream
                   Archaeological Sites in Grand Canyon
In 1963, construction of Glen Canyon Dam on the Colorado River was completed, profoundly altering the downstream riverine ecosystem in Grand Canyon
National Park. One consequence of the dam and its subsequent operations has been an 85 percent reduction in the amount of sediment flowing into the
Grand Canyon. The paucity of sediment to re-supply sand bars and replenish sand dunes along the river shoreline has not only altered the bio-physical
dynamics of the riverine ecosystem but has also affected the physical settings and geomorphologic stability of numerous archaeological sites. For the past
decade, U.S. Geological Survey scientists have been exploring various tools and methods to accurately capture the effects of ongoing dam operations on
downstream archaeological resources. We are now in the process of developing a comprehensive monitoring plan based on an ecosystem framework and
incorporating diverse measurements and classification procedures to objectively assess how current dam operations impact the physical integrity of
archaeological sites. Our approach incorporates measurements of topographic change, sediment flux, vegetation growth, local meteorological conditions,
and other parameters to help land managers understand how dam operations have affected the eco-geomorphological resilience of sites and to devise
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  131
appropriate methods to mitigate effects from future dam operations.
Fajardo Bernal, Sebastian (Sebastian Fajardo Bernal)
[97]              Prehispanic Settlement Patterns of the Sogamoso Valley
The results from a settlement pattern study covering 123 square kilometers in the Sogamoso Valley in the northern part of the Muisca area are presented.
The survey revealed that sedentary occupation there began during the Herrera Period (400 B.C.–800 A.D.) and consisted only of a few small hamlets and
some scattered farmsteads. After 800 A.D., population increased dramatically, reaching a few thousand inhabitants organized in several local communities
within the survey area. The largest of these local communities was centered on the settlement at Sogamoso where the major Temple of the Sun described
in sixteenth century documents was located, although the total population of this community numbered less than 1,000. After 1200 A.D., regional
population diminished. The inhabitants of the valley avoided locations prone to flooding, but there is no indication of major construction efforts to increase
production and no sign that chiefs gained wealth through agricultural or other economic activities.
Falabella, Fernanda (Departamento de Antropología, Universidad de Chile), Silvia Alfaro (FONDECYT Proyecto N° 1121097, Santiago, Chile),
María Teresa Planella (Sociedad Chilena de Arqueología, FONDECYT Proyecto), Matthew T. Boulanger (University of Missouri Research Reactor
Center, Co) and Michael D. Glascock (University of Missouri Research Reactor Center, Co)
[57]              Testing the Social Aggregation Hypothesis for Llolleo Communities in Central Chile with NAA of Ceramic Smoking Pipes and Drinking Jars
La Granja site in central Chile has been considered a social aggregation site for Llolleo communities based on an unusually large smoking pipe
assemblage, ritual features, and an abundance of drinking jars. The hypothesis states that people from a wide region gathered here for group cohesion
purposes mediated by rituals involving the smoking of psychoactive substances and drinking of fermented beverages. Based on the potential of NAA to
fingerprint ceramic artifacts’ raw material sources, we tested if ceramic smoking pipes and pottery found in La Granja showed chemical groupings that
support the idea that people traveled from several communities with their utensils to this site. Our results show that smoking pipes and their associated
pottery have similar mineralogical characteristics and that the whole sample is organized in only two chemical groups that likely represent the clay
production sources for these artifacts. Our conclusion is that, if pipes and pottery are used as a proxy for the circulation of people, social networks might
have been more restricted in the Llolleo social system than previously thought. Apparently La Granja, though a primary center for group activities, might not
be functioning on a regional and supra-regional basis.
Falk, Emily [90] see Napoleon, Taylor
Fallu, Daniel (Boston University) and Justin Holcomb (Boston University)
[184]             The Role of Bronze Age People in the Post-Bronze Age Landscape: An Integrated Geoarchaeological Approach to Site Formation at
                  Mycenae, Greece
While human-landscape interaction has been a key question in the archaeology of early complex societies, little research has focused on the effect of
occupation on the landscape post-abandonment. At Mycenae, a Late Bronze Age citadel in southern Greece, two distinct deposits, one anthropogenic and
one natural, were identified as covering archaeological remains dating to the twelfth century, B.C. Here, we present an integrated method combining
micromorphology, Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR), and X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) analyses intended to target local environmental change during a
period of abandonment associated with the Early Iron Age. Bulk samples and thin sections from 1.3 m of these two deposits were taken at 5 cm intervals
and analyzed in order to record changes in microstructure, mineralogy, and elemental proportions resultant from changing environmental conditions and
soil formation. Through this approach, we hope to answer two key questions: How did the intensive occupation of Mycenae during the Bronze Age
predetermine the eventual site formation during the Early Iron Age, and to what extent did the natural environment dictate change? By investigating multi-
scale processes of post-abandonment site formation, we hope to shed light on the long-term impact of human-landscape interaction during a key transition
in Greece.
Fankhauser, Amber [245] see Burnett, Katherine
Fargher, Lane F. [27] see Antorcha Pedemonte, Ricardo
Fargher, Lane (CINVESTAV del IPN)
[178]             Power in Middle Range Societies: A Cross-Cultural Perspective
For most of the second half of the twentieth century, Neoevolutionary theory dominated explanations for the rise of social complexity and inequality.
However, beginning about two decades ago, scholars began to problematize this framework. The resulting body of theory, referred to as “alternative
pathways to complexity,” introduced concepts of structure and agency and moved away from functionalism and systems theory. Despite these
improvements in our theoretical toolkit, much scholarship continues to focus only on the agency of the “elite” and ignores the strategic behavior of the
subaltern. In this paper, we seek to expand “alternative pathways” by applying collective action theory to the rise of middle-range societies. In the following
discussion, we apply collective action theory to a broad cross-cultural sample of middle-range societies drawn from Polynesia, Melanesia, southeast Asia,
Africa, south Asia, North America, and South America. The results of our statistical analysis reveal that emergent elites (aggrandizers) were only able to
manipulate certain revenue sources when they sought to monopolize power. Apparently, the strategic behavior of the subaltern is a key factor in the
emergence of inequality and complexity. Our results indicate that collective action theory provides insights into the development of social complexity.
Faria, Eliane (Eliane Faria)
[263]             Amazonian Landscapes: The Characteristics of Anthropic Landscapes in the Middle Xingu River (Pará, Brazil) from Pre-Colonial to
                  Contemporary Times
Based on a historical ecology approach, this work aims to investigate interactions between indigenous societies and the natural environment expressed in
landscape changes through the analyses of their long term occupation of the Middle Xingu River. My goal is to show the specificities of the indigenous
settlements in the region considering the multiple aspects of this process in the human settlement of Amazonia. Although not producing great changes in
the landscape, small groups of horticulturalists that settled in the Xingu region left their contribution in cultural and historical terms. Those are expressed,
for instance, in the management of plants and forest products in anthropogenic dark earth sites. In a long term perspective, I intend to show the alterations
in the landscape that result from: (1) the pre-colonial land management; (2) the colonization of the Xingu region by the Portuguese since the seventeenth
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               132
century, and (3) the impact of Belo Monte hydroelectric plant over both the indigenous culture and the archaeological heritage.
Farley, William (University of Connecticut)
[61]                 A Preliminary Analysis of Calluna Hill (CT 59-73), an Early 17th-Century Pequot Village
This paper describes the results of four seasons of field research and laboratory analyses at Calluna Hill (CT 59-73), a small Pequot village burned during
the English retreat from the battle at Mystic Fort, part of the 1630s Pequot War. The project uses environmental, spatial, and artifactual data from the site to
undertake a study of culture change in southern New England’s contact period in order to better understand the role of intercultural exchange in colonial
settings at the domestic scale. By combining survey, excavation, and laboratory analysis, this research will offer insights into Native American lifeways
during the 1630s, a key but understudied period owing to a lack of identified sites. Preliminary results, research questions, and interpretations will be
presented as a part of a broader comparative study of native and Euro-American lifeways in the seventeenth century.
[61]                Chair
Farrell, Mary [8] see Bates, Brian
Farris, Glenn (Farris & Schulz)
[82]                Indian Family Housing at Mission San Juan Bautista: Archaeology and Ethnohistory
Although the Indian converts resident at Mission San Juan Bautista numbered as high as 1,248 (in 1823), the available adobe housing for families could
only accommodate perhaps a fifth of this number. Archaeological testing on the Indian family housing site for this mission was combined with Spanish
sacramental records, annual reports, and other documents to suggest individuals and their families most likely have been allotted this scarce housing. The
aim of this study is to attempt to bring the Indian presence at the mission to life and thus rectify the unfortunate pattern of seeing missions simply in terms
of the priests and soldiers and a few other "gente de razon." In many cases we can follow individual converts from their original native villages and the
personal name they had right on through their lives at the mission, including occupations and relations thanks to a valuable online database held at the
Huntington Library.
Farstad, Kendra [27] see Russell, Bradley
Fash, William L. [129] see Sugiyama, Nawa
Fash, Barbara (Harvard University), Jorge Ramos (Insituto Hondureño de Antropolgía e Historia), Marc Wolff and William Fash (Harvard
University)
[162]               Sacred Water Mountains of the Copan Valley: A View from Rastrojon
The temples and stone monuments of Copan are replete with symbols of water and sustenance, both driving forces in the development of complex society
throughout the Maya region and greater Mesoamerica. Like other urban environments, Copan harnessed the power and religious nature of water,
mountains, maize, ancestors, and the divine ruler, juxtaposed to their dualistic counterparts of fire and drought, to construct their urban landscape,
cosmovision, and social structures. Research on ancient water management facilities, settlement patterns, shrines, and water-related imagery associated
with both the built environment and sacred places permits us to assess how people were once integrated around these vital elements of the natural and
social worlds. In this paper, we will present new data from investigations at the hillside residential site of Rastrojon that enhances understanding of the
sacred water mountain concepts and practices we interpret as being celebrated, managed, and deified on the temples and landscapes of ancient Copan,
both at the state (Principal Group) and community (outlying residential groups) levels.
Fash, William (Harvard University) and Barbara Fash (Peabody Museum, Harvard University)
[212]               Mythological Markers, Shifting Boundaries and Exchange in the Late Classic Copan Kingdom
Delimiting the “core” area of the Late Classic Copan kingdom may be enhanced through analysis of its shared mythology, associated with the ballgame.
Placed at the geographic and social center of the royal compound, the main ballcourt of Copan established a narrative of mythological macaws, and a
Macaw Mountain, that spanned the entire dynasty from the fifth–ninth century C.E. The geographic distribution of archaeological sites with stone macaw
head ballcourt markers, all of which had Copador pottery in association, allows us to refine the consensus model of Copan’s Late Classic domain. The very
large initial territory at the onset of the kingdom’s history included Quiriguá and other areas north and west of Copan, much reduced by the late eighth
century as various former vassal communities declared their independence in public inscriptions. A southerly distribution of the other sites with macaw
head bench markers supports ceramic evidence adduced by ceramicists that the Copan Dynasty favored trading partners (and allies) to the south and east
at the end of the Late Classic Period. What became the final 'core' area may have been involved in procuring and trading macaw feathers, ideologically
centered on a mythological—or actual—Macaw Mountain in this region.
Faugere, Brigitte (University Paris 1)
[175]               The Scales of the Landscape in Tarascan Rock Art of the Postclassic Period (A.D. 1200–1520): The Petroglyphs of El Paraiso, Zacapu,
                    Michoacan (Mexico)
As in other regions of the world, the rock art of northern Michoacan (Mexico) has to be seen within a given landscape. But the study of the El Paraiso
petroglyphs (Zacapu) shows that there is in reality a complex set of intricate scales of landscapes: since a macro scale that involves the whole surrounding
environment to a micro scale where the engraved blocks themselves form a sacred geography. The 3D survey realized recently highlights the subtle
dialogue between the location of the blocks, the orientation of the decorated panels, and the iconography. A part of the myths of Tarascan people of the
Postclassic Period seems to become accessible.
Faught, Michael (SEARCH, Inc)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               133
[21]              Beringia is Not the Sole Source of People in the New World
I challenge the belief of biological and archaeological anthropologists that Beringia is the only place people have come into the Americas, even if along the
coast. I show how researchers affirm their consequent, don't show direct historical continuity in areas where gene samples are modern, can't find any
other than Dyuktai/Denali/Dene cultures archaeologically, nor have evidence of north to south, or west to east propagation after intrusion. In its place, I
propose South America as the locus of the genomic stillstand, and that it could result from people displaced by sea level rise from the Sunda Shelf, or other
S.E. Asian location, Monte Verde and Paisley Caves are near contemporaneous potential examples of propagation from a more central node, recent and
robust genomic studies can be argued as consistent phylogenetically, and plant and animal domestication, settlement, and complex societies have earliest
examples in South America. Speculative arguments will be made for an initial equatorial landing point from a full Pacific Ocean crossing. I propose that
S.E. Asia is the homeland of the stillstand Amerindians, and they met up with Beringian Amerindians at the end of the last Ice Age, but other Holocene
migratory histories are indicated, as well.
[249]             Moderator
Faught, Michael [290] see Arbuthnot, Michael
Faulkner, Ivy (University of Minnesota)
[70]              Why Classics Needs Anthropology
While it is true that theoretical advancements are slow to cross disciplinary boundaries, when disciplines by necessity overlap, it seems almost willfull
ignorance that perpetuates old frameworks. For example, it has been over 30 years now that anthropology and colonial studies have come to terms with
the complexities of identity in colonial contexts and yet scholars in related disciplines, such as Classics, still argue over which label imposed by colonizers
should be used for which indigenous group in particular areas. What is the utility of these types of discussions? Rather, it is essential that more scholars
look towards interdisciplinary methods in order to advance our overall understanding of colonial encounters in the past. Therefore, this paper looks to
address specifically how anthropological theories on colonialism can and should be applied to the study of culture contact and colonization in the Classical
world.
Faulseit, Ronald (The Field Museum), Gary Feinman (The Field Museum) and Linda Nicholas (The Field Museum)
[171]             Wealth Inequality in the Late Classic Valley of Oaxaca: A Domestic Perspective
The Late Classic Period in the Valley of Oaxaca is marked by shared practices in residential organization, design, the layout of houses, and domestic
artifact assemblages both within and between sites throughout the region. This degree of homogeneity allows for cross-site comparison of excavated
residences to examine household wealth inequality on a systemic and regional scale. In this paper, we employ different indices to explore multiple lines of
evidence (e.g., patio size and other architectural measures as well as access to portable goods) to quantitatively measure wealth disparity among 15 Late
Classic residences spanning five sites in the Valley of Oaxaca. Individual axes of inequality are not entirely consistent, thereby illustrating that wealth may
be constituted differently in distinct contexts. Despite challenges of sampling, the overall pattern reveals that the extent of wealth disparity among
households (large and small, elaborate and basic) is less extensive than might be expected for an urban society or is found in other contemporaneous
Mesoamerican cases.
Faulseit, Ronald k. [231] see Garcia, Dante
Fauvelle, Mikael (University of California, San Diego)
[20]              Archaeological Reconnaissance at Fracción Mujular: A Small Site with Big Connections
Located on the Pacific Coast of Chiapas, the site of Fracción Mujular is best known for three carved stela bearing Teotihuacan associated stylistic
elements, first identified by Carlos Navarrete in the 1960s. The relatively modest architecture of the site, combined with evidence for long-distance
connections, makes Fracción Mujular an interesting place to investigate the impact that inter-regional political and trade relationships during the Early
Classic had on the lives of common people. This paper presents the results of preliminary archaeological surveys conducted at Fracción Mujular during
the summer of 2015. This work mapped four occupation groups at the site and conducted systematic surface collections from each area. The results of
this research have expanded the occupation of Cerro Bernal into the Terminal Classic, and have solidified evidence for material interactions with Central
Mexico. Additionally, topographic and architectural maps of the site have helped clarify the nature of the relationship between Fracción Mujular and the
nearby regional center of Los Horcones. I argue that the proliferation of Central Mexican stylistic elements and material artifacts into small sites such as
Fracción Mujular indicates that coastal Chiapas was closely connected to Central Mexican political and trade networks during the Early Classic.
Fayek, Mostafa, Brooke Milne (Dept. Anthropology, University of Manitoba, Winnip), Ryan Sharpe (Dept. Geological Sci., University of Manitoba,
Win), Rachel ten Bruggencate (Dept. Anthropology, University of Manitoba, Winnip) and Lawrence Anovitz (Chemical Sciences Division, MS
6375, P.O. Box 2008)
[214]             Obsidian Hydration Dating Using SIMS and the LEXT Laser-Microscope
Obsidian hydration dating (OHD) is based on the premise that when an obsidian artifact is manufactured, the fresh surface exposed immediately begins to
hydrate. A state-of-the-art obsidian hydration dating technique utilizes secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) to measure H diffusion profiles in obsidian
artifacts and the depths of the resulting sputter pits by a stylus-type profilometer. The pit depths are matched with the SIMS H diffusion profiles, which are
compared to diffusion profiles of time-calibrated obsidian standards with similar chemical compositions to the artifacts. The major source of error with this
technique is the precise measurement of pit depths because sputter pits often have rough surfaces and the depth resolution is dictated by the width and
sharpness of the stylus. Here, we use a Olympus OLS 4000 LEXT 3D laser measuring microscope to image and measure depths of sputter pits on
Pachuca obsidian that was exposed to water vapor at temperatures from 30oC to 75oC and from 600 days to 1,400 days. We compare the depths of the
sputter pits obtained by traditional stylus-style profilometry and the LEXT microscope. This new 3D imaging approach promises to produce improved depth
resolution and consequently much more precise obsidian hydration ages.
Fazioli, K. Patrick (Mercy College)
[161]             Trade, Technology, and Identity: Current Approaches to Pottery Studies in Late Antique and Early Medieval Europe
This paper will survey some of the most interesting and innovative recent contributions of pottery studies to our knowledge of late antique and early
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               134
medieval central Europe (circa fifth to tenth centuries C.E.). Since an exhaustive review of the many national traditions across this culturally and
linguistically diverse region is beyond the scope of this paper, the focus will remain on three broad areas of inquiry. First, what insights can pottery offer into
changing patterns of exchange and networks of trade in the late antique and early medieval world? Second, what can pottery reveal about localized and
regional modes of production, especially in terms of manufacturing traditions and technological style? Third, what (if anything) can pottery tell us about the
expression of individual and collective identities in the post-Roman era? For each of these three themes, we will review how research agendas have
evolved over the past several decades, identify key intellectual debates in the contemporary scholarship, and consider the promises and challenges of
future research.
Feathers, Valerie (Louisiana State University)
[238]             Dietary Implications from an Inundated Shell Midden at a Classic Maya Salt Work
During the 2013 field season, an inundated shell midden was excavated at the underwater ancient Maya salt production site of Eleanor Betty, one of the
Paynes Creek Salt Works. Excavations revealed that the midden was located 16-30 cm below the sea-floor and extended both inside and outside of an
underwater wooden structure. During the spring of 2015, analyses were performed to identify the shell species, assess the nature of the midden (cultural or
natural), and evaluate dietary implications of the shell remains. Approximately 4,733 number of individual specimens (NISP) were recovered, with 3,979
fragments identified as Crassostrea rhizophora (red mangrove oysters). A total of 264 minimum number of individuals (MNI) of C. rhizophora were present.
Several lines of evidence are presented to indicate dietary use of the oyster shells by the salt workers: the shell was mixed with charcoal and briquetage,
indicating this was a cultural midden. Butcher marks were found on 37 percent of the shells, with a notch being the most abundant break. A narrow range
of shell sizes, as shown by Height-Length Ratio (HLR) measurements, indicate the shell was deposited as a single event.
[238]             Chair
Feathers, James (University of Washington)
[292]             Luminescence Dating at Alice Boer site, Brazil
The Alice Boer site, in the Rio Claro region of São Paulo state, Brazil, gained some renown in the 1970s as a possible pre-Clovis site. It was excavated in
the 1960s by Maria Beltrão and produced a questionable radiocarbon date of 14.2 ± 1.2 B.P. (uncalibrated) drawn from a very small (for conventional
dating) charcoal piece near the bottom of an ant-disturbed cultural layer. A TL date on burned chert of 11 kya was also produced. The presence of
artifacts in the lower layers and the integrity of the site have been disputed. The University of São Paulo has recently re-investigated the site, because it
may represent an early incursion of a bifacial industry into Brazil. This presentation discusses the results of single-grain OSL dating of seven samples,
which range in age from 5 to 30 ka, and the relationship of the ages to cultural material. Additional OSL dates from the Rio Claro drainage are also
presented to put the dates in geological context.
[292]             Chair
Fedyniak, Kristine [190] see Lints, Andrew
Feeley, Frank (CUNY Graduate Center) and Lilja Pálsdóttir (Fornleifastofnun Íslands)
[210]             Sandbagging the Past: Rescue Excavations at a Medieval Icelandic Fishing Station
Since its discovery in 2008, archaeologists have been performing rescue excavations at the site of Gufuskálar in Western Iceland. During the Medieval
Era, this site was home to one of the largest commercial fishing operations in Iceland at that time. Little is known about these early commercial ventures
and most of these early fishing stations have been destroyed by later episodes of town-building. Gufuskálar is one of the best preserved examples of a
medieval fishing station but, as with many coastal sites around the world, is currently being destroyed by coastal erosion. Attempts have been made to
mitigate the damage in between field seasons, but there has been little success.
Fehrenbach, Shawn
[33]              Discussant
Fehren-Schmitz, Lars (UCSC Anthropology)
[62]              A Paleogenetic Perspective on the Early Population History of the High Altitude Andes
The peopling of the high altitude Andes marks an important episode in South American population history, eventually leading to the formation of the most
complex societies of the late precolumbian period, namely Wari, Tiwanaku, and Inca. Little is known about how population dynamic processes and genetic
adaptation to physical stressors like hypoxia shaped the genetic diversity of the Andean highland populations over the ~10,000 years of human presence in
high altitude leading to the emergence of these empires. Paleogenetic investigations in the highlands have been limited to populations not older than
~1,500 years. The molecular evolutionary processes associated with adaptations to hypoxic stress have only been studied in modern populations. Thus,
these studies are prone to potential bias resulting from past demographic events. Here, we report on genome wide data from precolumbian individuals
deriving from high altitude sites dating to ~8500–560 B.P. We gain new insights into the ancestry of early Andean highlanders, population relationships,
and admixture events that help us to better understand the interaction of Andean groups with low altitude groups. Furthermore, we identify that selection
must be considered as one of the driving factors of the adaptation to hypoxia in the central Andean highlands.
Fehren-Schmitz, Lars [117] see Verdugo, Cristina
Fehren-Schmitz , Lars [276] see Washburn, Eden
Feinman, Gary [171] see Faulseit, Ronald
Feldman, Michal [223] see Krause, Johannes
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               135
Femenias, Blenda (Catholic University of America)
[172]              The Colors of the Coya's Robes
Of the many surviving precolumbian Inka textiles, especially those made in tapestry and featuring tukapu (rectangular design blocks), only a few full-size
garments are associated with females. There are, however, many miniature female garments. Inka textiles also tend to follow a limited number of color
combinations, although some textiles show a more diverse, even exuberant mixture. Felipe Guaman Poma de Ayala, in his section on the coyas (queens),
attributes a specific set of colors to each coya, naming the main color used in her mantle (lliklla), skirt (aksu), and sash (chumbi). He tells us, for example,
that Mama Ocllo had a yellow mantle and a dark blue skirt—colors not visible in his line drawings. In the colonial period the situation changes markedly, as
many of the most spectacular surviving garments are women's mantles. While there is some literature on the colors associated with the Inkas (e.g., the red
puma), the dyes in the textiles, and the colors that Murúa shows for female dress, overall the correlation of colors with people and garment types has not
been explored in depth. This paper considers the question of color as closely correlated with high-status Inka female's garments.
Fenn, Mallory, Gabrielle Vail (New College of Florida), Gail Fish and Vail
[92]               Beyond the Utilitarian: Spindle Whorls from Burials and Caches in the Maya Area
Technologies for spinning fibers into thread by hand have changed little in Mesoamerica since they were first introduced. Made primarily of perishable
materials, however, the wooden spindle and the fibers themselves are generally no longer present in the archaeological record. What does survive,
however, are spindle whorls—spherical artifacts used to weigh down the spindle to keep it anchored during the process of spinning. In the Maya area,
these artifacts are rarely found in primary contexts; instead, they are encountered most frequently in caches and burials. They are also seen throughout
both the Maya area and central Mexico being worn by female deities with associations of fertility and often with water and rain making. This poster
examines what this patterning says about the functions and uses of spindle whorls in both the utilitarian and symbolic spheres during the Late Classic
Period (c. 600–900 C.E.) in the Maya Lowlands.
Fenn, Thomas (Yale University), Jeffrey Fleischer (Department of Anthropology, Rice University), Stephanie Wynne-Jones (Department of
Archaeology, University of York), Edward Pollard (British Institute in Eastern Africa (BIEA)) and Tom Fitton (Department of Archaeology,
University of York)
[269]              Economic Changes through Time along the Tanzanian Swahili Coast, as Seen through the Examination of Non-Ferrous Metals and
                   Metallurgical Technologies
Historic Swahili towns along the east African coast played prominent roles in the triangular Indian Ocean maritime trade linking east Africa with India and
the Persian Gulf/Red Sea, but their impact and the extent of economic changes through time at these towns are still poorly understood. Examining non-
ferrous metals, many of which were imported and reworked locally, can serve as a proxy to understand the impact of Indian Ocean trade on local
economies, particularly with regard to the consumption of semi-exotic materials and finished goods. Copper-based metals were relatively commonly
imported, but they also were locally worked and some even may have been produced locally or regionally. Therefore, studying these metals and their
metallurgy from Swahili sites in Tanzania can provide insights into socio-economic aspects such as organization of production and workshops,
consumptions patterns as well as networks connecting these sites to the hinterland and the Indian Ocean economic community. To that end, copper-
based metals were examined from several Swahili archaeological contexts along the Tanzanian coast dating from the seventh cent. C.E. to sixteenth cent.
C.E. Results of chemical and isotopic analyses identified imported metals from multiple locations, while discussion of potential indigenous metal
production also is presented.
Fennelly, Katherine (University of Sheffield)
[25]               Dublin’s Bedford Asylum and the Material Legacy of the ‘Industrious Child’
This paper will determine the extent to which the concept of ‘the child’ and ‘childhood’ was incorporated into the design of public institutions for the
reception of children in the early-nineteenth century. The primary case study of this paper will be the Bedford Asylum for Industrious Children, a purpose
built institution constructed adjacent to the North Dublin Union House of Industry in Ireland. Particular attention will be given to the frequent mention of the
asylum in the records of the House of Industry during the years of the Napoleonic Wars, when young boys deemed old enough were released into the army
for service in the conflict. Towards the end of the wars, this practice was suddenly and conspicuously halted. This paper will examine the Bedford Asylum
within its wider institutional context, and compare the built environment of the building for the reception of children with the adjacent workhouse and asylum
buildings constructed for adults, to determine what material features can be discerned in the architecture of the Bedford that make it specifically suitable for
children.
Fenno, Matthew [29] see Freeman, Jessica
Ferguson, Jeffrey (University of Missouri), Barbara Roth (UNLV) and Katelynn DiBenedetto (UNLV)
[64]               Obsidian Procurement Strategies at the Harris Site
The Harris Site is a large pithouse village in the Mimbres Valley of southwestern New Mexico. Many of the twenty structures (recently excavated) are
organized into five discrete clusters that have been interpreted as the remains of extended family corporate groups. Some of these groups apparently had
more wealth and social power, and these differences may be tied to both land tenure and ritual sponsorship. We use obsidian provenance data to explore
differences in obsidian procurement strategies between households at the Harris Site. All obsidian artifacts excavated during the eight field seasons of
UNLV-sponsored fieldwork at the site have been subjected to X-ray fluorescence analysis at the MURR Archaeometry Laboratory. This assemblage of
nearly 2,500 artifacts represents the largest known study from a single site in the southwest. The assemblage includes primarily obsidian from Mule Creek,
but it also most other known sources in New Mexico and eastern Arizona and a still unknown minor source. Many of these artifacts are from dated contexts
that allow the examination of patterns of obsidian procurement through time as well as within households and household clusters. These data can further
illuminate social relationships and access to obsidian by households at the Harris Site.
Ferguson, Jeffrey [66] see Van Keuren, Scott
Fernandez, Andrew [67] see VanPool, Christine
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               136
Fernández, Mercedes Grisel [176] see Scheinsohn, Vivian
Fernández , Pablo Marcelo [176] see Scheinsohn, Vivian
Fernández Eraso, Javier [125] see Alonso Eguíluz, Mónica
Fernandez-Gotz, Manuel (University of Edinburgh)
[60]              Hierarchies and Heterarchies in Iron Age Europe
Traditionally, Iron Age communities have been depicted as hierarchical, triangular societies, with elites at the top of the social pyramid and a strong warrior
tradition. However, archaeological evidence reveals very varied patterns of societies during the First Millennium B.C. in Europe, from those that display
marked signs of social hierarchy, to others where social differentiation was much less pronounced. This paper aims to contribute to the task of rethinking
Iron Age communities from the perspective of diversity, using the concepts of ‘economies of power’ and ‘heterarchy’ as starting points. Broadly speaking, it
is possible to make a distinction between mechanisms of ‘political economies’ that develop inequalities and hierarchies, and others of ‘moral economies’
that emphasise egalitarian values.
Fernández-León, Elisa (Universidad de Costa Rica) and Geoffrey McCafferty (University of Calgary)
[163]             Change and Continuity in the Greater Nicoya Region of Pacific Central America: A Comparison of Two Bagaces to Sapoa Transitional
                  Areas
Ethnohistorical sources describe migrations of Mesoamerican peoples into the Greater Nicoya region of Pacific Nicaragua and northwestern Costa Rica
during the Classic to Postclassic transition, ca. 800 C.E., a period known regionally as the Bagaces and Sapoa periods. Recent research has targeted this
transition in order to better understand the material culture dynamics, as a means to further understand historical linguistic and genetic data. This paper
contrasts two case studies: one from the Guanacaste sites of Finca Chiva, Villa Aventura, and Los Platanos; and the Nicaraguan sites of Santa Isabel and
El Rayo. Consideration of such attributes as mortuary practices, settlement patterns, and decorated ceramics all contribute to an empirical evaluation of
the migration claims. Among the conclusions is a critical reconsideration of the ‘Greater Nicoya’ concept, as well as evidence with other parts of Central
America.
Fernandez-Lopez De Pablo, Javier (Institut Català de Paleoecologia Humana i Evolució Social (IPHES))
[72]              Discussant
Fernández-López de Pablo, Javier [72] see Lozano, Sergi
Fernandez-Perez, Natasha (University of Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras) and Isabel Rivera-Collazo (University of Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras)
[156]             Plants used in the Indigenous Caribbean: A Database of Plants in Reference to the Archaeological Literature
Archaeological studies have demonstrated that the dynamics between plants and people in the Neotropics are central for the understanding of both forests
and human societies. However, in the archaeological literature of the Caribbean, there is no single analysis listing the range of plants used and for what
purposes. Upon this situation, we have undergone the task of reviewing the existing paleobotanical literature from a Pan-Caribbean perspective, and
assembling a database. It includes each plant identified with details of remain type, use/interpretation, country or island, archaeological site, attributed
culture, reported date, calendar years minimum and maximum, and reference. The database was analyzed statistically (taxa most represented), spatially
(localities where specific taxons have been identified), and qualitatively (general perspective of the meaning of these assemblages). As the database
included both macro and micro remains, the diversity and richness of taxa responds to the variability of human use of different species, their preservation in
the archaeological record, and to the recovery methods for each type of remain. The taxonomic richness evidenced in this database illustrates the wide
range of plants used in the past and the importance that the forests had to the societies living in the Lowland Neotropics.
Ferone, Troy (US Forest Service-Eastern Region)
[165]             Paying It Forward: Collaborative Heritage Stewardship in the Forest Service's Eastern Region
The U.S. Forest Service-Eastern Region includes 16 National Forests and one Tallgrass Prairie in 20 states across the Great Lakes, New England, Mid
Atlantic, and Midwest. Over 40 percent of the U.S. population lives within the boundaries of the Region. The proximity of these Forests to urban centers, as
well as to rural and tribal communities, provides bountiful opportunities for collaboration, partnerships, and volunteer-based heritage stewardship. This
short presentation touches on a variety of partner and volunteer-based initiatives led by the Eastern Region’s National Forests. In particular, we highlight
the creative and exciting initiatives that connect youth, students, veterans, and tribal members with cultural, traditional, and historic properties on National
Forest lands. There is no better way to instill a sustainable preservation ethic than to “Pay it Forward” by training the next generation of preservation
advocates and professionals.
Ferreira, Teresa [49] see Umbelino, Cláudia
Ferrier, Asa [295] see Haberle, Simon
Ferring, Reid [87] see Coil, Reed
Ferring, Reid and Teona Shelia (Georgian National Museum)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               137
[87]              Technological Variability and Change in the Lithic Assemblages from M5 at Dmanisi, Republic of Georgia
Recent excavations in the M5 Sector of Dmanisi recovered a series of stratified lithic assemblages dated to the Upper Olduvai subchron (1.85-1.78 Ma)
and early Upper Matuyama Chron (1.78-1.76 Ma). These materials from all of Dmanisi's nine major strata provide the most detailed record of lithic
acquisition and use from the site. Highly diverse raw materials were acquired and transported to the site from both bedrock and alluvial sources, in contrast
to many contemporaneous sites in east Africa, where a high degree of raw material selectivity is frequently reported. The earlier assemblages from Stratum
A are dominated by use of alluvial cobbles of tuff, rhyolite, and basalt, and are characterized by quite intensive core reduction, resulting in numerous small
flakes and small, exhausted cores. Assemblages from Stratum B indicate shifts in raw material preference, lower degrees of reduction intensity, and
production of higher frequencies of retouched tools. Throughout the sequence there is evidence for importation of larger flakes made of high quality
material that were produced elsewhere. Overall, these assemblages from Dmanisi provide evidence of technological variability related to occupational
intensity, differential raw material preference, and probable functional variability.
Ferrusquía-Villafranca, Ismael [16] see Arroyo-Cabrales, Joaquin
Feseha, Mulugeta [22] see Kappelman, John
Fetterman, Liv (USDA Forest Service) and Rick Anderson (Southern Methodist University)
[208]             The Heritage Stewardship Enhancement Program and Research Archaeology on the Dakota Prairie Grasslands, U.S. Forest Service
The ongoing partnership between the Dakota Prairie Grasslands (DPG) and Southern Methodist University, supported by the U.S. Forest Service Region 1
Heritage Stewardship Enhancement (HSE) program, is an investigation of the Paleoindian archaeological record of the Little Missouri National Grasslands.
As hoped, this collaboration produced vital information about local Paleoindian prehistory. It has also been fruitful in other ways, including a few tough
lessons learned along the way. Liv Fetterman discusses how the HSE program, the partnership, and results of this research provide some solutions to
challenges DPG archaeologists face in the midst of an oil and gas boom, while Richard Anderson outlines the benefits of the collaboration for an aspiring
archaeologist navigating graduate school. Both also comment on problems encountered through the process of creating and maintaining the partnership,
and offer advice for others who may pursue such opportunities.
Fibiger, Linda [25] see Bickle, Penny
Fiedel, Stuart [21] see Morrow, Juliet
Fiedel, Stuart (Louis Berger Group)
[21]              The Anzick Genome Proves Clovis Is First, After All
The close relatives who buried the Anzick infant ca. 13,000 cal yr B.P. made classic Clovis tools and were unequivocally the lineal genetic ancestors of all
the living Native peoples of southern North America, Central America, and South America. Clovis-derived Fell 1 fishtail points track the rapid southward
migration of this ancestral population all the way to Tierra del Fuego. Any hypothesized earlier populations—e.g., the seaweed eaters of Monte Verde or
the rock-bashers of Pedra Furada—if they (improbably) ever existed, must have been replaced or genetically swamped by these Clovis descendants.
Field, Michael (Leiden University), Jaime Pagán-Jiménez (Leiden University), Menno Hoogland (Leiden University), Jason Laffoon (Leiden
University) and Corrine Hofman (Leiden University)
[223]             What Plants Existed in the Lesser Antilles just Prior to 1492 and Could They Have Been Exploited by the island Inhabitants? - New Data
                  from Archaeological Excavations at Anse Trabaud, Martinique
The exploitation of plants in the tropical belt by Europeans had a major influence on the distributions of many species. The Lesser Antillean islands
received their fair share of new arrivals. But what plant species inhabited the Lesser Antillean islands just prior to 1492? Establishing which plant species
occurred immediately before colonial times would increase our understanding of the impact of alien introductions, provide information about
biogeographical range changes, and, in addition, indicate the botanical resources available to the pre-colonial inhabitants. Archaeological excavations in a
mangrove swamp at Anse Trabaud, Martinique, exposed artefact-bearing sediments that were deposited between A.D. 600 and 1250. These sediments
have yielded carpological, palynological, and starch fossils. Preservation of this type is rare in the tropics. Each fossil type allows identification to different
taxonomic levels. Carpological remains can often be determined to species level and, on occasion, so can fossil starch grains. This allows a detailed
palaeoenvironmental reconstruction of the Anse Trabaud site and biogeographical and archaeological conclusions to be made. Existing archaeobotanical
data from the period just before the arrival of Europeans will be reviewed and, in combination with the new data, allow regional scale conclusions to be
made.
Field Murray, Wendi (State Historical Society of North Dakota) and Meagan Schoenfelder (State Historical Society of North Dakota)
[265]             From Folsom to the Fur Trade: Harnessing the Research Potential of the State Historical Society of North Dakota's Archaeology
                  Collections
The State Historical Society of North Dakota curates collections covering 13,000 years of human history in North Dakota. The development of a more
comprehensive archaeology collections program in the last five years has been geared toward increasing public access to these collections and
communicating the collections’ research potential to an academic audience. The spectacular Lake Ilo Paleoindian collection documents thousands of years
of continuous land use in North Dakota. Future research could investigate the northern periphery of Folsom technology, the role of Knife River flint in the
northern Plains economy, and other questions relating to Paleoindian adaptations in marginal environments. For researchers interested in the Late
Prehistoric and Historic periods, the SHSND curates an entire storage room dedicated to Plains Village collections. Further analysis of these extensive
collections will elucidate the establishment and trajectory of ancestral Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara farming communities situated along the Missouri River
and its tributaries between the thirteenth and eighteenth centuries, and their participation in the nineteenth century fur trade. These collections shed light on
lithic technology, craft specialization, social and ritual life, and the versatile subsistence strategies that allowed these communities to become flourishing
trade centers in a vast intertribal trade network.
Fields, Shawn and Jamie Arjona (University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                138
[221]             A Chained Melody: Queering Ceramic Industries in 19th Century South Carolina
During the antebellum period, ceramic industries began to sprout up across South Carolina’s agricultural landscape. In the Edgefield district, located near
the South Carolina-Georgia border, a number of family-owned kilns contracted enslaved laborers from nearby plantations to mass-produce stoneware for
sale throughout the southeast. Innovative alkaline glaze technologies became the foundation for experimental ceramic traditions and styles. A long-held
local fascination with these ceramic industries, and their products, captured the attention of art historians, contemporary folk potters, and collectors
throughout the course of the last several decades. Much of the scholarship pertaining to these ceramics stems from the imprint of an enslaved African-
American potter known as Dave Drake. His inscriptions of poetic verses along with his signature on immense pots were a catalyst for the mythification of
Drake during, and after, his life. Drawing from queer theory and recent archaeological findings, we reconsider heteronormative discourses related to Dave’s
life and art. Specifically, we highlight the ways in which queer intimacies and abject bodies worked to queer these ceramic industries. In doing so, we
illustrate how clay intimacies afforded maneuverings in industrial environments laden with oppressive forms of racial domination.
Figueiredo, Camila [263] see Rebellato, Lilian
Figueiredo, Camila
[263]             Different and Complementary Landscapes: A Case of Study in the Flona-Tapajós
The goal of this presentation is to contribute to the ongoing debate in Amazonian studies to which human societies impacted and reshaped the landscapes.
Landscapes are the results of a human action and environmental changes over time, providing a fundamental dataset for understanding social practices in
a historically particular manner (Ingold 1993). Ultimately, this presentation sheds light on the formation and significance of settlement patterns within sites
located in the Flona-Tapajós and Santarém region. The paper will present results of a survey conducted in six communities of the Flona-Tapajós in 2014.
The majority of the 12 sites mapped contained ceramic fragments typical of the Santarém phase. However, ceramic fragments with Konduri style and from
the Borda Incisa Tradition were recovered from sites near the Tapajós River. The presence of indigenous paths connecting the plateau to the riverine
region suggests that the archaeological sites located on different landscape types were interconnected. In addition, some sites on the plateau are located
in strategic positions, affording great visibility, evidence that point to a defensive function. This presentation contributes to archaeological theory because it
attempts to unite landscape approaches to historical ecological perspectives.
[263]             Chair
Figueroa, Alejandro (Southern Methodist University)
[175]             Mountain Doorways: Caves, Shelters, and Rock Art in Past and Present Southwestern Honduras
Caves and shelters hold a special place among Mesoamerican cultures. Some of the earliest evidence of human occupation in this region is found inside
these natural features, where well-preserved materials attest to the detailed knowledge past populations had of their surrounding landscapes and
resources. In later time periods, caves were treated as the portals to the underworld and became an essential part of Mesoamerican ideology. The
landscape of the Santa Elena highlands of southwestern Honduras is defined by its numerous shelters and caves, all of which have been used and
continue to be used to some degree by its inhabitants. This paper presents the results of a multi-disciplinary research project that demonstrated significant
long-term use of sheltered sites in this area, documenting their use as residences, locales for communal gatherings and rituals, and as places of burial.
This study and previous work in the area suggest that caves, shelters, and the rock art within have been and continue to be sites charged with meaning
and importance for the groups that have visited and inhabited them for the past 10,000 years.
Filini, Agapi (El Colegio de Michoacan)
[46]              Negative Painted Ceramics in Mesoamerica: Functional Equivalency and Multiple Solutions
Negative or resist-painted ceramics are present in diverse Mesoamerican ceramic traditions and at different time scales and a millenary functional
continuity may be postulated thereof. At the lacustrine region of Michoacán, for example, they were first recorded at the Preclassic El Opeño site (1500
B.C.E.) and manufacturing processes reached a level of technological complexity within the Postclassic Tarascan state. Recent archaeometric studies
through SEM/EDX and Raman spectroscopy techniques on sherds of diverse sites in west Mexico revealed technological aspects which have been
heretofore poorly understood. Results indicate that potters used several techniques of negative decoration in order to produce highly ritual vessels. Specific
questions regarding processes of manufacture, craft specialization, and the use of these vessels are addressed.
Filipovich, Dragan
[88]              A Simple Fiscal-Demographic Model of the Classic Maya Collapse
The Classic Maya civilization flourished from approximately 200 A.D. to 800 A.D. in the southern reaches of the Yucatan Peninsula. Population increased
throughout the period, accelerating towards the end, finally falling to a small fraction of its former peak level (10 percent or less) in a relatively short span of
time (50–100 years). Even though Maya civilization continued in the northern end of Yucatan Peninsula, the holy kings who had been the protagonists of
Classic Maya civilization disappeared from the Maya cultural tradition, with their former habitat remaining practically vacant until modern times. In order to
explain this `collapse', I embed a predator-prey model (with an agricultural support population as prey, and a dependent non-agricultural population as
predator) within a dynamic model of conflict. With the help of such model it is argued that Classic Maya civilization collapsed because Maya kings could
not, under the pressure of warfare, manage (politically) to keep the balance between support and dependent populations upon which the long term
sustainability of their kingdoms depended.
Finegold, Andrew (NYU Institute of Fine Arts)
[209]             Self-Referentiality on Mimbres Painted Bowls
Drawing on George Kubler's theoretical treatise, The Shape of Time, as well as more recent epistemological reflections by art historians such as Georges
Didi-Huberman and Alexander Nagel and Christopher Wood, this paper explores the potential for objects to contribute to their own interpretation. The
imagery painted on Mimbres vessels often playfully responds to or incorporates their hemispherical shape. There are also instances where the imagery
seems to resonate with the holes that were regularly punctured through the bowls’ bases at the time of their placement in burials. Rather than “killing” the
vessels, this puncturing can be seen as emphasizing their material presence and symbolic value in excess of their functionality as bowls. I will argue that
Mimbres artists occasionally chose imagery that, by anticipating this common ritual treatment, highlighted the objects’ extension through time while
provoking reflection on the nature of the vessels' object-ness and the metaphoric potentials of their perforations.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 139
Finnigan, Patrick (Indiana University South Bend) and James VanderVeen (Indiana University South Bend)
[193]             Historical and Archaeological Investigation into the "Triangle Land" in South Bend's West Washington District
All too often, archaeology illuminates the history of “big men.” This paper narrates the history through archaeological investigation of one city corner in
South Bend, Indiana, and the contribution of the businesses that occupied it in the city’s most formative years. Manufacturing successes within South Bend
such as the Oliver Plow Works, and Studebaker, are well known and researched. What is less well known are the supporting businesses and businessmen
that made up the representative sample of this influential city. This paper illuminates the establishment, growth, and community influence of the businesses
it housed, supported by extensive archival research, and recovered artifacts. The humble tinsmith became the proprietor of the area’s largest hardware and
lumberyards. A German immigrant and his friend established one of the area’s largest and longest-running grocery stores that would propel both families
into more prosperous circles. Elite families blended interests, forming a neighborhood. The West Washington neighborhood was one of gaslights and
trolley cars, nouveau-rich, and the fruits of American industrial expansion in the early 1900s. Contributions from the wealthy helped build opera houses and
churches, but it was those of the corner businessmen that formed the heart and soul of South Bend.
Fischer, Anders [214] see Donahue, Randolph
Fish, Gail [92] see Fenn, Mallory
Fisher, Chelsea (University of Michigan)
[27]              Landscape and Formative Households at Tzacauil and Yaxuná, Yucatán
A population boom during the Late Formative Period (ca. 250 B.C.E.–250 C.E.) corresponded with the expansion of permanent, aggregated settlements
across Mesoamerica. In central Yucatán, Yaxuná was a centralizing focus during the Formative, yet it was not the only place that attracted settlers—so did
the nearby, smaller site of Tzacauil. In this dynamic time, what was the relationship between a large center like Yaxuná and its humbler neighbors like
Tzacauil? Was Tzacauil an autonomous hamlet, or is it better thought of as a far-flung but culturally integrated segment of Yaxuná? We can approach who
these initial permanent settlers were and how they interacted through their houses. Formative houses at both Tzacauil and Yaxuná show patterned
preferences for specific landscape features. The influence of bedrock promontories and depressions on initial settlement cannot be understated, as I
demonstrate with data from excavations of Formative houses and surface collection. This link between landscape and settlement is not simply one of
ecology; rather, it is intrinsic to cultural, economic, and religious patterns that persist for centuries in the northern lowlands. As such, this comparison
provides an opportunity for understanding changing relationships between an incipient urban center and its surroundings.
Fishman, Susannah (University of Pennsylvania)
[87]              In the Orbit of Empires: Ceramics from Urartu to Rome
Imperial borderlands are drawn into the orbit of their powerful neighbors through a combination of economic interests, cultural affiliations, and martial
threat. The site of Oğlanqala, Azerbaijan, has long been positioned at the periphery of empires, making it an excellent case study for dynamics of
incorporation and resistance. This research uses ceramic petrography to compare patterns of ceramic production and exchange in the Middle Iron Age
(MIA, 800–600 B.C.E.) to the Roman Period (100 B.C.E.–100 C.E.). During the MIA, Oğlanqala lay at the edge of the Urartian Empire. The ceramics from
the MIA are primarily local, yet contain a significant proportion of non-local ceramics that indicate wide-spread regional trade. Local and non-local
production methods and aesthetics are highly diverse. In contrast, while Oğlanqala was part of Rome's contested periphery, at least half of the ceramics
were imported from a single site under Roman control. Moreover, both local and non-local ceramics from the Roman period display a narrow, unified
stylistic repertoire. The distinct patterns of economic and stylistic incorporation evident at Oğlanqala during two different regimes, first Urartu and later
Rome, demonstrate the diversity and specificity of imperial control.
Fitton, Tom [269] see Fenn, Thomas
Fitzhugh, Ben (University of Washington)
[296]             Human Ecodynamics of Subarctic Islands of the North Atlantic and North Pacific in Comparative Perspective
The subarctic islands of the North Atlantic and North Pacific share a number of ecological characteristics, related to common latitudes and similar
oceanographic and atmospheric conditions. Both regions were occupied in pre-modern times by subsistence harvesters with varying degrees of
dependence on the marine environments for survival, and both areas became incorporated into capitalist, commercial fishing and hunting markets in the
past several centuries. We compare the historical ecology of maritime fishing/hunting of these regions and consider the hypothesis that commoditized
harvests increased the vulnerability of subsistence communities to environmental perturbations more easily weathered when stocks were less heavily
impacted.
[210]             Discussant
Fitzhugh, William
[217]             Discussant
Fitzpatrick, Scott [41] see Lawrence, John
Fitzpatrick, Scott (University of Oregon)
[223]             The Pre-Columbian Exchange: The Anthropogenic Zoogeography of Insular Caribbean Translocations
The post-Columbian introduction of exotic animals in the West Indies initiated a cascade of ecological changes, resulting in extensive defaunation,
reduction, and homogenization of biodiversity, loss of ecosystem services, and extinction of island endemics. Yet, these changes were not without
precedent in the Caribbean, one of the world’s foremost biodiversity hotspots. Evidence suggests that in the years before 1492, Amerindians in the region
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                140
had already profoundly impacted insular ecology, although our understanding of the many aspects of this process varies. For instance, while the
archaeological record indicates extensive introductions of South American fauna to the prehistoric Caribbean along with inter-island relocations of endemic
animals, the dynamic impacts of these biological invasions remain poorly understood. Taking a diachronic approach, we review the anthropogenic
zoogeography and translocation history of exotic species in the insular Caribbean over the last 2,500 years, focusing principally on four wild and domestic
mammalian taxa: agouti (Dasyprocta), opossum (Didelphis), guinea pig (Cavia porcellus), and hutia (Capromyidae). Drawing on zooarchaeological,
isotopic, and genetic data, we contextualize the introduction and insular dispersal of these mammals within the frameworks of historical ecology and human
agency, driven by economic, social, and symbolic incentives.
[296]             Discussant
[160]             Chair
Fitzsimons, Rodney (Trent University)
[119]             Monuments for the Living, Monuments for the Dead: A Stone-by-Stone Guide to Mycenaean State Formation
Prior to the appearance of the first palaces at Mycenae in the fifteenth century B.C., the most impressive architectural manifestation of elite authority in the
Argolid was not the palace or the house, but rather the tomb, specifically the shaft grave and the tholos tomb. While the funerary data supplied by these
burials have long served as the primary means by which the study of Early Mycenaean state formation has been approached, such studies focus almost
exclusively on the grave goods themselves, rather than the tombs that housed them. This paper seeks to address this lacuna by applying an energetics
approach to the funerary landscape, an approach that posits that the quantity of labour expended upon any particular architectural project correlates with
the socio-political complexity of the society that produced it. Since one aspect of socio-political power is defined by differential access to labour resources,
the values thus generated serve as quantifiable and easily comparable measures of the power of those groups responsible for their undertaking. This
approach injects a new, yet rarely considered dimension to current discussions of “wealth” and “status” and offers new insight into the nature of the socio-
political transformations that transpired during the Early Mycenaean Period.
Flad, Rowan (Harvard University)
[106]             Dayatou and Siwashan - Preliminary Report on the 2015 Season of the Tao River Archaeology Project
In May and June 2015, archaeologists from the Gansu Provincial Institute of Archaeology, Harvard University, Peking University, Yale University, and
National Taiwan University, conducted archaeological and geophysical survey at two important sites in the Tao River drainage: Dayatou and Siwashan.
Whereas Siwashan is the type site of the Siwa Culture, and has long been known as an important archaeological site, Dayatou has previously not
undergone any published systematic research. Furthermore, previous work at Siwashan has not clarified the complicated distribution of material at the
site. This recent research lays the foundation for additional focused work, and was also the last fieldwork conducted by Pochan Chen before his untimely
death one month later.
[106]             Chair
Flad, Rowan [180] see Brunson, Katherine
Fladd, Samantha [64] see Barker, Claire
Fladd, Samantha (University of Arizona)
[65]              A Room Remembered: Room Closure through Material Deposition at Homol’ovi I
Material deposition involves a range of social practices that enact negotiations of identity and interrelationships between people and spaces. Through the
deliberate accumulation of artifacts and sediment in certain locations, these negotiations are materialized in the archaeological record. The reciprocal
creation and expression of the meaning of spaces and objects can begin to be understood by analyzing the materials deposited in rooms post-
occupationally. In this poster, I examine the ways material deposition speaks to the meaning and continued relationships with rooms at the Pueblo IV
village of Homol’ovi I. The Homol’ovi Settlement Cluster, located in northeastern Arizona, has been the focus of significant research concerning the range
and implications of deposits, particularly in kivas, for the past three decades. Building upon this literature, I investigate three room blocks within the site to
understand the social practices involved in the closure of rooms. I pay specific attention to the temporal continuities and discontinuities of depositional
assemblages from individual rooms. These patterns should provide insights into the social memories attached to spaces and may speak to the social
groups participating in depositional and closure practices at Homol’ovi I.
Fladeboe, Randee (University of Florida)
[239]             Macaw Husbandry in the Ancient Greater Southwest
The archaeological record of the American southwest and north Mexico contains evidence that for hundreds of years, ancient peoples transported, kept,
and possibly bred tropical macaws at several major population centers. Archaeologists are still working to understand exactly how this was accomplished,
but the fact that this evidence indicates aspects of macaw husbandry has been underappreciated. Ethological data on human and macaw interactions in
similar contexts in the present can help inform the technological practices required of macaw husbandry in the past. Basic interaction sequences of care
activities by human keepers are grouped into major “events”—maintenance events, feeding events, etc. This allows assessment of the behavioral
properties and capacities of macaws within various interactions and lends insight into past husbandry practices.
[239]             Chair
Flegenheimer, Nora (CONICET-Área Arqueología y Antropología, Museo de Ciencias Naturales, Necochea), Natalia Mazzia (CONICET, Área
Arqueología y Antropología, Museo de) and Celeste Weitzel (CONICET, Área Arqueología y Antropología, Museo de)
[139]             Assessing Fishtail Projectile Point Distribution in the Southern Cone
This presentation discusses possible causes affecting the distribution of fishtail points in the southern Cone. This distribution is discontinuous, with large
territories without diagnostic remains and areas where sites are concentrated. Also, most of the sites with this type of points exhibit few specimens, with
remarkable exceptions in Uruguay, the Argentinian Pampa, and Patagonia and southern Chile. We will present thoughts arising from long term research in
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                141
a micro region in the Argentinian Pampa. On this ground, the relevance of the following proposals is discussed: 1) sites occupied by early hunter gatherers
do not always include materials that are currently diagnostic of early settlers using fishtail points, 2) the practice of depositing broken fishtail points at one
place leaves other sites without these diagnostic tools and affects our record of their distribution, 3) certain landscapes and particular resources, such as
hills and rocks, were especially attractive for early settlers causing concentrated occupations, 4) some concentrations of sites respond to the history of
research and to modern high population areas with good visibility. It is concluded that the discontinuous distribution observed responds both to the
behavior of the early occupants and to current research history.
Fleischer, Jeffrey [269] see Fenn, Thomas
Fleming, Arlene (World Bank)
[10]              The World Bank’s Approaches To Valuing Cultural Heritage
The World Bank provides loans, credits, and technical assistance to governments of its client countries. The importance and value of cultural heritage on
international, national, and local levels are reflected in the Bank’s investment operations as well as in its Operational Policy 4.11—Physical Cultural
Resources. Investment for cultural heritage has totaled over four billion U.S. dollars in the past two decades. The Bank’s safeguard policy requires that an
Environmental Impact Assessment identify cultural heritage that may be impacted by any development project, as well as the stakeholders who assign
value to the heritage, and that measures for avoidance or damage mitigation be determined and included in the project’s management plan.
Archaeology contributes to local, national, and international economic development in numerous respects, a fact that is gaining increasing attention
through study and analysis. For years, large-scale multi-year excavations provided seasonal wages to local workers and supported community craft
industries, although the revenues were rarely quantified or regarded as local economic development. Archaeological sites, when featured as tourist
attractions, can comprise a lucrative source of revenue for their localities, and for provincial and national governments, as well as for foreign private tourism
operators. Development institutions, with the intent to alleviate poverty and foster community economic development, have encouraged participation by
local inhabitants in maintaining and managing archaeological sites. This emphasis results in efforts to ensure that these populations share in the economic
benefits of tourism and requires that such benefits are monitored, recorded, and evaluated. The presentation focuses on several instances where
archaeological excavation and site management involve participation by local populations, utilizing their knowledge, cultivating skills, and providing income.
Fleming, Edward (Science Museum of Minnesota)
[58]              From Hero Objects to Foam Blocks: Contextualizing the Archaeological Record in Maya: Hidden Worlds Revealed
Maya: Hidden Worlds Revealed is a 10,000- to 15,000-square-foot traveling exhibition created through multi-national, multi-institutional partnerships and
intended to appeal to museum visitors of all ages. The core of the exhibition is a collection of more than 200 stunning and thought-provoking archaeological
artifacts and ethnographic objects from throughout the Maya world. These objects provide visitors opportunities to engage with the authentic Maya past,
the Maya today, and the work of dozens of archaeologists. But, equally important, the exhibition also contains hands-on interactive components, immersive
environments, large- and small-scale models, and compelling storytelling that, when associated with the objects, help to contextualize both Maya culture
and the archaeological process. In this paper, we will explore the development of the exhibition and the methods of display and interpretation used to
contextualize the archaeological record of the Maya.
[58]              Chair
Flemming, Nicholas (National Oceanography Centre UK)
[249]             Discussant
Fletcher, Roland (University of Sydney)
[138]             Water, Weather and the Fallacy of the Rationalist - Romanticism Dichotomy
Angkor, in Cambodia, between the seventh and the thirteenth century depended on the largest urban water management infrastructure of the agrarian
urban world. The key elements of this infrastructure came into being before the global climate transition of the ninth–tenth century C.E. That infrastructure
was vital for coping with the start of the Medieval Warm Phase when other societies around the world experienced severe crises. By the fourteenth century,
some parts of Angkor’s infrastructure were nearly 500 years old and parts of the network had been modified or gone out of use. When the climate transition
to the Little Ice Age began in the thirteenth– fourteenth centuries, the network was hit by repeated extremes of water flow due to mega-monsoons that it
was not built to handle. A post-processual/contextualist (Romanticist) viewpoint is essential for trying to understand why the Khmer did what they did. A
processual (Rationalist) viewpoint is essential for understanding the outcomes of what they did relative to the circumstances. The theoretical disputes of
the previous quarter of century in Archaeology have been a futile misapprehension of the multi-scalar characteristics of cultural evolution.
Flood, John (Department of Anthropology, Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis), Seth Grooms (Department of Anthropology,
University of North Ca), Matthew Pike (Department of Anthropology, Purdue University), Edward Herrmann (Department of Geological Sciences,
Indiana Univers) and Jeremy Wilson (Department of Anthropology, Indiana University Pur)
[111]             Fortifications in the Eastern Woodlands of Pre-Columbian North America: An Examination of Organized Warfare during the Mississippian
                  Period
The prevalence and ubiquity of warfare have long been recognized by scholars studying the Mississippian Era in the eastern Woodlands. These data point
to a culture(s) that often found itself in periods of conflict between competing regional polities, which is reflected in skeletal trauma rates, fortified
settlements, and conflagrated villages. Our collective understanding of the geopolitical interactions and causes for this strife is subject to substantial
interpretation and debate, rendering the topic suitable for additional exploration. Likewise, archaeologists have infrequently focused on how Mississippian
warfare was conducted with relatively unorganized raiding, often invoked as a plausible scenario.
In this study, we examine the protohistoric accounts, ethnographic data on small-scale warfare, geophysical and archaeological data for fortifications, and
the prevalence and patterning of warfare-related skeletal trauma to better define the organizational nature of both aggressors and defenders within and
around Mississippian period villages. Building upon our research during Indiana University’s 2015 NSF REU program at Lawrenz Gun Club (11Cs4), a
heavily fortified community in the Illinois Valley, we examine the likelihood that smaller raiding parties could have effectively breached larger palisades with
bastions spaced at regular intervals.
Flores, Jodi [10] see McManamon, Francis
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 142
Flores, Paola Michel (Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla)
[136]            La culpa es de Kirchhoff: Un análisis en torno a Mesoamérica como categoría geohistórica
El concepto “Mesoamérica” ha fungido como una herramienta útil que permite ordenar el amplio corpus de datos y materiales recuperados con suficiente
coherencia y bajo un lenguaje común; no obstante, es posible afirmar que la Mesoamérica que definió Kirchhoff se ha desbordado en múltiples
dimensiones, arrastrando consigo problemáticas en torno a la definición territorial, cronológica y conceptual, que varios autores se han esforzado por
subsanar. En ese sentido, es conveniente cuestionarse y repensar desde las pautas epistemológicas bajo las cuales nos está guiando, la clase de
conocimientos que generan y la manera en que éstos quedan demarcados en un modelo hasta cierto punto rígido.
Se propone pues, hacer un análisis crítico que derive en una propuesta distinta, tanto de la demarcación territorial que hasta ahora ha definido subáreas y
trazado líneas fronterizas fluctuantes; como de la cronológica que contempla tres grandes períodos dentro de los cuales se insertan las particularidades
regionales; esperando suscitar el debate, formular más preguntas y plantear nuevas críticas en torno al concepto bajo el cual se ha desplegado la
Arqueología Mexicana.
Flores-Fernandez, Carola (UCSB), Diego Salazar (Universidad de Chile), Laura Olguín (Universidad Católica del Norte, Chile), Gabriel Vargas
(Universidad de Chile) and Camila Arenas (Universidad de Chile)
[139]            Early Coastal Occupations in Taltal, Southern Atacama Desert, Chile
In this presentation, we will discuss recent results on the historical trajectory of hunter-gatherer-fishers from the coast of Taltal, southern Atacama Desert,
Chile. We will focus on the Early Holocene Period (around ca. 11.500–10.000 cal B.P.) which includes several logistical occupations in rock-shelters and
an open-air pigment mine. Our research aims to understand geographical and climatic conditions during the early human occupation of the area and its
relation to human mobility and subsistence. As the sea level during the Early Holocene was below present coastline, the understanding of human
occupation during this time also included the reconstruction of pale-shorelines and underwater surveys to identify currently submerged residential sites.
Flynn, Erin (PAL) and Dianna Doucette (PAL)
[42]             An Illustrative Case Study for an Archaic House Structure in Southern New England: Insights from the Halls Swamp Site and Beyond
The Halls Swamp Site represents an Archaic and Woodland Period multi-component Native American occupation in Kingston, Plymouth County,
Massachusetts. Excavation of just 2 percent of the Halls Swamp Site yielded over 24,000 artifacts and 78 cultural features, including evidence of an
Archaic Period house structure. Archaic Period dwellings have largely gone unnoticed in southern New England due to poor preservation conditions and
the ephemeral nature of these features. However, a concentration of post molds, pit features, and fire hearths uncovered at the Halls Swamp Site
characterize attributes associated with the few Native American subterranean dwellings reported from Massachusetts and Connecticut, as well as outside
of New England. Spatial distribution analysis and radiocarbon data are used to reconstruct the habitation activity at the Halls Swamp Site and contribute to
our recognition and understanding of Archaic Period house structures in southern New England.
Foias, Antonia [26] see Moriarty, Matthew
Foias, Antonia (Williams College) and Kitty Emery (Florida Museum of Natural History, University of F)
[291]            Power and Polity in the Motul de San José Zone: Recent Research at Kantet’u’ul and Chachaklu’um
Motul de San José dominated a swath of the northern shore of Lake Peten Itza in central Peten, Guatemala, during the Late Classic. Recent excavations
at two small sites in the periphery of Motul de San José, Kante’t’u’ul (approx. 3km northwest) and Chachacklu’um (approx. 5km east) investigated the
relations between these secondary centers and their political overlords at Motul de San José. The divergent cultural histories, settlement patterns,
architecture, and material culture of these two minor centers will be compared to reflect on the means of control and strategies of power used by Motul de
San José at its apogee during the eighth century A.D.
Folan, William (Univ. Autónoma de Campeche), Joel Gunn (University of North Carolina, Greensboro) and Ma. del Rosario Dominguez (Univ.
Autonoma de Campeche)
[179]            Calakmul, Campeche: Its Comings and Goings in a Market Economy
This paper covers, in detail, the principal characteristics of Structure II in Calakmul including its architecture, artifacts, and associated activities.
Folan, William J. [179] see Poot, Paulina
Follensbee, Billie (Missouri State University), Allison Robbins (Missouri State University), Sammie Hernandez (Missouri State University),
Alexandra Thrower (Missouri State University) and Nicholas Deckard (Missouri State University)
[216]            Block Busters: What Systematic Replication Studies Reveal about Hypotheses on the Iron Ore Cubes
Among the most enigmatic artifacts to emerge from Formative Period Gulf Coast deposits are thousands of small, roughly rectangular cubes of iron ore
that are perforated in a consistent, t-shaped pattern. Numerous hypotheses have been suggested for the function and meaning of these artifacts, including
that they may have served as beads that were strung together as helmet decorations; as objects that were strung together to serve as a sort of armor or
mail; as tiny hammers for chipping obsidian; as tokens or as some kind of currency; as an amulet or a charm; as small mirrored pendants; as weights for
fishing nets; as caps for bow drills or fire drills; as atlatl weights; as whistles; or as a type of bull-roarer noise maker. Scholars have reached no general
consensus, however, on the most sound nor the most probable hypotheses. This presentation will discuss how recent systematic replication studies
conducted by my students and I have revealed which of these hypotheses stand up to close scrutiny.
Fonseca Santa Cruz, Javier [198] see Bauer, Brian
Fontes, Lisa (University of New Mexico)
[170]            Passage through a Palimpsest: Lower Magdalenian Lithic Manufacture and Maintenance Patterns in El Mirón Cave, Cantabria, Spain
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              143
El Mirón cave, a major Upper Paleolithic residential site in Cantabria, Spain, has been the subject of long-term excavations led in part by Lawrence Straus.
This presentation focuses on Level 17, a significant Lower Magdalenian deposit excavated in the cave’s outer vestibule. Level 17, which is a total of 33 cm
thick, was divided into 13 sublevels that were created using correlations made between depth measurements taken during the excavation in each square
meter of the 9.5 square meter area. Each sublevel is ~3 cm thick, and allows for heuristic comparisons of spatial changes in activities in the cave. This
presentation uses lithic microdebitage to evaluate temporal shifts in Lower Magdalenian lithic manufacture and maintenance areas. These microdebitage,
all <1 cm trimming flakes and shatter, were likely compressed in situ during occupations, signaling areas where flintknappers maintained and manufactured
lithic artifacts, respectively. Results indicate that during some occupations, manufacture and maintenance were tightly clustered within a single area in the
outer vestibule, while during others they were located in distinct zones. These trends may relate to the site being abandoned, reused, and modified as new
hunter-gatherer groups entered the site and adjusted its features over the c. 2000 year Lower Magdalenian Period.
[170]               Chair
Foor, Thomas [171] see Prentiss, Anna
Ford, Anabel (UCSB)
[71]                Archaeological Commitment to Participation: Discovering the Local to International El Pilar Community
The El Pilar community is dynamic and includes the most proximal villages, the general communities of Cayo and Peten, the nations of Belize and
Guatemala, and from there the greater international community interested in the culture and nature of the tropics. From its first archaeological recognition
in the 1980s, El Pilar was destined to play a role in the conservation and development of the Maya forest. Large and imposing, with monuments straddling
the political line that separates Belize and Guatemala, there is a complex relationship locally linked and nationally divided, yet integrated in the appreciation
and value of the Maya forest and ancient culture. Creating challenges and potentials over the past three decades, work at El Pilar is now a local household
word with community outreach through primary schools and village organizations, recognized for a unique brand of tourism that unites traditional Maya
farmers and ancient Maya settlement patterns, and for the international exploration of solutions past impacting a path to sustainable conservation and
development.
Ford, Ben [90] see Napoleon, Taylor
Ford, Ben (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[90]                The Lake Oneida Durham Boat: A Previously Unrecorded Vessel Type
A shipwreck recently discovered in Lake Oneida, NY, and recorded by a team of professional and amateur archaeologists, appears to be the remains of an
early nineteenth-century Durham boat. Durham boats plied the inland waters of the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic during the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, offering an efficient means to transport bulk cargoes during the pre-canal era. While no archaeological example of a Durham boat has been
previously identified, this shipwreck closely matches all available historical descriptions. The size, shape, and layout of the vessel all suggest that this is the
first archaeologically reported example of a Durham boat. The details of this find offer important information about early Euro-American trade and
commerce.
Forde, Jamie [15] see Dupey, Elodie
Forde, Jamie
[135]               Volcanic Glass and Iron Nails: Shifting Networks of Exchange at Postclassic and Colonial Achiutla, Oaxaca, Mexico
In this paper, I present data from recent excavations at the highland Mixtec site of Achiutla, Oaxaca, Mexico, to shed light on how indigenous residents
there negotiated changes and continuities in exchange relationships from the Postclassic (A.D. 900–1521) to Early Colonial (A.D. 1521–1650) periods.
Various lines of evidence demonstrate that Achiutla had significant economic ties to both the Basin of Mexico and the Oaxaca Coast, and that the site was
an important locus along trade routes between the two regions. The site may not only have attracted travellers due to its geographic location, but also
through its status as a center of prehispanic religious pilgrimage.
 Ethnohistorical data indicate that residents of Achiutla acquired significant quantities of goods from the coastal lowlands, while excavations have revealed
the presence of a large obsidian workshop there, primarily utilizing material imported from Pachuca. I argue that Achiutla utilized its geographic position
and political ties to play an important intermediary role in facilitating highland and lowland exchange. Further, this continued into the Colonial Period
despite historical rupture, as data from domestic middens show that natives continued to acquire and manufacture Pachuca obsidian, despite also having
access to metal cutting tools introduced by the Spanish.
[135]               Chair
Fornaciari, Antonio [147] see Stewart, Marissa
Forton, Maxwell (Binghamton University)
[268]               Petroglyphs of East Tank Mesa and the Mac Stod Great House: Using Rock Art to Gauge Regional Influences in Petrified Forest National
                    Park
East Tank Mesa is a prominent landform located within the new expansion lands of Petrified Forest National Park: harboring a high concentration of Pueblo
II-Pueblo III petroglyph panels and one of the region’s few possible Chacoan outliers. This possible outlier is the Mac Stod site: a seven-room pueblo
possessing some of the hallmarks of Chacoan architecture (core veneer masonry, large rooms, long straight walls, and well constructed rectangular
doorways). The nature of Mac Stod, and whether it truly is a great house outlier, remains unclear though. This uncertainty was addressed through a survey
of East Tank Mesa’s rock art panels and comparing the depicted elements to panels found throughout the rest of the park and the greater southwest. By
understanding what regional influences are represented in the mesa’s rock art, we may begin to gauge whether the Mac Stod site was ingrained within
locally focused systems of interaction or may represent an expansion of Chacoan influence. Ultimately this project will contribute new data on the rock art
within Petrified Forest National Park, enhance our knowledge of one of the park’s few possible Chacoan sites, and advance our understanding of this
region’s relationship with the peoples of the greater southwest.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                144
Foster, Cheryl
[235]             Garden Soils: Assessing the Viability of Soil Phosphate Analysis in the Archaeological Identification of Ancient Maya Kitchen Gardens
The study of ancient Maya intensive, intra-site agricultural systems has gained new interest in recent years as a valuable way of interpreting numerous
aspects of the ancient Maya’s daily life. However, ancient kitchen gardens, specifically, are usually difficult to identify by traditional archaeological
techniques because of their lack of architectural structures and other identifying features. To compensate for this, Phosphate analyses are being used to
positively identify kitchen gardens that are invisible to standard archaeological techniques. The general archaeological community trusts these methods to
be a reliable way of testing soils in archaeological sites for specific agricultural features, even though there has been little research conducted to
conclusively prove this assertion. In response to this lack of research, this project investigates the viability of Phosphate analysis. This will be determined
by a comprehensive literary review of previous and current research and an analysis of the data presented within them. While Phosphate testing has been
used to identify general agricultural features, the chemical signatures produced from these methods only give vague information about the soil and what
was done to it, making them unreliable to definitively discern a kitchen garden, which was used for specific agricultural purposes.
Fóthi, Erzsébet [147] see Gugora, Ariana
Fouéré, Pierrick [220] see Bonnissent, Dominique
Fowler, William (Vanderbilt University) and Raquel López Rodríguez (Universidad Tecnológica de El Salvador)
[32]              A Thousand Years after the Volcano Erupted: TBJ Deposits and Use at Ciudad Vieja, El Salvador
The impact of the eruption of Ilopango Volcano in the early sixth century A.D. has been a focus of Payson Sheets' research for more than four decades.
The signature of this eruption is the distinctive "tierra blanca joven" (TBJ) layer found at sites in central and western El Salvador. Our excavations in 2013–
15 at Ciudad Vieja, the archaeological remains of the Conquest Period town of San Salvador, have allowed us to identify a hitherto unknown site in the
distribution of TBJ tephra. In some parts of the site, construction dating to 1528–1545 rests directly on eroded deposits of TBJ that fell about 1,000 years
earlier. In other loci, redeposited TBJ was incorporated as part of the construction fill of architectural deposits, and it was an element in the construction of
adobe and rammed earth walls. Modern brick makers in the region use TBJ as tempering material for fired clay bricks.
Fowler, Jeremy and Melissa Vogel (Clemson University)
[207]             Geochemical Evidence for Pigment Sources from El Purgatorio, Peru
Portable X-ray fluorescence was used to analyze raw pigments as well as paints on ceramics and adobes found at El Purgatorio, the capital city of the
Casma state. This analysis showed that, in addition to the common red ochre found in the area, cinnabar was also present. This mercurial compound has a
distinctive fluorescence and is not common to the area, supporting Casma participation in long distance exchange networks. Further analyses showed
manganese present in black paints and calcium in the white paints. Manganese Dioxide has been used in black pigments for millennia. Calcium was
present in all of the white paints on ceramics, supporting visual observations that the coastal polity was probably grinding marine shells into temper to
make the paste and paints. Pigment and paint production has not been well-studied and this non-destructive analysis has helped to illuminate more about
these processes in the Casma state.
Fowles, Severin (Barnard College, Columbia University)
[18]              Discussant
Fox, Amy (University of Toronto)
[39]              Stone Tools from the Outside: Correlating Object Mass and Shape
This poster describes a novel high-resolution 3D geometric morphometric outline method that is able to describe object shape in great detail. Elliptical
Fourier spherical harmonics—SPHARM—quantifies the shape of an object by producing values for the elliptical Fourier harmonic formula over multiple
iterations of the object’s surface. This technique is applied to a series of handaxes from Wonderwerk Cave, South Africa, and the data is correlated with the
volumetric research of Riddle and Chazan (2014) to ascertain the relationship between handaxe shape and mass within this particular sample. Their radial
point distribution (RPD) method uses 3D point-cloud data placed within a digitized 3D handaxe object and calculates the distribution of points within ever-
expanding spherical shells based off the object’s centroid. Both SPHARM and RPD are size-invariant metrics and as such they are complimentary
methodologies. The results of this study demonstrate that different shapes of object can produce comparable mass distributions, an important revelation
when studying typology. This poster describes how non-traditional metrics can explore the various ways that humans and objects can interface, and how
these ideas are necessary components of a holistic typology.
Fox, Georgia L. [100] see Wells, E. Christian
Fox, Steve, Claire Ebert and Jaime Awe
[237]             ering the Past: Analysis and Interpretation of a Terminal Classic Deposit at the Cahal Pech Terminus Group
The Terminal Classic (A.D. 750–900/1000) Maya “collapse” remains one of the least understood and most debated aspects in Maya archaeology. One
characteristic feature of Terminal Classic contexts in the Belize Valley are large surficial ceramic deposits and are located in the corners of plazas, in front
of stairs, and in the doorways of public architecture. These types of terminal deposits have been attributed to numerous activities including termination
rituals, feasting events, refuse disposal in middens, or reoccupation by “squatters.” We compare the location, composition, and interpretations of terminal
deposits excavated at eight Maya sites in the Belize Valley. We use this comparison to analyze the function of a large terminal deposit excavated at the
Zopilote Group, a terminus group connected to major Belize Valley polity of Cahal Pech. Based on the presence of ritually significant artifacts recovered
from the deposit, as well as the close proximity to monumental architecture containing elite burials, we suggest that the Zopilote terminal deposit functioned
as a place of ancestral worship after the site was abandoned. Comparison to ethnohistoric documentation of ritual acts of ancestor remembrance
performed by the Lacandon Maya may provide a modern correlate with this archaeological interpretation.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             145
Frachetti, Michael [134] see Hermes, Taylor
Fradkin, Arlene [7] see Rock, Carolyn
Frahm, Ellery [214] see Monnier, Gilliane
Frampton, Sam (Yale University)
[283]             Stringing it Together: An Examination of Shell and Stone Beads at Panquilma
The presences of different type of artifacts, especially shell and stone beads, have often been used to discuss these inter-regional trade networks. In this
paper, I will discuss and try to identify some of these regional networks and the importance of exchange within these local networks. I examine whether
elaborate grave goods are displays of wealth or whether they might represent ritual paraphernalia. I discuss the nature of incipient status inequality.
Franchetti, Fernado F. [207] see Otaola, Clara
Franchetti, Fernando, Clara Otaola (IMHICIHU-CONICET Buenos Aires, Argentina) and Miguel Giardina (Natural History Museum of San Rafael.
Argentina. I)
[255]             Human Biogeography in the Diamante Valley, (Central Western Argentina): Integrating Different Data in a New Research Design
The archaeology from the Diamante River Valley, located in Mendoza, Argentina, has been carried out since the beginning of the seventies. The
information generated along these years was oriented in several study programs and was motivated by diverse research questions. Different kinds of
surveys were done and very few data was published. Most of the archaeological information we have nowadays from this Valley comes from excavations
using old techniques, some modern excavations, and from distributional surveys within cultural resource management projects.
The main objective is to improve our knowledge about human biogeography in this ecologically diverse area. We present a random sampling design for the
Diamante Valley, where three areas located in the highlands, the piedmont, and the lowlands were selected. The aim is to test differences and variability in
the use of the space and resources. In this paper, we will focus on our first challenge of this research program: integrating the background information we
compiled from previous archaeological investigations with the methodological approach we developed in our own distributional surveys.
Francisco Curate, Francisco [49] see Umbelino, Cláudia
Franciscus, Robert [181] see Daniel, Chloe
Franco, Nora (CONICET-UBA), Víctor Durán (CONICET - Laboratorio de Paleoecología Humana/UNCu), Valeria Cortegoso (CONICET -
Laboratorio de Paleoecología Humana/UNCu) and Gustavo Lucero (Laboratorio de Paleoecología Humana/UNCu)
[139]             Human Ranking of Spaces and the Role of Caches: Case Studies from the South of Patagonia (Argentina)
Storage of artifacts is a common behavior among hunter-gatherers. Archaeologically, caches have been identified in different places. In this paper, we
focus on the discussion of the role of caches recovered in two different environments in southern Patagonia: the southern end of the Deseado Massif and
the upper Santa Cruz river basin. In the first case, two caches, attributed to the colonization of this environment have been identified, while in the second
case, the cache recovered would correspond to the effective occupation of this area. Cache information is integrated into the known archaeological record
of both spaces and the ones located close to them and compared with data on raw material availability. Available paleoenvironmental information, dealing
with the existence of arid periods, is also taken into account. This study is framed on GIS least-cost models for human circulation, which are used in order
to model and study mobility patterns in heterogeneous landscapes. Information obtained allows us to discuss selection criteria used by hunter-gatherers
during different moments of peopling of these environments.
Francozo, Mariana (Leiden University)
[141]             Caribbean Archaeological Collections in European Museums: An Overview
This presentation will discuss the partial results of the research project “Caribbean Collections at European Museums: Historical Processes and
Contemporary Practices,” carried out in collaboration with André Delpuech (Musée du quai Branly). The project is part of the ERC-Synergy project
NEXUS1492: New World Encounters in a Globalizing World. Although there is a wealth of scientific literature on Caribbean pre-colonial art, so far there is
no comprehensive catalogue or inventory of archaeological Caribbean collections in Europe. Therefore, this project aims at identifying such collections and
understanding the collecting, spreading, and presentation of Caribbean archaeology in Europe. This presentation will give an overview of such collections
located so far in public and private museums in the Netherlands, Belgium, United Kingdom, Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Spain, and Portugal. They
include assemblages large and small, from the well-known ‘Taíno’ historical masterpieces to unknown collections excavated by geologists in the Lesser
Antilles counting hundreds of shards and fragments. The aim of this presentation is to provide empirical data from which we can derive broader theoretical
questions about the history of archaeology as well as the role of museums in the ownership and conservation of archaeological heritage, in particular in
regards to the Caribbean.
[141]             Chair
Franklin, Jay D. [137] see Shreve, Nathan
Franklin, Jay, Jean-Philippe Rigaud (Bordeaux, France), Jan Simek (University of Tennessee ), Lucinda Langston (Bureau of Land Management,
Elko, Nevada) and Frédéric Surmely (Ministère de la Culture DRAC Auvergne/SRA)
[278]             A Techno-morphological Analysis of Gravettian Stone Tools from La Grotte Seize and La Ferrassie, Dordogne, France
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                146
The Gravettian cultural sequence has become of greater interest to Paleolithic scholars now that the relationships of previous industries have been sorted
out. Our focus here is on Gravettian truncated elements. Morpho-typology suggests that this tool type is a recycled, broken Gravette point. We suggest that
truncated elements were deliberately produced tools used as different armatures than Gravette points based on techno-morphological differences. We
suggest that truncated elements were part of a predetermined composite tool hunting technology. We examine this idea through a series of morphometric
measurements and discriminant analysis.
Frankum, Cheryl (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[36]              “How Non-Destructive is XRF: Testing Sample Preparation Techniques for Redware”
Can XRF accurately detect the chemical composition of ceramics using non-destructive sample preparation techniques? This study looks at the reliability
of the Innov-X Delta XRF unit in detecting the chemical composition of earthenware ceramics through three different sample preparation methods. While
there are growing interests in using XRF analysis for various ceramic studies, this research question examines whether different testing strategies will
produce different results. This experiment studies 16 pieces of redware collected from an eighteenth century site, Historic Hanna’s Town near Greensburg,
Pennsylvania, by first testing the clean surface of the artifact, then with a slightly abraded surface, and lastly, as pressed pellets. The results will be applied
to a larger study of redware from the site with the goal of determining if the redware was locally produced.
Frazier, Mechell (Arizona State University)
[66]              Variations in Connectivity: Mapping Long-distance Interaction in the Prehistoric U.S. Southwest
Changes documented from the pre-Classic to Classic Period (A.D. 475–1450) suggest that a larger social or political movement was occurring within the
Hohokam regional system, but the motives behind this change are poorly understood. To fully understand this phenomenon, it is necessary to examine
how the change differed within the Hohokam regional system. Researchers can observe this relationship through the study of what Nelson (2006:345) calls
“interaction markers,” artifacts, and architectural styles that incorporate a Mesoamerican element (e.g., copper bells, macaws, ballcourts).These markers
are present in both the Phoenix and Tucson regions but appear in different proportions, possibly relating to social relationships, the organization of trade
networks, or political organization. This research compares the presence of Mesoamerican interaction markers at archaeological sites in the Phoenix and
Tucson basins, and estimates the costs of transporting the markers to the respective regions. It is not well understood how interaction and connectivity with
other regions, such as north Mexico, changed during this time. Comparing the patterning of interaction markers between the Phoenix and Tucson basins is
a useful starting point in understanding the degree of Mesoamerican integration over the Hohokam sequence.
Frederick, Charles [168] see Chavez, Christina
Freedline, Joshua (Brandeis University) and Joanne Baron (University of Pennsylvania)
[88]              La Florida/Namaan: Investigating a Loci of Politico-Economic Influence in the Classic Maya World
Located on one of the central embankments of El Rio San Pedro Martir, the Classic Maya polity of La Florida (Namaan) is situated between prominent
polities of this period (250–909 A.D.). These polities include Piedras Negras, Pomona, and El Peru (Waka), all of which La Florida seems to have had
positive trade relations with. During the 2015 field season as part of El Proyecto Arqueologíco La Florida, directed by Dr. Joanne Baron, I preliminarily
investigated the view sheds between structures along this embankment of the San Pedro. At the summits of five different structures in the 'El Naranjo'
central acropolis of La Florida, I was able to view major tracts of land and monuments on the other side of the river. In this presentation, I will use view
shed analysis from the tops of structures via arcGIS to portray La Florida as a type of trade loch on El Rio San Pedro Martir. What motivated the residents
of La Florida to construct their city in such a manner? Did other polities have economic or political investments at La Florida such that they used this polity
as a type of trade checkpoint?
Freeman, Jessica (Seminole Tribe of Florida - Tribal Historic Preservation Office)
[29]              Seminole Cowboys: From Cowkeeper to Today
Cattle herding is not new to the Seminoles. It is a centuries old way of life that is embedded into their cultural heritage. This tradition began in the 1700s in
the Alachua prairies of north Florida under the leader Cowkeeper and has continued into modern day on the Seminole Tribe of Florida (STOF)
Reservations. The STOF Tribal Historic Preservation Office (THPO) is currently investigating several early twentieth century sites related to the formation
of the Seminole cattle program, including the Charlie Micco Camp, the Morgan Smith Camp, and Marsh Pens. With little archaeological material recovered
from these sites, our ability to document them demonstrates how consultation with Tribal members is essential to understanding these sites and their
importance.
[29]              Chair
Freeman, Jessica [29] see Mahoney, Maureen
Freeman , Mark [84] see Dennison, Meagan
Freer-Waters, Rachel [63] see Gearty, Erin
Freidel, David (Washington University in St. Louis)
[138]             Water Mountains and Water Trails: The View from Northwest Peten
Vernon Scarborough’s path-breaking work on lowland Maya water management has focused attention on the way that the Maya conceptualized and
utilized landscape and its water sources for political, religious, and economic purposes. Research in northwestern Peten suggests that canoe traffic linked
the site of El Achiotal adjacent to the Central Karstic Uplands to the San Pedro Martir River by way of the San Juan River commanded by El Peru-Waka’.
The Mirador hill at Waka’ was conceived as a water mountain expressing dominion over the surrounding water trails. Control of Waka’ and its water trails
was contested by regional hegemons during the Classic Period. We review the evidence.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             147
[59]              Discussant
[26]              Chair
Freiwald, Carolyn [86] see Patterson, Erin
Freiwald, Carolyn (University of Mississippi) and Timothy Pugh (Queens College-CUNY)
[100]             Strontium Isotope Values for Early Colonial Cows at San Bernabe, A Spanish Mission in the Peten Lakes Region of Guatemala
The earliest Spanish explorers in the fifteenth century brought ships stocked with European domesticated animals. Yet for nearly two centuries, the Maya
living in Guatemala’s Peten Lakes region continued to rely on traditional wild animal species. A small number of cow and horse bones have been identified
in Contact Period contexts at Zacpeten and Tayasal, but significant changes in animal use are only visible after the Spanish began to build missions in the
region during the early 1700s. We explore the introduction of cows, pigs, and horses to the region at the San Bernabe mission near Tayasal. Strontium
isotope values provide information on where these animals were acquired, and zooarchaeological analysis provides information on animal rearing and
butchery practices, as well as access to the new species by different groups residing at the site. Examination of the San Bernabe faunal assemblage
shows a continued reliance on lacustrine resources such as turtles and snails, though other data suggest a marked change in diet. We examine the
potential impact of this new lifestyle on land use, farming, and even the health of the regional population.
French, Katherine (New York University)
[161]             A Multiscalar Approach to Medieval Animal Cremains: From Bone Microstructure to Multiregional Trends
Variability is a defining characteristic of early medieval pagan mortuary practice. Groups may have buried individual decedents in myriad ways, all falling
under the definition of ‘pagan.’ When the variability of a specific ritual practice is compared at the community rather than individual level, however, then
local and regional trends emerge. One such ritual practice is the incorporation of animals into human cremations—a practice common in terminal Iron Age
and early medieval mortuary contexts across northwestern Europe. This paper examines the prevalence of animal deposits in Early Saxon (450–650 A.D.)
cremations, and suggests that “communities of ritual practice” who cremated and buried their dead in this manner can be identified on multiple scales, from
the intracemetery to the interregional. Previous studies demonstrated the likelihood of these communities, although geographically limited to East Anglia,
Lincolnshire, and Yorkshire. Using advanced cremation analysis techniques, in particular histological methods developed for the identification of small bone
fragments, new data suggest that approximately one in five burials contained commingled animal remains in Early Saxon cremation cemeteries across
England, suggesting highly structured communities of ritual practice. Future research will expand beyond Britain to identify related “communities of ritual
practice” on a broader scale.
French, Kirk (Pennsylvania State University)
[162]             The Flow of Knowledge: Ancient Water Systems and Mentorscapes
From his initial doctoral work at Cerros in the late 1970s to his most recent investigations in Tikal, Vernon Scarborough’s research goals have consistently
used water control as an instrument to better understand social complexity. His research has spanned a period of our own history when more sustainable
approaches to growth are desperately needed as access to water is of an ever increasing concern. As his student, now colleague, this paper will highlight
how Vernon Scarborough and his work has shaped and influenced my own research into water management and sustainability at Palenque, Tikal, and the
Teotihuacan Valley.
[250]             Discussant
French, Kirk [235] see Hermitt, Elijah
Freund, Kyle (Indian River State College), Craig Alexander (University of Cambridge), Robert Tykot (University of South Florida), Keri Brown
(University of Manchester) and Italo Muntoni (Soprintendenza Archeologia della Puglia)
[146]             A Network-based Approach to the Study of Neolithic Pottery Production in the Tavoliere (Apulia, Italy)
The Tavoliere has one of the densest concentrations of Neolithic settlement in Europe and is known for its wide repertoire of pottery styles. Using network
analysis techniques, this study explores Neolithic pottery production in the region by integrating typological analysis with petrography and elemental
characterization using portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) spectrometry. In doing so, we reveal sets of choices made at multiple stages of the production
processes and in turn shed light on the cultural and socio-economic relationships that underpinned these communities of practice.
During the summers of 2013–2015, our team systematically surveyed 28 sites for cultural resources, which included the collection of ceramic and lithic
finds from the surfaces of known Neolithic sites. We also collected 75 geological clay samples from major river valleys throughout the Tavoliere to
distinguish possible sources of ancient raw materials.
Using these data, network analysis was undertaken to identify the strengths of inter-site relationships based on comparisons of the relative proportions of
ware types and their corresponding geological sources. The results indicate that raw material procurement is patterned in different ways when compared
with the distribution of ware types. Moreover, there are distinct differences in the distribution of the major ware types across space.
Friedel, Rebecca
[270]             Ancient Maya Plant Use In the Mopan River Valley, Belize
The Mopan River Valley was home to a number of prehispanic Maya polities, including both political centers and rural communities. The forests and plant
products grown in the region played crucial roles in the lifeways of these Maya, providing food, fuel, construction materials, and medicine. This paper
presents preliminary results from the analysis of macrobotanical remains recovered through flotation by the Mopan Valley Archaeological Project and
Mopan Valley Preclassic Project. These plant remains come from both monumental centers like Xunantunich and Buenavista del Cayo, and rural
settlements like San Lorenzo. They derive from a variety of archaeological contexts, including commoner and elite residences and public ritual areas.
Temporally, the samples span various important transformations in the valley’s social history including the development of complexity during the Preclassic
Period, the political florescence during the Late Classic Period, and the collapse of divine kingship associated with a large-scale depopulation of the area in
the Terminal Classic Period. The results will be discussed in terms of what they reveal about elite and commoner lifeways and broader sociopolitical
dynamics.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              148
Friedl, Alex [6] see Sherwood, Sarah
Friel, Robert [210] see Bond, Julie
Froese, Tom (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México) and Linda Manzanilla (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México)
[129]             A Network Theoretical Analysis of the Emergence of Co-Rulership in Ancient Teotihuacan, Central Mexico
The political organization of Teotihuacan continues to be unknown. While some researchers see evidence for a powerful centralized hierarchy, others
argue for a more collective form of government. We created an abstract computer model of hypothetical social relations among neighborhood-level
representatives to show that such a distributed political network could in principle have been sufficient for globally optimal decision making, as long as
there are community rituals and sections of the city that are not too independent (Froese, Gershenson and Manzanilla 2014). These conditions were most
likely satisfied during the early periods of the city. However, there is evidence that during the final stages, some neighborhood centers become more
isolated and independent, and the city as a whole became organized into four districts. Our model suggests that such social fractioning would have
undermined a purely horizontally organized collective government. But Manzanilla has hypothesized that four co-rulers governed the city at the district level
during this period. We therefore introduced this hierarchical level into our model to verify if such a mixed organization could have addressed some of the
issues associated with a fractioning of the underlying social system. We discuss our modeling results in the context of archeological evidence.
Fruhlinger, Jake (Idaho National Guard)
[73]              Moderator
Fulkerson, Tiffany (Washington State University)
[39]              Engendering the Archaeological Record of the Southern Plateau, Northwestern North America
Within the last 30 years, researchers have made considerable advances in the effort to engender the archaeological record in areas of northwestern North
America. Despite these developments, archaeological considerations of gender in the southern Plateau remain markedly sparse; rather, studies in the
region tend to focus on human-environmental interactions and subsistence, settlement, and technological systems. This study aims to address the relative
scarcity of explicit and systematic approaches to archaeological inquiries into gender in the Pre-Contact Period of the southern Plateau and, specifically,
approaches which center on women. Studies addressing gender and sex in the archaeological record of the Plateau, Great Basin, and Northwest Coast
are reviewed in order to assess current theoretical and methodological frameworks that have been published in peer-reviewed and gray literature.
Ethnographic records are reviewed in order to identify female-based activities and the material objects, features, and spatial organizations that are
associated with these behaviors. For example, digging sticks/digging stick handles, basketry/matting/woven textiles, needles, ground stone tools,
menstrual hut features and camas ovens, and macro-and micro-botanical remains offer potential avenues for exploring issues of gender identity and
divisions of labor in the southern Plateau.
Fuller, Dorian Q [106] see Qin, Ling
Fulton, Albert and Catherine Yansa (Michigan State University)
[90]              Historic Native American Impacts on a Temperate Forested Ecosystem, Northeastern U.S.A.
We quantified the nature and extent of Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) disturbance on the forests of the Finger Lakes region, west-central New York, U.S.A.,
through multivariate statistical analysis of witness trees and survey line vegetation descriptions derived from original late eighteenth century C.E. land
survey records and historical documentation in conjunction with archaeological site distributions analyzed in a geographic information system (GIS).
Detrended correspondence analysis (DCA) ordinated the regional vegetation along a primary successional gradient associated with proximity to
Haudenosaunee agricultural settlements. Furthermore, logistic regression indicated that proximity to aboriginal settlements was the most statistically
significant predictor for the distribution of mast, early-successional, and disturbance-related taxa in the pre-Euro-American settlement forests among a
variety of climatic and topographic predictors. We hypothesize that sustained anthropogenic vegetation disturbance—primarily in the form of forest
clearance, vegetation burning, and selective mast tree cultivation—during and prior to the Historic Period (1600–1800 C.E.) was responsible for the
conversion of a portion of the Finger Lakes region’s late-successional forests into distinct successional communities associated with agricultural and
silvicultural subsistence activities.
Fulton, Kara (University of South Florida)
[120]             Geochemical Analysis of Maya Commoner Houses and the Spaces in between at Actuncan, Belize
This research considers commoner activity patterns by investigating the results of a geochemical analysis of 500+ samples from earthen surfaces at
Actuncan, a prehispanic Maya city located in western Belize. Samples derive from Terminal Classic surfaces of commoner houses as well as the open
spaces surrounding them. Archaeological research has often focused on areas that contain visible architecture, since those regions are most easily
recognizable as places that contained ancient activity, while neglecting the open spaces between. When ancient use of open spaces is considered, most
researchers have focused their investigative efforts towards the exploration of formalized patios and plazas. However, less effort has been devoted to non–
formalized space, such as the areas between residences, particularly open areas surrounding commoner houses. With the advent of modern methods,
such as soil chemical residue analysis, these open spaces can be investigated in new ways in an attempt to explore how ancient people used architecture–
free zones in comparison to architectural areas. Results of this research show that residents of the sample area actively engaged with not only
architecturally defined spaces, but also with the interstitial spaces in between. Further, activities conducted in these spaces appear to have been distinct.
Fulton, Kara A. [125] see LeCount, Lisa
Funk, Caroline [124] see Taivalkoski, Ariel
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            149
Fusco, Ugo [80] see Moses, Victoria
Fyfe , Ralph [218] see Griffiths, Seren
Gadison, Davette (Tulane University), Brittany Hundman (Georgia State University), Dan Jones (Georgia State University) and Nicola Sharratt
(Georgia State University)
[219]             Late Intermediate Period (A.D. 1250-1470) Mortuary Practices at Tumilaca La Chimba: Spatial and Temporal Mortuary Variation in the
                  Moquegua Valley, Peru
In this paper, we present recent fieldwork focused on Estuquiña mortuary contexts at the site of Tumilaca La Chimba in the Moquegua Valley of Peru.
Estuquiña is the local expression of the Late Intermediate Period, and conventionally dated to approximately A.D. 1250–1470. In summer 2015, a total of
eight intact circular below ground tombs were excavated at the site. This represents the largest sample of intact Estuquiña burials excavated since
fieldwork was conducted by Programa Contisuyo members at the type site of Estuquiña in the 1980s. We discuss tomb construction, as well as the
deposition and special distribution of cultural materials and human skeletal remains within the burials, and examine the considerable variation between the
excavated tombs, particularly in terms of the treatment of human remains before and during burial. We also compare these new data with pre-existing data
on mortuary practices in an earlier occupation at Tumilaca la Chimba, as well as with the literature on funerary contexts at the site of Estuquiña, to examine
local variations in funerary patterns across space and time during the Late Intermediate Period.
Gadsby, David
[191]             Using Site Condition Data to Manage Heritage Sites for Climate Change Impacts
Heritage sites worldwide are threatened by human action and inaction; archaeologists are observers of the era of human-induced global change. We are
specially positioned to use our data to examine such change through the material record. Additionally, archaeologists have been recording observations
about the condition of sites for many years, even if those observations are not always intended to monitor site condition or integrity. Archaeologists in the
National Park Service have, in maintaining the Archeological Sites Management Information System (ASMIS), inadvertently left a record of climate change
observations.
As heritage stewards, we must learn to manage sites in the face of continuous changes that we do not fully understand. Recently emerged technologies—
including those designed to manipulate increasingly comprehensive and accurate geospatial data—allow archaeologists to examine our data in new ways
to understand the causes, directions, and ongoing dynamics of climate change impacts. Our recent study of site condition data from several U.S. National
Parks allows us to examine those impacts on National Park Service sites and provide recommendations for future study. We consider how park planners
and managers might use these data to prioritize and preserve cultural resources in the face of rising sea levels.
[191]             Chair
Gadus, Eloise (Prewitt and Associates, Inc.)
[292]             Luminescence Dating of Prehistoric Ceramic Vessel Sherds from the North Central Hills of Mississippi
Data recovery investigations at site 22CH698, located in Choctaw County, Mississippi, employed luminescence dating of ceramic vessel sherds to
complement radiocarbon dates and establish cultural stratigraphy within the site’s thick Holocene alluvium. The dating results, along with diagnostic
artifacts, indicate that the site components, representing some 2,000 years of occupation, are mixed. Yet the luminescence dates underscore a strong
Miller I through Miller III phase occupation (ca. 100 B.C. to A.D. 1100) and demonstrate consistency with dating of the ceramic sequence from the
Tombigbee drainage to the east. These results bode well for using luminescence dates to adjust southeastern chronologies.
Gaffney, Vincent [223] see Allaby, Robin
Gaggio, Giacomo (University of California, San Diego.) and Paul Goldstein (University of California, San Diego.)
[122]             Food for the Ayllus: Plants Access and Social Meaning in the lowland Tiwanaku Sites of Omo and Rio Muerto
Tiwanaku, one of the first Andean states, spread during the Middle Horizon (A.D. 500–1000) from the Bolivian Altiplano into the lowland territories of
Cochabamba and Moquegua in order to acquire the resources that were lacking in the highlands, a strategy termed by Murra as the "vertical archipelago."
Plants such as maize and coca were among the primary resources that the Tiwanaku sought in these valleys, and different social groups, ayllus or elites,
were probably in charge of accessing and redistributing them, as suggested by archaeobotanical research on Tiwanaku domestic contexts (Wright et al.
2003). In this paper, we test this hypothesis with a paleoethnobotanical analysis of Tiwanaku household contexts from the sites of Omo and Rio Muerto,
located in the Moquegua Valley. The Moquegua Valley presented a large Tiwanaku occupation from A.D. 600 to A.D. 1000 ca. Two main ceramic styles,
representing different Tiwanaku social groups, termed Omo and Chen Chen, have been identified by Goldstein (2005). Our objective in this paper is to
assess differences in food access, consumption, and processing between the two groups of colonists through the analysis of the presence and distribution
of food plants in the domestic contexts of the Omo and Rio Muerto sites.
Gagnon, Celeste (Wagner College) and Bethany Turner (Georgia State University)
[45]              Those Who Came Before: Investigating Diet, Health and Mobility in the Moche Valley, 1800 B.C –A.D. 200
Much sweat and ink has been shed investigating the Moche of north coastal Peru. But what of those who came before? In order to understand the Moche
world, we must explore their history. To address this issue, the skeletal remains of over 850 individuals who lived in the Moche Valley during the Guañape,
Salinar, or Gallinazo phases were examined. The collected bioarchaeological data including demographic patterns, oral health indicators, light and heavy
isotopes, and pathological conditions allow us to investigate the lived experience of these Moche ancestors. Bioarchaeological evidence of individuals lives
are integrated within phases and used to examine population-level phenomena. What we find are indications of the development of a regional political
economy, changing patterns of population movement, and varying levels of stress. These patterns shed light on people’s daily experience of
archaeologically identified changing settlement patterns and growth of agricultural infrastructure.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             150
Gakii, Mercy [13] see Ambrose, Stanley
Gakuhari , Takashi [147] see Karsten, Jordan
Gal, Robert [217] see DeAngelo, Rebekah
Galaty, Michael [166] see Parkinson, William
Galaty, Michael (Mississippi State University)
[166]             Collective Memory and the Mycenaeans: The Argolid, Messenia, and the Mani Compared
The concept of collective memory has received some attention in archaeology, but has not been systematically applied to processes of state formation and
sociopolitical change. In this paper, I model the evolution of collective memory systems in Greece from the Neolithic to Iron Age, with a focus on
Mycenaean regions. The Argolid, Messenia, and the Mani—using The Diros Project’s excavations of a Mycenaean “ossuary” at Ksagounaki as a primary
example—vary in terms of how collective memories were created and put to use, as reflected in long-term differences in mortuary practice. A collective
memory model can also be employed to help explain differences in Mycenaean versus Minoan state formation.
Gale, Sara, Shawn Patch (New South Associates, Inc.) and Sarah Lowry (New South Associates, Inc.)
[8]               Double Palisades and Double Frequencies: Comparing Single-Channel and Dual-Channel Ground Penetrating RADAR data from
                  Hiwassee Island
The vast majority of Ground Penetrating RADAR (GPR) surveys have used one ultra-wide band frequency range when examining sites. With this choice
come assumptions of the maximum depth and size of potential features as there is always a trade-off in GPR between depth range and maximum
resolution. A multi-component site or one with extended occupation may warrant surveys with different GPR antennas in order to reach the earlier
occupations and still resolve small features, such as post molds. However, the use of multiple antennas will typically double the survey time. A 2015 survey
of Hiwassee Island (40MG31) in the Tennessee River afforded an opportunity to directly compare results from a single-channel, 400 MHz antenna, and
dual-channel system, which combines an 800 MHz and 300 MHz into one antenna. Results from this survey show the impact a dual channel system can
make when interpreting features of varying sizes and depths while still being budget conscious.
Galke, Laura (George Washington Foundation)
[293]             Is Colonoware an Emblem of Enslavement?
During the antebellum period the town of Manassas, Virginia, was composed of free whites, and both free and enslaved black people. In this small
community material culture played a crucial role in broadcasting status amongst its anxious constituents. They lived in an atmosphere where “whiteness”
connoted cleanliness, order, freedom, and privilege. An individual’s proximity to, or distance from, whiteness yielded either powerful benefits or humiliating
consequences. This was a community in which colonoware pronounced status over ethnicity. Decades of archaeological investigations under the
direction of the National Park Service, National Capital Region, have yielded material culture from a variety of antebellum-era domestic sites whose
assemblages indicate that the dominant ideology considered colonoware an emblem of enslavement.
Gallaga, Emiliano (EAHNM, University of Arizona), victor ortega (EAHNM) and Tobias García (EAHNM)
[78]              The Petrographs of Janos, Chihuahua and its Archaic Community
In this paper, we will present the preliminary results of the first field season of the El Peñón del Diablo, Janos, Chihuahua Project, focused on an interesting
rock art site on the chihuahuan prairie. We like to emphasize that this archaeological project was created under the Janos community initiative, which
wanted to know more about the site for its protection and for tourist development in the area. Thanks to the close collaboration between the Janos
municipality, the Centro INAH Chihuahua, and the EAHNM, we were able to register the more than 45 petroglyphs sets located on the crag, as well as the
surface material collection from the immediate site area (250 x 150 mts). In a first assessment, the rock art site seems to be a single and isolated feature
on the valley, but the finding of more than 25 stone ovens, several basin metates, more than 120 stone mortars, and a considerable amount of lithic
material, indicate a long occupation that possibly started around the late Paleoindian/early Archaic Period.
[78]              Chair
Gallaga, Emiliano [179] see Melgar, Emiliano
Gallant, Thomas (University of California, San Diego)
[271]             Landscape Archaeology, Watermills and Hydrotechnology on a Greek Island
A striking feature of the Greek island of Andros's human landscape is the extremely large number of watermills that operated on the island in the recent
past. By one estimate, there were on the island, whose territory is only 380 sq km, more than 270 watermills in operation during the last century. Today,
there are none and not a single ravine on the island has sufficient water flow to power even a single mill. To reconstruct the social, economic, and
environmental history of mills on the island, we studied one ravine, Fousiai. First, we conducted an intensive pedestrian survey of the ravine and identified
29 water mills. Next, we selected three for more detailed examination, including selective excavation. During the survey, we discovered that an elaborate
system of rock-cut channels had been incised into the walls of the ravine in order to channel water to the various mills. Using detailed satellite imaging, we
reconstruct the hydrotechnological system in the ravine. The last two sections of the paper focus on, first, the question of climate change and when the
island ceased to receive sufficient water to power the mills and, second, the economic history of the mills.
Gallardo, Franscico [57] see Correa Girrulat, Itaci
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             151
Gallareta, Tomas [26] see Gallareta Negron, Tomas
Gallareta Cervera, Tomás (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill)
[127]              A Model for Interpreting the Royal Court Puuc Tradition
Throughout 16 years of research at the archaeological site of Kiuic, located in the Puuc zone of the Yucatán Peninsula, explorations have yielded the
complete construction sequence of its Late Classic Period royal court and central architectural group, Yaxché. Deep and detailed excavations at the
group’s central building, Str. N1065E1025, have produced a unique picture of the evolution of architecture, modification of the landscape, and its role in the
consolidation of royal power through the use of ritual, domestic, and administration spaces. Moreover, evidence of royal behavior, and the dynamics of the
royal court institution at Kiuic suggest a local tradition of highly specialized architecture and ceramic wares which can be seen at large Classic Period Puuc
sites such as Uxmal and Labna. In this paper, I use data from detailed stratigraphic analysis, AMS dated contexts, architectural reconstruction, and midden
analysis to generate a Royal Court Model to interpret the continuities and transformations of Puuc elite behavior during the Late and Terminal Classic
periods.
Gallareta Negron, Tomas (INAH), Tomas Gallareta, William Ringle and Bey George
[26]               Economic Strategies in the Puuc Hills of Yucatan
Some theorists of the ancient Maya economy argue that the movement of goods served to materialize and aid in the performance of what were essentially
political relations of power. Such a perspective emphasizes the rigidity and extreme hierarchy of exchange networks, and their essential focus on the ruler's
body and his court. Proponents of market exchange, in contrast, see exchange as serving more quotidien processes of supply and demand, and only
tangentially political forces. The Puuc Hills of Yucatan provide an interesting test of these positions, as on the one hand many small sites built extensive
palaces suggestive of an elaborate court life. On the other, Puuc society had an extremely broad base of wealthy individuals but relatively little investment
in ritual architecture. Imports seem to have been modest. This paper suggests that the particular demands of the karstic landscape fostered the active
participation of sub-royal elites in the Puuc domestic economy in ways distinct from the extremes of market and ritual exchange.
Gallareta Negron, Tomas [127] see Kohut, Betsy
Gallareta Negrón, Tomás [127] see Parker, Evan
Galle, Jillian [7] see Bates, Lynsey
Galle, Jillian (The Digital Archaeological Archive of Comparative Slavery, Monticello)
[272]              Chitons and Clams, Cash and Carry: An Archaeological Exploration of the Impact of Enslaved Children’s Foraging Strategies on 18th-
                   Century Enslaved Households in Jamaica
Attempts at understanding the economic and social strategies used by enslaved people in the early modern Atlantic World require sophisticated models of
human interaction, models that allow archaeologists to precisely investigate the complex behavioral strategies that underlie artifact patterns. Here, Optimal
Foraging Theory provides the framework for identifying the fishing and foraging activities of enslaved children and adults laboring at the Stewart Castle
Estate, an eighteenth-century Jamaican sugar plantation. Data from the estate’s slave village suggests that a growing reliance on the products of children’s
labor, in this case low-ranked shellfish, allowed enslaved households to divert high-ranked fish species to the marketplace, where the proceeds from the
sale of these high-ranked fish were used to acquire costly, imported goods. Signaling Theory then provides a framework for understanding the relationship
between the discard of fauna remains, shellfish, and non-provisioned costly goods within the village, patterns that suggest how and why enslaved
households transformed precious labor and food into consumer goods purchased at local and regional markets.
Gallego, Jose Ramon [20] see Casar, Isabel
Gallenstein, Gwenn [63] see Gearty, Erin
Gallivan, Martin (William & Mary) and Jeffrey Hantman (University of Virginia)
[284]              Pilgrimage, Ancestors, and Commemoration in Postcolonial Indigenous Homelands
In this paper, we consider ritual practices at indigenous places in the Chesapeake that are traditionally described as ‘abandoned.’ Our study involves four
sites in Virginia regarded as sacred by past and contemporary Monacan and Powhatan people. From a strictly non-indigenous perspective each of these
places has been viewed as abandoned at or just past the moment of European colonization. Instead, we find evidence that these locations remained
active as part of indigenous homelands. The archaeological and ethnohistorical records provide evidence of periodic journeys to towns, mounds, and
burial grounds after the residential population had departed. Our research situates us in an ongoing discussion of pilgrimage rituals inferred at precontact
centers in North America such as Cahokia and Chaco Canyon. However, monumentality, large gatherings, feasts, and social transformations
(communitas) are not apparent in our studies. Instead, we posit that the rituals observed in the Chesapeake are part of postcolonial commemorations of
ancestors, homeland, and continuity. This process of postcolonial commemoration within precolonial places has implications for contemporary indigenous
connections to ancestors and ancestral homelands.
Galvan, Melissa (Universidad de las Americas) and Betsy Kohut (Millsaps College)
[127]              Acknowledging Anonymous Artists: Examining the Painted Stucco Facade from a Temple at Kiuic, Yucatan
Excavations in the main plaza of Kiuic in Yucatan, Mexico, revealed the presence of a dismantled stucco façade south of the temple it once adorned. The
façade dates to the temple’s initial Late Classic construction (600–800 A.D.) and is thought to have been stripped from it during a second construction
phase in the Terminal Classic (800–1000 A.D.). Preliminary analysis of the deposit provided insight into the methods used to sculpt the stucco revealing its
theme to have been a historic-narrative depicting important characters, a style similar to those found at other Classic lowland Maya sites.
To understand the process by which such stucco facades were created, we will conduct analysis of the raw materials and artistic/architectural techniques
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   152
used in their production. In this paper, we present the results of chemical analyses used to identify the materials (stucco plasters and pigments) used in the
construction. Identification of these materials and the techniques by which they were combined enables us to address questions regarding their availability
and selection by the artists operating at Kiuic during this time. The specifics of this artistic tradition with regard to level of specialization and resource
investment can be compared to others in ancient Mesoamerica.
Gamble, Lynn (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[110]             Feasting, Ritual Practices, and Persistent Places: New Interpretations of Shellmounds in Southern California
Intensive archaeological investigations at the largest extant shell mound in the Santa Barbara Channel area and one of the best-preserved Early Period
archaeological sites in the region have produced an array of radiocarbon dates within solid stratigraphic contexts. Approximately 50 house depressions
situated in rows on several terraces have been mapped on the eight meter high mound that measures 270 by 210 meters, approximately 5 hectares.
Analysis of multiple lines of evidence, including stratigraphic profiles of multiple house depressions and features, 76 radiocarbon dates, ground penetrating
radar, and mortuary analyses of over 200 previously excavated burials, support my claim that the mound, El Montón, was a persistent place where early
visitors feasted on red abalone, urchins, sea mammals, and other marine delicacies, constructed dwellings, buried their dead, and performed ceremonies
where select groups of infants, children, and adults were revered. These mortuary rites conveyed the symbolic power of the place and created a history of
events that became part of a mythical and real past that was repeatedly visited, modified, and interpreted as social relationships were reinforced. This case
study supports the idea of southeastern archaeologists and others that shellmounds are socially constructed landscapes, not just accumulations of refuse.
Gamble, Julia (University of Toronto) and Brooke Milne (University of Manitoba)
[214]             Explorations in LEXT Image and Profile Capture for Dental Enamel Surface Morphology
The field of bioarchaeology is leading to significant advances in our understanding of the lives of past populations. A particular area of interest in this field
lies in the consideration of the early life determinants of later life conditions. The consideration of non-specific skeletal stress markers has been at the
forefront of this research. Dental enamel grows incrementally, and because it does not remodel once formed, a permanent record of growth disruption is
preserved. Traditionally, enamel surface defects have been observed macroscopically. However, this method does not capture the smaller defects
reflecting a disruption in only a few of the growth lines visible on the tooth surface. Previously, SEM has been used to examine these patterns, but this only
provides an image of the tooth surface which then needs to be scored through visual examination. Other techniques for trying to produce profile lines for
more objective assessment have been explored, such as the use of an engineering measuring microscope and the Alicona 3D InfiniteFocus imaging
microscope. This paper presents the preliminary application of the LEXT 3D laser measuring microscope to examine dental enamel. The benefits of the
LEXT will be discussed along with the challenges encountered in this examination.
Gamble, Joseph [230] see Pohl, Mary
Gangloff, Deborah
[48]              Discussant
Gantos, Alex [221] see Harrison-Buck, Eleanor
Gao, Xiaofang [180] see Zhang, Qun
Gao, Qian (University of Barcelona)
[254]             Archaeological Tourism and Social Values, a Case Study in China
Today the increasing commercialization of cultural heritage draws archaeology and tourism into ever-closer contact. With the fast development of tourism,
archaeological sites are utilized for their multiple potentials as revenue generators, public education providers, national identity promoters, and many other
roles. It should be noted that these potentials are defined by the various values that a society attributes to its archaeological heritage. That is to say the
values of archaeological heritage, once considered to be intrinsic, are now believed to be produced out of the interaction between the heritage itself and its
historical, social, and economic contexts. The social values of archaeological sites, firstly recognized in the Burra Charter of 1979, have become
increasingly emphasized in legislation and guidelines for the management of archaeological sites at a global level. In China, the social values of
archaeological sites are also progressively recognized in recent years. However, there is rarely a full account of the impact of tourism on a society’s
perception of such values. This paper employs ethnographic approaches to scrutinize the social values attributed by local communities to archaeological
sites in China under the influence of tourism development, using the Daming Palace archaeological site as a case study.
Garay, Jose and Isabel Rivera-Collazo (University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras campus)
[156]             Subsistence and the Resilience of Coastal Habitats in the Longue Durée
Mollusks recovered from archaeological sites reflect decisions made by individuals in the past, changes in the environment through time, and the
interactions between people and landscapes. Therefore, archaeomalacological analyses can help to reconstruct paleoenvironments and to identify
changes in consumption practices. Changes should be particularly evident when considered from a deep-time perspective. In this presentation, we will be
evaluating samples from three archaeological sites spanning from 4.4kBP to the nineteenth century A.D. within the same hydrological basin (Rio Grande
de Manati, Puerto Rico) with the intention of examining culture and environmental change through time. The research question guiding this investigation is
what coastal ecosystems are identified in the archaeomlacological component of the subsistence-remains assemblage, and to what extent does this
information reflect patterns of resource management and territory exploitation through time? By using taxonomic identification, MNI and NISP counts, we
expect to identify similar species in all sites notwithstanding cultural differences because they are all located within the same landscape. Detailed
examination of the samples provides specific data of coastal resource exploitation of multiple ecosystems from Archaic, Ceramic Age, and Late Historic
periods reflecting changes in habitat distribution along a continuation of socioenvironmental knowledge of subsistence resource acquisition.
Garcia, Lorena (Museu de Arqueologia e Etnologia da Universidade de São Paulo) and Fernando Almeida (Universidade Federal de Sergipe)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             153
[23]              Ceramics and the Indigenous Histories of Southeastern Amazonia
Ceramics buried in dark earths guard different histories from indigenous groups, including the millenary process of occupation interfluvial and riverine areas
of southeastern Amazonia. These histories are often related to the regional settlement of Tupi-Guarani speaking groups, and the relations they established
with their Arawak and Carib neighbors. We argue that some ceramic elements can be interpreted as a materialization of short or long time contacts
between these groups. The main objective of this presentation is, hence, to discuss which ceramic elements have the potential to reveal interaction
processes in the region between the Xingu and Tocantins rivers. We also discuss the importance of this region to help understand the wider archaeological
context of the Lower Amazon.
Garcia, Dante and Guillermo De Anda
[46]              Climatic Changes and Ceramics during the Terminal Classic at Chichén Itzá
According to the ceramic evidence that came out of the Chichen Itzá sinkholes or “cenotes,” it seems the ancient Maya offered into these wells important
quantities of pots and very unique ceramic vessels within a very specific period of time, and under very specific situations. The evidence indicates that
most of the ritual activity occurred approximately between A.D. 900–1100, a time that coincides chronologically with the end of the Terminal Classic Period,
the rise and subsequent abandonment of Chichen Itza, and two of the three strongest droughts in the last 3,500 years at the North side of the Yucatan
Peninsula.
This information raises the question whether these ceramics are perhaps the archaeological evidence that shows specific vessels manufactured related to
rainwater petition ceremonies. Cenote Holtún of Chichén Itza is probably one the most intact archaeological context at the North Maya Lowlands and can
provide important information about climate stress moments that encouraged new ceramic manufacturing behavior.
Garcia, Dante (Zona Arqueologica de Monte Albán), Cesar Dante García Ríos (INAH-Oaxaca) and Ronald k. Faulseit (Museo “Field”, Chicago, IL,
EE.UU)
[231]             Gestión arqueológica, estructura base en el redescubrimiento de Dainzú-Macuilxochitl
Durante el proyecto de investigación Arqueológica Dainzú-Macuilxóchitl 2015, la gestión arqueológica ha permitido conjuntar la ciencia con la tradición.
Partiendo de vincular a la comunidad con la investigación se ha logrado la reapropiación y el empoderamiento patrimonial, el fortalecimiento de la
identidad, la reapertura del museo comunitario y el redescubrimiento de los zapotecos antiguos por los zapotecos contemporáneos. Los dos ejes de
trabajo, mapeo y excavación, revelan algunos elementos urbanísticos y parte de la estructura político, social y religiosa de una ciudad sagrada que
aparece desde el periodo formativo y continuo vigente hasta la llegada de los españoles. De hecho, debido a que los habitantes del pueblo moderno son
descendiente de la ciudad antigua, el aprendizaje es recíproco porque sus conocimientos sobre la tradición moderna llevan implicaciones para la
comprensión de actividades del pasado. La excavación reveló un complejo residencial del clásico tardío que contaba con su propio taller de figurillas,
permitiendo conocer acerca de las divinidades y elementos de la ritualidad de la religiosidad zapoteca, misma que con los 5 entierros, 12 ofrendas y
diversos materiales como cerámica, lítica y hueso, evidencían en parte, de la compleja dinamica de esta ciudad.
Garcia, Jorge (University of Florida Department of Anthropology)
[254]             New Perspectives for a Collaborative Community Archaeology in Colombia: Strengthening the Social Fabric through the Mitigation of
                  Violent Pasts and the Re-Appropriation of Heritage Management
Colombian archaeologists continue to be criticized for instituting nationalistic agendas and ignoring the demands of local communities interested in
participating in the research and stewardship of archaeological remains. This criticism of Colombian archaeology has a strong foundation, but it does not
generate alternatives on how to mitigate the lack of cooperation between archaeologists and communities. It is necessary to assess processes in which
communities have worked along with archaeologists, to improve the discourse and the implementation of community archaeology in Colombia. I will assess
the strategies applied in the first community archaeological project in Colombia, the San Jacinto Archaeological Project and Museum, as well as describe
other important community projects in other regions in the country to identify factors of the value/costs for the communities participating in these projects to
define how strategies and methodologies used in each of the projects can contribute to the future of collaborative community archaeology. Given
Colombia’s violent history, the regions where the above-mentioned community archaeological projects are conducted have been stricken by armed
conflicts and can serve as comparative cases for the implementation of community archaeological projects in other regions of the world as a tool to mitigate
violent events and conflictive pasts.
[254]             Chair
García, Tobias [78] see Gallaga, Emiliano
García Ayala, Gabriela
[169]             La Terraza 912, un espacio domestico del Cerro Jazmín
Las recientes investigaciones en el cerro Jazmín, sitio prehispánico dela Mixteca Alta Oaxaqueña, han comprobado que este sitio fue establecido en el
periodo formativo, teniendo una ocupación constante del asentamiento hasta la llegada de los españoles. La excavación de una unidad habitacional en la
terraza 912 del periodo Natividad da constancia de la continua ocupación del espacio y también un pequeño acercamiento a la forma de vida en esta
época. El estudio de unidades habitacionales es fundamental en los estudios arqueológicos, ya que aportan valiosa información sobre la vida cotidiana de
la población, así como información económica, política y religiosa, que en conjunto con otros datos ayudan a entender mejor los diversos procesos
sociales llevados a cabo en una comunidad. Esta ponencia resume los datos de excavación de este espacio habitacional el cual fue utilizado en las dos
principales etapas de esplendor del Cerro Jazmín (Ramos y Natividad). Aunado a esto se dará una visión general de los procesos sociales acontecidos en
estas dos épocas en toda la Mixteca Alta.
García Capistrán, Hugo [256] see Vázquez López, Verónica
García de Quevedo Machain, Rafael [101] see Mountjoy, Joseph
García Ríos, Cesar Dante [231] see Garcia, Dante
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  154
Garcia-Plotkin, Patricia (Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians)
[29]              Stewards of the Land: Agua Caliente Tribal Historic Preservation
As stewards of the Tribe’s heritage, the Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians has designated the Tribal Historic Preservation Officer (THPO) responsible
for the protection, preservation, and management of a wide array of Historic Properties and Cultural Resources such as archaeological sites, historic-
period properties, as well as expanses of land which are of traditional or ceremonial importance to Tribal membership. In order to best protect the Tribe’s
cultural heritage, the THPO has developed a Historic Preservation Management Plan, a Research Design, and a Historic Preservation Policy to provide
guidance in regards to Historic Preservation on the Agua Caliente Indian Reservation and Traditional Use Area. This Presentation will provide an overview
of the Agua Caliente THPO, its successes, and challenges.
[203]             Discussant
Gardner, A. Dudley (Western Wyoming College) and William Gardner (Yale University)
[155]             A Comparison of Macro Botanical Materials Recovered from a Multi-Stratified Site in West Central Colorado: Dating from 200–13,000 B.P.
Over the last 9 summers we have conducted extensive excavations at a rock shelter (Eagle Point) located above the Gunnison River in west central
Colorado. The deposits are laddered and the macro botanical fill from the features indicates that from the Paleo Period to the last occupation in 200 B.P.
similar plant resources were available and exploited. There are some differences. We want to briefly present the differences and similarities in plant
exploitation from the Paleo (13,000 B.P.) through the Formative Period (500 B.P.). This presentation will focus on dominate botanical materials utilized
across time and offer some suggestions as to why some plant resources are not evident during certain time periods at this site.
[155]             Chair
Gardner, William [155] see Gardner, A. Dudley
Gardner, Chelsea (University of British Columbia)
[166]             Local Identity in the Mani Peninsula in Classical Antiquity
This paper presents a new approach to studying ancient identity in the Mani peninsula, using a combination of archaeological and epigraphic evidence and
existing theoretical paradigms. Mani can be classified as an 'ahistorical historical' region—one that is inhabited within the historical period but which does
not itself produce emic written evidence. Regions like Mani are often left out of typical inquiries into ancient Greek identity, which are overwhelmingly
divided between studies of a) prehistoric identity through examinations of geography and archaeology; versus b) historic cultural identity through
examinations of written records and literature. The result of this divide is that investigations of ancient ethnic and cultural identity tend to centre on areas
with either an abundance or a complete absence of written history.
This theoretical methodology applied to this region is used in order to understand ancient identity in this remote peninsula, and the way in which regions
like Mani (those which are occupied within the historical period, but which lack primary historical sources) are still able to contribute to the discussion of
ancient identity. The results of a pedestrian survey in the Diros Bay region illustrate this 'ahistorical-historical' approach to identity on a hyper-local level.
[166]             Chair
Garhart, Zachary [265] see Clauter, Jody
Garnett, Justin [40] see Pettigrew, Devin
Garnier, Aline [96] see Purdue, Louise
Garrett, Zenobie (New York University)
[188]             Dynamic Communities in Early Medieval Aquitaine: A GIS Analysis of Roman and Medieval Landscapes in the Vézère Valley, France
The transition from Roman to post-Roman Europe represents one of the sharpest breaks in the archaeological sequence of Europe. Over the past two
decades, European archaeologists have increasingly argued for the necessity of a regional perspective to this transition. They argue against an
interpretation that views the Roman-Medieval transition as a pan-European event, and instead, reframe the break as a series of localized events with
independent chronologies and histories.
Although traditionally overlooked, the Vézère Valley in southwestern France occupies a unique environmental and social landscape in which to study this
transition. While the topographic variability makes it a key place to test questions concerning the location and placement of communities, it also lies within
a space of multiple, contested, and political influences providing a unique insight into the agency of communities in the formation and transformation of
states. This paper presents the results of a dissertation project that analyzed the spatial relationships of traditionally and non-traditionally sourced site data
with a number of environmental factors. The results provide crucial insights into the changing nature of community organization in the landscape and how
this informs our understanding of community response to large-scale socio-political change.
Garrido, Francisco (University of Pittsburgh)
[259]             The Illusion of Total Control in the Provinces of the Inca Empire
Despite the interest of the Inca empire in promoting their ideology and establishing a strong political economy in their provinces, the actual result of that
process was full set of “trade-offs” that involved the empowerment of local elites, and the independent development of parallel economies of sumptuary
goods and household provisioning. This proposition challenges current and dominant “top-down” approaches to the Inca empire, where all economic and
political transformations are seen as a direct product of the Inca intervention, without room for local agency. I propose to go beyond simple dichotomies of
adaptation and resistance and explore other ways in which local populations may have infiltrated the structure of the empire for their own benefit as a
“bottom up” response to imperial control.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              155
Garrison, Thomas [228] see Alcover, Omar
Garrison, Ervan
[249]              Discussant
Garrone, Florencia [176] see Scheinsohn, Vivian
Garvey, Raven (University of Michigan)
[289]              Cultural Transmission and Artifact Variation in Late Prehistoric New Mexico
Prehistoric boundary dynamics likely affected aspects of cultural transmission. Several lines of archaeological evidence indicate increased economic
importance of bison and related inter-group tensions ca. A.D. 1300 in southeastern New Mexico, a boundary zone between the Pueblos to the west and
cultures of the southern High Plains to the east. This paper presents preliminary results of a study centered on artifact variability and designed to test the
hypothesis that model-based, biased cultural transmission, or heightened incentive to “advertise” group membership influenced the fidelity of projectile
point manufacture in this context.
Garzon-Oechsle, Andres (Department of Anthropology, Florida Atlantic University) and Valentina L. Martínez (Department of Anthropology,
Florida Atlantic Unive)
[205]              Results of Survey and Preliminary Analysis of Manteño Archaeological Sites with Stone Structures in the Las Tusas River Valley, Rio
                   Blanco, Ecuador
This poster presents information on the Manteño occupation (1500 B.P.–1532) of the cloud forest within the Chongón-Colonche Mountains of coastal
Ecuador. Survey and data recovered from eight archaeological sites containing stone structures located alongside Las Tusas River drainage suggest a
specific mode of adaptation and settlement pattern that left a particular landscape signature. The survey was conducted by the Florida Atlantic University
Archaeological Fieldschool in Ecuador during the summer of 2015. The data reveals a pattern of maximized use of restricted living spaces in such rugged
terrain. At least one of the investigated sites displays a concentration of 22 structures, indicating a semi-urban settlement design. Previous investigations
suggest that the Manteño articulated a diversity of environments characterized by the presence of sustainable human settlements across the region.
Therefore, results of this investigation will contribute to a larger discussion of Manteño socio-political organization.
Gasco, Janine (CSU-Dominguez Hills)
[292]              Luminescence Dating at the Postclassic Site of Gonzálo Hernández, Chiapas, Mexico
In the Soconusco region of Chiapas, Mexico, we are still struggling with refining the Postclassic ceramic chronology. At the site of Gonzálo Hernández, the
evidence suggests that the principal occupation of the site was during the Late Postclassic Period (ca. 1300–1520 C.E.), but a small percentage of sherds
date to earlier periods. In an effort to approach the local ceramic chronology from a new perspective, a small sample of sherds were dated using
luminescence dating. The results have clarified certain issues—namely that many of the ceramics were produced in the Late Postclassic Period. Curiously,
however, some dates spilled over into the Colonial Period, an unlikely scenario as no known historic materials (e.g., metal goods, glazed ceramics) were
found at the site. In this paper, I discuss how the various dates generated by luminescence dating can be interpreted.
Gates St-Pierre, Christian [84] see McGrath, Krista
Gates St-Pierre, Christian (Université de Montréal), Krista McGrath (BioArCh, University of York), Keri Rowsell (BioArCh, University of York) and
Matthew Collins (BioArCh, University of York)
[176]              The Identification of Archaeological Bone through Non-Destructive ZooMS: The Example of Iroquoian Bone Projectile Points
ZooMS (Zooarchaeology by Mass Spectrometry) is a well-established technique for the identification of archaeological bone. In this study, we apply a
refined ZooMS method to worked bone points in order to analyse them in a completely non-destructive fashion. The traditional ZooMS technique requires
destructive analysis of a specimen, which is obviously problematic when dealing with intact rare artefacts. The bone points are part of large assemblages
of bone tools and manufacturing debris recovered from two pre-contact Iroquoian village sites located in southern Quebec, Canada. White-tailed deer was
the most important mammal species identified in the faunal assemblages. This information combined with the approximate size of the original bone
suggested the points were likely deer, however, preliminary ZooMS analyses using this new technique revealed the unexpected species identification of
bear. The results were subsequently confirmed using traditional ZooMS and DNA analysis. Further testing of additional artefacts from the site using the
modified ZooMS method has resulted in several additional species identifications. These surprising results would never have come to light through
traditional zooarchaeological methods, highlighting the importance of advancing biomolecular research in this field.
Gatto, Maria [177] see Banks, Kimball
Gaudreau, Mariane (Simon Fraser University) and George Nicholas (Simon Fraser University)
[144]              Tackling Ethnicity from Anthropological, Archaeological, and Indigenous Perspectives: The Case of the St. Lawrence Iroquoians
Cultural anthropologists’ and archaeologists’ interest in theorizing identity has a long history. Anthropologists have generally focused on emic perspectives
to gain insight into contemporary individual and group identity, while archaeologists have relied mainly on material culture to discern identity in the past,
with relatively little attention paid to the views of contemporary peoples. When archaeological interpretations conflict with those of contemporary peoples,
serious concerns arise. This is the case in Quebec where First Nations groups today claim to be the descendants of certain archaeological cultures that the
archaeologists have attributed to someone else, and are thus denied what they consider as their cultural heritage. In this paper, we review ways in which
identity has been theorized by cultural anthropologists and archaeologists in the in the last 30 years. We then consider the implications of identity and
ethnicity theories in contemporary contexts (e.g., tribal and inter-tribal relations, land claims, heritage management) using the case study of the ethnic
identity of the St. Lawrence Iroquoians.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                156
Gauthier, Nicolas (Arizona State University)
[72]               Agricultural Risk Management in Mediterranean Environments: A Computational Modeling Approach
Small-scale agriculturalists in the Mediterranean Basin rely on multiple strategies including diversification, intensification, and storage to maintain a stable
food supply in the face of environmental uncertainty. Each of these strategies requires farmers to make specific resource allocation decisions in response
to environmental risks and is thus sensitive to variability in both the spatiotemporal pattern of risk and the ability of farmers to perceive that pattern.
In this talk, I present an agent-based model of a Mediterranean agroecosystem. By driving the model with realistic environmental dynamics derived from
simulations of mid-Holocene Mediterranean climate, and by allowing the psychology of risk perception to vary among individual farmers, I explore the
hidden vulnerabilities of traditional risk-management strategies to periods of rapid climate change. I show that even when farmers are able to manage risk
“optimally” in light of past experience, changes in the spatiotemporal pattern of rainfall can still lead to major food shortfalls.
Gauthier, Rory [210] see Adler, Rachel
Gaylord, Donald (Washington and Lee University)
[284]              Revisiting a Stratified Random Sample of the 18th-Century Liberty Hall Campus of Washington and Lee University
Many of us at institutions with long-standing archaeology programs benefit greatly from the collections we inherit. However, these also present certain
challenges. One such example is a stratified random sample done by Washington and Lee Archaeology in the 1970s on its eighteenth-century Liberty Hall
Campus. Exceptional in historical archaeology at a time when many archaeologists were still stripping the plowzone from sites, a stratified random sample
provides the statistical benefits of randomness, while still ensuring systematic coverage of the test area that a simple random sample does not achieve.
Spatial analysis of this collection with statistical methods unavailable at the time of its excavation has led us to realize that we needed a larger sample in
order to meet new preservation needs and to answer new research questions. Recent excavations have supplemented the sample in our attempt to
determine adequate quadrat size and spacing to accomplish our research.
Gearty, Erin (Flagstaff Area National Monuments), Rachel Freer-Waters and Gwenn Gallenstein (Flagstaff Area National Monuments)
[63]               Wrinkle-free Clothing: Conservation and Rehousing of Prehistoric Cotton Textiles from Navajo, Walnut Canyon, and Wupatki National
                   Monuments, Arizona
In 2014, the Flagstaff Area National Monuments received funding to conserve and re-house more than 300 non-burial related prehistoric cotton textiles
from Navajo, Walnut Canyon, and Wupatki National Monuments housed at the Museum of Northern Arizona (MNA). The textiles were woven in the 1100s
A.D. and range from expediently constructed objects to technologically complex clothing with dyes. These prehistoric remnants of cloth were excavated by
archaeologists in the 1930s and 1960s, and many remained in the crumpled state in which they were found. Many fragments also still had soil
accumulation and other debris from the excavation site, and due to creasing, they could not be adequately studied or fully viewed. The project included
conservation treatments, as needed, and designing of storage systems that provide preventive care for the textiles. Conservation was undertaken with care
to preserve any potential material that might be valuable during scientific analysis, and balance those interests with the preservation of each piece. In this
presentation, we discuss how the project was completed, and provide an analysis of the textiles from Wupatki and Walnut Canyon National Monuments.
Geber, Jonny (University of Otago)
[25]               “Children in a Ragged State”: Seeking a Bioarchaeological Narrative of Childhood in Ireland during the Great Famine (1845–52)
More than half of all victims of the Great Famine in Ireland from 1845 to 1852 were children, but despite this fact relatively little attention, amongst a vast
body of famine research undertaken to date, has been undertaken to explore their experiences and what realities they endured during this period.
Following the archaeological discovery and bioarchaeological study of a large famine-period mass burial ground adjacent to the former workhouse in
Kilkenny City, the physical experience of this calamity for over 500 children that ultimately succumbed to malnutrition and infectious disease has become
evident. The experience of poverty, famine, and institutionalisation can be discerned from skeletal markers in their bones, and when interpreted in their
historical and cultural context, they enable a unique insight into the reality of growing up as a child in Ireland during one of the worst subsistence crises in
human history.
Geib, Phil (Nebraska State Historical Society)
[63]               Mesoamerican Grooved Curved Sticks: Short Swords, Fending Sticks, or Other Purpose?
Curved sticks with longitudinal facial grooves were dredged from the Sacred Cenote at Chichén Itzá at the start of the 1900s. They are also depicted in art
there and at other sites such as Tula. These artifacts are similar to specimens recovered from various sites throughout the North American southwest,
where one suggested function was for defense against atlatl darts. Accepting this speculative account, Mesoamerican archaeologists have identified these
artifacts as fending sticks. Starting in the late 1980s, some started to doubt the fending interpretation, with Hassig (1988:294–295) arguing that the grooved
curved sticks were specialized short swords for close fighting. My analysis of the Chichén Itzá sticks along with a consideration of the mural evidence
disproves the short sword argument, but does not corroborate the fending role. However, there is a tantalizing bit of ethnographic evidence from Diego de
Landa that hints at the possibility of the Yucatan Maya deflecting atlatl darts using short sticks in a ritual designated as a dance. There is also some use-
wear support for the fending interpretation from the southwest, where this artifact type dates to at least 8,000 years ago. Fending atlatl darts in ritual fights
remains a probable interpretation of these sticks.
Geiger, Crystal (Seminole Tribe of Florida) and Jack Chalfant (Seminole Tribe of Florida)
[29]               Flipping the Desk: Increasing Tribal Participation in Archaeological Investigations
Tribal archaeology expands the interpretation of the archaeological record through the incorporation of tribal perspectives. The Seminole Tribe of Florida
(STOF) Tribal Historic Preservation Office (THPO) partnered with the sixth grade students of STOF Pemayetv Emahakv (“Our Way”) Charter School in
2014 to excavate a little known, historic, Anglo-American home-site on the Seminole Brighton Reservation. The THPO worked with the students to
document their observations and participate in the site’s excavation. Contrary to traditional archaeological projects, in which non-natives investigate and
decipher native sites, this field school focused on Seminole interpretations of a non-Seminole site. This research, in tandem with oral histories gathered
from tribal members, allowed for a more expansive view than previously recorded. This project utilizes the active engagement of tribal members and
archaeologists in order to yield a more nuanced, complete view of the past.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             157
Geller, Pamela (University of Miami)
[24]              “The Creation Of Silences”: Medical Officers & the Morton Collection
Official historic documents proclaimed nineteenth-century medical officers as heroic for administering to the inflicted during wars that defined and
expanded the United States’ national borders. Military doctors were especially welcomed by U.S. soldiers and Euro-American settlers on the Florida
frontier where life was precarious. Yet, their activities were often far from benevolent; many advanced necropolitical conditions. Rather than humanitarian
crisis, medical officers regarded the epidemiological disasters and forced relocations of Native Americans as a scientific opportunity. Their gathering of
data—observations on infectious diseases, collection of crania—worked to further erase, to let die, native peoples and the places they had inhabited. “The
production of traces,” Michel-Rolph Trouillot reminds us, “is always also the creation of silences.” Can a biohistoric study of these traces—archival and
skeletal—yield understandings of past events and peoples that counterpoise official histories? Or, does giving voice to those silenced in the past simply
reflect researchers’ social privileges, thereby reinforcing social inequalities in the present? As an example, I discuss the Samuel G. Morton Crania
Collection. I concentrate on the decedents acquired for Morton by medical officers stationed in Florida during the Seminole Wars.
Gentil, Bianca (The Pennsylvania State University)
[234]             Particularism vs. Broad Strokes: The Application of Political Economic Paradigms of the Elite Classic Maya in Northwestern Belize
By bringing together theoretical frameworks utilized by scholars to describe the Classic Maya political economy, this work evaluates their applications in the
case of the site of La Milpa. Located in northwestern Belize, La Milpa experienced a demographic rise during the Late Classic/Terminal Classic periods,
followed by a rapid decline shortly thereafter. This poster explores Maya political economy mechanisms as defined by Kenneth Hirth in his 1996 piece,
specifically focusing on aspects of elite craft control and differential access to imported goods. By analyzing ceramic and lithic material excavated during
2008–2015 field seasons from the courtyard of La Milpa’s ruling family, we gained a greater understanding of the modes of production (craft specialization
and control), consumption (elite communal and private activities), and distribution (access to interregional wares) for the La Milpa elite. From there, we
assessed whether or not the operating processes of the La Milpa political economy share similarities from other areas throughout the Maya region during
the Late Classic.
Gentry, Jewel (California State University Monterey Bay) and Donna L. Gillette (University California Berkeley )
[175]             Marking the Sacred: Rock Art Images in an Unusual Context
Rock art images, generally associated with outdoor landscapes and boulders, occur in an unexpected context and very sacred space in the California
Spanish colonial community of Mission San Miguel the Arcángel. The Mission Community consisted primarily of Salinan and Tulare native populations and
included neophyte Indians from previously established nearby Missions. It has been suggested that images found etched throughout the sanctified interior
are analogous to California Indian rock art with subsequent parallels being drawn from regional archaeological sites. Current research broadens previous
studies by relating spatial positions of proposed neophyte etchings within San Miguel to Catholic mandates which directed the use of sacred space. Spatial
and liturgical organization of neophytes within the mission church was defined by many factors including; age, gender, musical aptitude, and level of
religious training, with access to sacred space being linked to neophyte identity and status. Associated to this, proposed neophyte etchings within the
church of San Miguel are found in pronounced form in areas of access corresponding to prominent status within the church. This observation offers many
compelling perspectives related to neophyte continuance of rock art traditions and the conflation of indigenous traditions in the continued formation of
sacred space.
Georgakopoulou, Myrto [257] see Abell, Natalie
George, Bey [26] see Gallareta Negron, Tomas
Georgia, Fox [183] see Schoenike, Katelyn
Gerard-Little, Peregrine
[144]             Seeing the Forest for the Trees: Human-Landscape Interactions Explored through Wood Charcoal Assemblages from Three Seneca
                  Iroquois Settlements (1670–1750 C.E.)
This paper presents an assessment of archaeologically recovered wood charcoal data from comparable archaeological contexts at three eastern Seneca
sites: Ganondagan (1670–1687 C.E.), White Springs (1688–1715 C.E.), and Townley-Read (1715–1750 C.E.). These sites were successively occupied by
the same community through periods of both residential upheaval and relative peace, as well as interaction with a number of non-Seneca cultural traditions
and colonial entanglements. This project’s use of archaeological materials to understand human-landscape interactions at a site-level and site sequence
scale contributes to modeling dynamism in these systems, particularly in an area dominated by indigenous processes, at the ‘periphery’ of colonial control.
Inter- and intra-site differences in wood species occurrence in domestic features are interpreted within a framework that places Seneca landscape
practices in the context of ongoing modification of local environments, culturally specific landscape practices, and political and economic variability across
the occupation of these three sites.
Gerdau-Radonic, Karina (Bournemouth University) and Jelle DeFrancq (Bournemouth University)
[206]             Tooth Tales from Lima: Pre-Columbian Dental Health along the Central Coast of Peru
Changes in political, economic, and social organisation may affect diet and access to resources, and consequently dental health. This study aimed to
assess the dental health of two populations from Peru and to establish differences over time. Caries, Linear Enamel Hypoplasia (LEH), ante-mortem tooth
loss (AMTL), and calculus were recorded for Tablada de Lurín (TL; 1 A.D.–200 A.D.) and for Pueblo Viejo (PV; 1476 A.D.–1534 A.D.). Frequencies were
examined in order to assess sex and inter-population differences. The data was compared to earlier research. Seventy-three individuals from TL and 39
individuals from PV were selected. Results show no significant inter-sex or inter-population differences in LEH and calculus frequencies. Significantly
higher caries frequencies in PV can be attributed to higher female frequencies. Female AMTL rates were higher than males’ for both series. AMTL was
lower in PV. Differences in caries and AMTL between the sexes of both series can be attributed to differences in foodstuff consumption and to biological
differences. The caries frequencies in PV are consistent with maize availability under Inca rule. Results show that socio-political change can impact on
dental health over time. However, this impact can be variable between contemporaneous populations.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              158
Ghezzi, Ivan, Alan Hogg (Radiocarbon Dating Laboratory, University of Waika), Rodolfo Rodriguez (Laboratorio de Dendrocronología,
Universidad de Pi), Antonio Mabres (Laboratorio de Dendrocronología, Universidad de Pi) and Gretel Boswijk (Tree-Ring Laboratory, University
of Auckland, New )
[56]             Building a Dendrochronology for the Coast Of Peru: High-Precision 14C Dating Results from Chankillo, Casma
We present preliminary results from our project to create dendrochronological sequences for the coast of Peru, from the earliest monumental constructions
to the present. Our first results come from Chankillo (400–200 B.C.), in coastal Ancash, which has numerous in situ lintels made from algarrobo wood. Our
study of living algarrobos shows high correlation between ring-widths and climate records of the past century. The principle of uniformitarianism dictates
the same was true at the time of Chankillo. Our dendrochronological (tree-ring width, wood density) measurements from Chankillo have produced the first
dendroarchaeological series from the Central Andes. It is a “floating” sequence that illustrates the chronology of construction of the site, without the ability
yet to give absolute dendrochronological dates. However, wiggle-matched radiocarbon dates on wood from these series give us a highly precise
approximation of its calendar date range. Improved dating of this site helps fine tune archaeoastronomical analyses of its solar observatory, and throws
light on the possible contemporaneity between the rise of Chankillo and the decline of Chavin de Huantar. Finally, ring variability shows the annual climatic
variations at the time, in particular possible El Niño events on the north coast of Peru.
Ghezzi, Iván [57] see Makowski, Krzysztof
Giardina, Miguel [204] see Neme, Gustavo
Gibb, James (Smithsonian Environmental Research Center)
[159]            Archaeological Considerations in the Study of the Anthropocene
The Anthropocene epoch, garnering the interest of geologists and environmental scientists for the past decade, has now entered the archaeological
lexicon. As in other disciplines, questions remain about what Anthropocene means and when it began, as well as how it differs from the Holocene. This
presentation explores some of these issues and offers a ground-up approach by which conventional approaches in archaeology might be adapted to a
reassessment of the human experience and the role of humanity in this newly defined geological epoch.
Gibbons, Kevin [191] see Hambrecht, George
Giblin, Julia [149] see Duffy, Paul
Giblin, Julia (Quinnipiac University)
[166]            Human Mobility during the Greek Neolithic: A Multi-Isotope Analysis of the Burials from Alepotrypa Cave
This study measures strontium (87Sr/86Sr), oxygen (δ18O), and carbon (δ13C) isotope ratios in human and domesticated animal teeth from Alepotrypa
Cave, a cave that was used for both shelter and burial of the dead from the Early to the Final Neolithic Period (6000–3200 B.C.) in southern Greece.
Previous radiogenic isotope research on archaeological material in Greece indicates that there are significant differences in 87Sr/86Sr ranges in the
Aegean due to the complex geology (Nafplioti 2011; Richards et al. 2008). This established isotopic baseline is compared to enamel samples from
Alepotrypa Cave to evaluate whether the individuals in the cave grew up in the surrounding geological (tectonic) zone. Preliminary strontium results
indicate that the people buried in the cave originated from both “local” and “non-local” geological contexts. These data are also compared to δ18O and
δ13C values from the same samples to determine whether these independent measures of location and diet corroborate the strontium results.
[149]            Chair
Gibson, Terry [190] see Coons, Aaron
Gidusko, Kevin, Rachael Kangas (Florida Public Archaeology Network), Kassie Kemp (Florida Public Archaeology Network) and Nigel Rudolph
(Florida Public Archaeology Network)
[260]            CLAASP: A Public Archaeology Initiative to Preserve Archaeological Information in Central Florida
The Communities of Lake Apopka Artifact Survey Project (CLAASP) is an attempt by several regions within the Florida Public Archaeological Network
(FPAN) to preserve information about the many unprovenienced collections of artifacts hailing from this area in Central Florida. Relative to several other
areas in the state, the Lake Apopka region is under-represented in the archaeological record. This is in part due to the long term use of much of this area
for agriculture prior to the creation of laws requiring cultural resource surveys and the collection of many artifacts by avocational archaeologists. Many of
these unprovenienced collections have found their way into local museums around the Lake and throughout the region. CLAASP seeks to create a basic
database of these collections by creating partnerships with local cultural institutions and avocational archaeologists. This project will allow FPAN to engage
the public via open lab days, educational opportunities, and the creation of interpretive material.
Giesso, Martin (Northeastern Illinois University, Department of Anthropology), Andrés Laguens (Instituto de Antropología de Córdoba,
CONICET, Uni), Silvana Bertolino (Facultad de Matemática, Astronomía y Física, Unive), Michael Glascock (Missouri University Research
Reactor, University o) and Mathew Boulanger (Missouri University Research Reactor, University o)
[91]             NAA Analysis of Ambato Ceramics from the Southern Andes (Eastern Valleys of Catamarca and Tucuman, Argentina)
We analyze the provenience of clays used in the manufacture of Aguada ceramics, mainly black incised, characteristic of the Ambato valley of
southeastern Catamarca (Argentina). This ceramic style is also present in lesser quantities in sites of other neighboring valleys/regions, most of it
manufactured with the same clay. The research is part of a broader project to study economic organization and the emergence of complex societies in
northwestern Argentina. Research that took place in the Ambato Valley since the early 1990s has explored lifestyles characterized by institutional
differences created and maintained between Aguada subgroups approximately between 500–1000 A.D.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               159
Gifford, John A. [290] see Koski, Steven
Gil, Adolfo (CONICET-IANIGLA Grupo Vinculado San Rafael), Gustavo Neme (CONICET-IANIGLA Grupo Vinculado San Rafael), Amber Johnson
(Truman State University), David Zeanah (California State University Sacramento ) and Robert Elston (University of Nevada, Reno)
[94]              Human Response to Environmental Change during the Early/Mid Holocene in Central Western Argentina: Frame of Reference in
                  Comparative Perspective
Early/Middle Holocene human strategies are an archaeological topic of debate in arid central western Argentina. Among the controversies are whether
population decreased and what were human responses to increased aridity. In this presentation, we use Binford’s environmental frames of reference to
model regional Early and Middle Holocene subsistence. Radiocarbon trends are used as paleodemography proxy, archaeofaunal, archaeobotanical, lithic
assemblages, and isotopes on human bone are used to approach to the human strategies during this time period. Based on human behavioral ecology, the
results are compared with the Great Basin region.
Gil, Adolfo [204] see Neme, Gustavo
Gil , Adolfo [94] see Zeanah, David
Giles, Brett [115] see Koerner, Shannon
Giles, Bretton (CEMML, Colorado State University), Shannon Koerner (CEMML, Colorado State University) and Eric Skov (CEMML, Colorado
State University)
[155]             Two Paleoarchaic Sites along Wind Creek in Riley County, Kansas
CEMML archaeologists recently identified and tested two closely related Paleoarchaic sites, 14RY8129 and 14RY8130, on the Fort Riley Installation.
These sites are positioned on the south side of Wind Creek, which is a minor perennial tributary of Wildcat Creek, and part of the larger Kansas River
watershed. Survey and testing at the two sites recovered several fragmentary projectile points diagnostic of the Paleoindian and Early Archaic periods,
including a unifacially fluted Clovis point; a possible Hell Gap variant or Milnesand stemmed point; and a side-notched Logan Creek point from the Early
Archaic Period. Other artifacts include debitage, biface fragments, and other tools that were recovered from surface and subsurface testing. We explore
variability in the proportion and breadth of lithic reduction activities performed at these two sites. We also discuss the relationship between 14RY8129 and
8130 and other Paleoarchaic sites in Kansas and the eastern Plains, as well as why certain locales could have been preferentially selected, based on Late
Quaternary and Early Holocene environments, and early hunter-gatherers’ subsistence strategies.
Gilhooly, William [285] see Wilson, Jeremy
Gill, Kristina [55] see Braje, Todd
Gill, Lucy (Columbia University) and Dorothy Peteet (Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory/NASA Goddard Inst)
[85]              A Sediment Story: Anthropological and Environmental Continuity and Change along the Hudson River Estuary
Wetlands have a long history of anthropogenic influence due to their proximity to watersheds, traditionally optimal localities for human settlement. Sediment
stratigraphy from these ecosystems is an important source of paleoecological data, as they experience high depositional rates and, due to their anoxic
environments, preserve organic material. Humans have acted upon one such watershed, the Hudson River Estuary, since the Paleo-Indian Period
(10,500–8000 B.C.E.) and have been a keystone species for much if not all of that time. To what extent have the cultural landscapes created by pre- and
post-contact peoples resulted in change at the ecosystem scale? This study presents the results of a recent analysis of multiple soil cores extracted from
Haverstraw tidal marshlands, adjacent to the widest part of the Hudson River. It utilizes loss-on-ignition, macrofossil analysis and X-Ray Fluorescence
spectroscopy, in combination with Accelerator Mass Spectrometry radiocarbon dating, to construct a high-resolution paleoenvironmental record that
complements ongoing archaeological investigations. Biotic composition indicates that despite the introduction of invasive species following European
settlement in 1666 C.E., key native species persist, evidencing sustainability of the ecosystem. Sediment chemistry, similarly, has been influenced by
humans throughout the history of the tidal marsh but demonstrates the ecosystem’s long-term resilience.
Gillam, Christopher (University of South Carolina (SRARP-SCIAA)), Andrei Tabarev (Institute of Archaeology and Ethnography) and Masami
Izuho (Tokyo Metropolitan University)
[21]              Continental Roots and Coastal Routes? Merging Archaeological, Bio-Geographic and Genomic Evidence of the Peopling of the Americas
Genetic evidence suggests that the Amerind haplogroups A-D coalesce in north-central East Asia (CEA), around Mongolia. How, then, do we have a late
Pleistocene coastal migration to the Americas when ancestral populations are centrally-located in the heart of the continent? One answer is offered by bio-
geographic and archaeological evidence and an (in)convenient gap in our genetic knowledge of Upper Paleolithic Japan. Japan’s mainland, Honshu, is
proposed as the genetic refugia of the first Americans, in contrast to the Beringia hypothesis. These populations, established by a southeastern migration
(ca. 40k–35k B.P.) from CEA/Mongolia to Kyushu/Honshu, via China/Korea, were themselves subsequently displaced, physically and genetically, by a
southern migration (ca. 18k–16k B.P.) of northern Siberian hunters from Sakhalin/Hokkaido, progenitors of the later Jomon. Genetic isolation and
subsequent displacement/migration are more likely from a large island setting with low population density, nearly 20,000 years of prior occupation and
diverse cultural adaptations, than a continental-linked landmass with little archaeological evidence dating prior to 15,000 – A southeastern migration around
35,000 B.P. from CEA to Japan set the stage, with northern Siberian migrants around 16,000 B.P. displacing Honshu’s established Paleolithic cultures,
driving some maritime-adapted populations northward along the opening coastline and onward to the Americas.
Gillam, Christopher [132] see Uchiyama, Junzo
Gillette, Donna L. [175] see Gentry, Jewel
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              160
Gilmore, Zackary (University of Florida) and Kenneth Sassaman (University of Florida)
[41]             From Distributed to Place-Based Communities: The Ceramic Social Geography of Late Archaic Stallings Societies
North America’s oldest pottery-making societies belonged to the Late Archaic Stallings culture of Georgia and South Carolina. The basic culture history of
Stallings archaeology is relatively well-known; however, the types and scales of communities constructed by Stallings people, along with the nature of the
connections between them, remain poorly understood. This poster presents preliminary results of research that uses compositional data from Stallings
fiber-tempered pottery to investigate the transition from the loosely bounded “distributed communities” of Early Stallings (5150–4100 cal B.P.) times to the
more fixed and formalized “place-based communities” characteristic of Classic Stallings (4100–3800 cal B.P.). To this end, more than 400 pottery samples
from 13 sites along the Savannah and Ogeechee Rivers were subjected to neutron activation analysis (NAA), while half of those were also thin-sectioned
and examined petrographically. These pottery data were then compared to that from a series of clay reference samples to infer patterns of mobility and
interaction over the course of the Late Archaic Period. The primary goal of these analyses was to evaluate the extent to which Classic Stallings social
formations were constrained and/or enabled by the Early Stallings arrangements that preceded them.
Gilmour, Danny (Willamette Cultural Resources Associates, Ltd.), Thomas Brown (Portland State University), Paul Solimano (Willamette Cultural
Resources Associates, Ltd.) and Kenneth Ames (Portland State University)
[114]            Radiocarbon Chronology of the Western Stemmed Tradition on the Columbia Plateau
The Western Stemmed Tradition (WST) is an early cultural phase on the Columbia Plateau of western North America. Much of the seminal work
establishing the timeframe of WST is now decades old and suffers from imprecise dating. In this poster, we review previously compiled data, update
stratigraphic interpretations, and model existing radiocarbon assays within a Bayesian framework. Preliminary results indicate that WST on the Columbia
Plateau is at least coeval with Clovis and spanned at least 1,900 calendar years, but possibly 2,800 years. A population model based on date frequency
suggests WST groups peaked between 12,100 and 11,200 cal B.P. WST thrived during the Younger Dryas, a period long considered a possible cause for
the collapse of Clovis and the extinction of roughly 35 genera of animals.
Gilstrap, William (University of Missouri, Columbia), Vassilis Kilikoglou (Laboratory of Archaeological Materials, N.C.S.R. ") and Peter Day
(Department of Archaeology, University of Sheffield)
[257]            Painting and Firing Technology in the Late Bronze Age Saronic Gulf: A Study of Ceramic Microstructures by SEM
The end of the Bronze Age in the Saronic Gulf boasts at least three pottery production centers, at Kontopigado, Attica, on the north part of the island of
Aegina, and in northeast Corinthia. All three produce a similar range of goods and although each has a different set of production practices, certain
technological information was shared.
Focusing on the painted fineware pottery, it is evident that all three centers decorated pots with dark-on-light motifs using either red or black paint. Analysis
by SEM-EDS demonstrates that both red and black paints were manufactured using iron-rich raw materials indicating that each center used a three stage
firing sequence. Macroscopic and microstructural evidence indicate that all three centers shared this highly technical knowledge, but not all had the right
locally available raw materials to produce high quality black paints.
This paper focuses on the analysis of both black and red paints by SEM-EDS. Through this analysis, we have reconstructed certain surface decoration and
firing technology in the production of Mycenaean fineware pottery. The results of this study present new insight into the different practices of neighboring
production centers, the sharing of technological knowledge, and how it was applied using locally source raw materials.
Gilstrap , William D. [180] see Luo, Wugan
Gingerich, Joseph [218] see Kitchel, Nathaniel
Gingerich, Joseph (Smithsonian Institution/NC State University)
[218]            Terminal Pleistocene Depositional Patterns and their Hypothesized Impact on Human Populations in the Middle Atlantic Region, USA
Depositional regimes determine the burial and preservation of archaeological sites. Before, during, and after the Younger Dryas interval, we see
differences in depositional patterns throughout the Middle Atlantic Region of the United States. In this paper, we explore both differences and similarities in
alluvial and eolian deposition within the Middle Atlantic Coastal Plain, Piedmont, and Ridge and Valley physiographic provinces of eastern North America.
Using select case studies, we explore what role, if any, varying landscape stability played in the settlement or use of river valleys by human populations
during the Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene.
[218]            Chair
Giomi, Evan (University of Arizona) and Matt Peeples (Arizona State University)
[17]             Pueblo Bonito as a Material and Spatial Network
While formal network analyses (and traditional statistical analyses) can be used to understand the network relationships between archaeological sites, they
can also be geared towards understanding relationships within sites, both between architectural units and between different classes of artifacts. Using
these techniques on a network of general material categories (like turquoise or shell) from different room contexts within Pueblo Bonito potentially reveals
different "sets" of material classes grouped either through common use or deposition together. Similar "sets" can be derived from a network of room
assemblages by using cluster analysis. Comparison between the room assemblage network and the material class network helps confirm the validity of the
material sets. Mapping these sets of associated material types onto an architectural plan of Pueblo Bonito reveals differences both between construction
sequences and across the east-west divide of the building, reinforcing an interpretation of a dual division in the architecture.
Giovannetti, Marco Antonio [259] see Lynch, Julieta
Giovas, Christina (University of Queensland)
[222]            Caribbean Anthropogenic Paleozoogeography: Cultural and Ecological Significance of Animal Introductions in the Lesser Antilles
Studies of exotic animal introductions in the insular Caribbean have focused on the paleozoogeography, origin, and dispersal patterns of these taxa, but
have yet to resolve a number of important, related issues. Among these are the critical problems of distinguishing live introductions from the import of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             161
animal parts and assessing the degree of animal management practiced by Amerindians. These questions are fundamental to understanding the broader
cultural and ecological significance of faunal translocations in the Caribbean, particularly the long-term impact of exotic species on Antillean ecosystems,
but require a multi-evidentiary approach to address. Taking a theoretically informed perspective, here I review data provided by heavy isotope analyses,
ethnohistory, zooarchaeology, and ecology to understand the anthropogenic dispersal, cultural role, and environmental impact of exotic species in the
prehistoric Lesser Antilles, focusing on opossum (Didelphis marsupialis) and agouti (Dasyprocta sp.), with consideration given for rarer taxa such as deer
(Cervidae) and pecarry (Tayassu/Pecari).
[222]               Chair
Giovas, Christina [223] see Fitzpatrick, Scott
Giraldo Tenorio, Hernando (Universidad del Cauca), Robert Speakman (University of Georgia) and Michael Glascock (University of Missouri)
[57]                Pottery Production and Consumption in the Andean-Amazonian Frontier in Southwestern Colombia (2500–500 B.P.)
The circulation of goods and knowledge between Amazonian and Andean societies from southwestern Colombia has been understood as pivotal for the
development of political hierarchies in the region since 2500 B.P. However, such circulation has not been supported by solid empirical evidence. By using
neutron activation data, we document pottery production, distribution, and consumption in a frontier region between Andean and Amazonian groups.
Ceramic samples were obtained from a systematic regional survey in four valleys in the Caquetá River Basin: Valle de las Papas, Santa Rosa, Descanse,
and Yunguillo. The compositional analysis of clay provides evidence of intra and interregional exchange of utilitarian and prestige pottery goods. Even
though pottery production was mainly local, there was some movement between the valleys. There is no strong evidence for the consumption of foreign
pottery; therefore, the long established idea emphasizing a solid interaction sphere between Andean and Amazonian groups must be reconsidered for this
region.
Giron-Abrego, Mario [294] see Saldana, Melanie
Gísladóttir, Guðrún [95] see Adderley, Paul
Glascock, Michael [57] see Makowski, Krzysztof
Glascock, Michael (University of Missouri)
[91]                A Database of Neutron Activation Analysis Characterizing Indigenous Ceramics from South America
The earliest ceramics in South America were made by the indigenous peoples at least 7,500 years B.P. Ceramics were used for a variety of purposes,
including cooking and storage vessels, funerary urns, toys, ceremonial items, sculptures, and other art forms. Over the past 25 years, the Archaeometry
Laboratory at the University of Missouri Research Reactor has performed neutron activation analysis on more than 7,000 ceramics and clays from
locations throughout South America to establish a comprehensive geochemical and descriptive database. The ceramics database has facilitated a wide
range of investigations concerning both local production and exchange over long distances. This poster will describe the database and provide an
overview of recent research along with suggestions for future research.
[57]                Chair
Glascock, Michael D. [180] see Luo, Wugan
Glascock, Ph.D, Michael D. [93] see Orozco, Joseph
Glassburn, Crystal (Anthropology Department, University of Alaska Fairbanks), Ben A. Potter (Anthropology Department, University of Alaska
Fair), Joshua D. Reuther (University of Alaska Museum of the North, Fairbank) and Matthew J. Wooller (Alaska Stable Isotope Facility, University
of Alas)
[124]               Steppes Across the Land: Reconstructions of Steppe Bison Mobility Patterns in East-Central Alaska through Isotopic Analyses and
                    Implications for Prehistoric Human Behavior
Steppe bison (Bison priscus) were an important species for interior Alaskan subsistence economies during the late Pleistocene and early Holocene, but the
locations of preferred bison habitat areas, seasonal movement patterns, responses to environmental change, and other behavioral factors remain largely
unexplored in Alaskan archaeology. This study applies strontium, oxygen, and carbon isotopic analyses to 14 sequentially-sampled and AMS radiocarbon
dated steppe bison teeth from two locales in the Yukon-Tanana Uplands in order to reconstruct steppe bison behavior on a seasonal basis. This study is
the first of its kind for a prehistoric species in Alaska, and the dataset encompasses both glacial and interglacial periods, which has allowed for behavioral
comparisons between different climatic periods. The results suggest that bison behavioral ecology changed as climates warmed during the Pleistocene-
Holocene transition, and climate change may have been the driving force behind the eventual extinction of steppe bison. These results are discussed with
regards to how bison seasonal movement patterns, as well as longer-term behavioral changes, may have affected human settlement and subsistence
patterns during the late Pleistocene and early Holocene in Alaska.
[124]               Chair
Glasscock, Mike [91] see Myers, Emlen
Glatz, Claudia [12] see Casana, Jesse
Gleason, Matthew (Worcester Polytechnic Institute) and Adam Watson (Worcester Polytechnic Institute)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 162
[214]            Deciphering Bone Tool Production and Use: A Comparative Assessment of Quantitative Approaches to Microwear Analysis
Recent research in the precolumbian Pueblo southwest has demonstrated the importance of understanding trends in bone industries that closely track
other, related economic sectors such as perishable craft production. A vital next step in this line of inquiry is the identification the specific types of
production activities in which bone tools are employed and variation across time and space. As illustrated by the results of this pilot study, texture analysis
methods, developed within the mechanical engineering discipline, show great promise for advancing the study of bone tool manufacture and use. This
paper attempts to locate the most promising locations on the tool for measurement and analysis of use wear, while exploring the differences between
traditional roughness measures, and multi-scale geometric analysis using area-scale fractal techniques for characterizing and discriminating
microtopographic differences as a function of tool use. The scales of the use-wear and the tool Multi-scale analyses provide characterizations with greater
potential for useful and confident discrimination than the traditional methods.
Glover, Jeffrey [20] see Vaughan, Andrew
Glowacki, Mary
[99]             The Head as the Seat of the Soul: A Medium for Spiritual Reciprocity in the Early Andes
There are many visual representations spanning the different time periods of the ancient Andes, and corroborated by historic accounts, that point to man’s
spiritual essence as residing in the head, and more specifically, head hair. These examples suggest that this power was transferable and maintained the
reciprocal balance between men, and the earthly and supernatural realm. This presentation briefly discusses the human head and hair in Andean belief as
a conduit for the flow of spiritual power as documented in the archaeological, ethnographic, and historic record. The data suggest that such movement of
energy was fundamental to maintaining the equilibrium in life—a balance in social ties and relations, resources, political control, and supernatural
interactions, as broadly conveyed in metaphor. In recognizing this concept, scholars may better interpret what is found in the archaeological record tied to
this basic Andean principal.
Gnivecki, Perry L. [222] see Berman, Mary Jane
Goar, Toni [66] see Kerr, R. Stanley
Goebel, Ted [69] see Keene, Joshua
Goebel, Ted (Texa A&M University) and Joshua Lynch (Texas A&M University)
[242]            Late Glacial Climate Change and the Dispersal of Humans to Beringia: An Ecological Model
New studies of ancient as well as modern human genomes suggest that the immediate ancestors of Native Americans began to disperse from greater
northeast Asia to Beringia after the last glacial maximum, roughly 20,000 cal B.P. These new data require us to reconsider the lengthy incubation period
predicted by the Beringian standstill model as well as the place of the Yana RHS site in our understanding of the peopling of Alaska. In this paper, we
review the climatic, paleoenvironmental, genomic (human as well as other important mammal species), and archaeological records of eastern Siberia and
Beringia to develop an ecological model of human dispersal. Did climate and environmental change during the early part of the late glacial encourage rapid
northward expansion of human populations? How did human adaptations 20,000–13,000 cal B.P. further condition dispersal across the Bering land bridge
to Alaska?
Goepfert, Nicolas [45] see Espinosa, Alicia
Goff, Sheila [289] see Santarelli, Brunella
Gokee, Cameron [17] see Wright, Alice
Gokee, Cameron and Matthew Kroot (Skidmore College)
[177]            Relocate, Aggregate, or Fortify?: Exploring Local Responses to Atlantic Era Entanglement in Southeastern Senegal
The sixteenth–nineteenth centuries in west Africa marked a period of dramatic social and cultural change fueled, in part, by the opening of Atlantic markets
and the rise of predatory states. The responses of societies peripheral to these political economic processes often involved strategic shifts in the production
of space—including relocation to highland refuge areas, aggregation into larger villages, increases in residential mobility, and fortification of elite houses
and/or entire settlements. In this paper, we compare historical and archaeological evidence to model the ways in which physical and social dimensions of
landscape shaped, and were shaped by, these strategies in the Senegambia and elsewhere across west Africa. In so doing, we also consider the interplay
between these spatial strategies and local constellations of power and authority. Applying this model to preliminary data from our archaeological research
in southeastern Senegal, we offer some hypotheses about the origins of socio-spatial relations among the Bedik, Peul, and Malinke communities living
today in this region.
Gold, Claire [187] see Mires, Ann Marie
Gold, Jacob
[262]            One Foot in the Field and the Other in the Forest: Indigenous “State Hedging” in Cambodia and Beyond
This essay uses a comparative approach to investigate the practice of "state hedging" deployed by various peoples moving in and out of the margins of
large-scale historical states. Among these peoples are the Kuy ethnic group whose communities in north-central Cambodia have invited me to study them
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                163
as their traditional forests rapidly disappear. Kuy methods of "state hedging" and the outcomes of pursuing this practice will be compared with the use of
similar tactics by peoples in Africa and the Americas. Investigation of "state hedging," I believe, can shed light on under-appreciated facets of both early
and more recent complex tropical states, including the advantages of tactical pluralism on the part of those states. It can also reframe the debate over the
meaning of "agency" and "marginality" on the part of less-complex indigenous state-hedgers.
Golden, Charles (Brandeis University), Andrew Scherer (Brown University), Whittaker Schroder (University of Pennsylvania) and Clive Vella
(Brown University)
[59]              Decentralizing the Economies of the Maya West
Many reconstructions of precolumbian Maya economies are based on a centralized model of exchange, in which major capitals acted as import and export
hubs and centers of production, while royal courts provided some form of management for long-distance trade networks. Research in the western Maya
Lowlands, and particularly the Usumacinta River Valley, suggests that although during the Classic period (A.D. 250–810) powerful dynastic centers like
Piedras Negras, Yaxchilan, and their neighbors functioned as significant nodes in trade networks, the networks themselves were maintained by hinterland
elites. These elites functioned as critical allies for the royal courts and must have provided goods and services to those courts. But hinterland sites were
also centers of production in their own right, with exchange networks that did not always intersect with those of the royal center. Hinterland elites pursued
their own ambitions and sought local economic benefits that sometimes diverged from the best interests of the courts. In this paper, we present the results
of research in the hinterlands of Yaxchilan and Piedras Negras, and consider these data in light of a decentered model of Classic Maya economies.
Golden, Patrick [261] see Rabinowitz, Adam
Goldfield, Anna (Boston University), Ross Booton (University of Sheffield) and Teresa Steele (University of California, Davis)
[80]              Cost Thresholds and Differential Resource Exploitation Behavior during the Middle and Upper Paleolithic in Southwest France
“Specialization” and “generalization” are used as descriptors for Paleolithic subsistence behavior, particularly when differentiating the Middle and Upper
Paleolithic. These terms, however, dichotomize and obscure the complexity of subsistence decision-making. Instead, it is more productive to investigate
whether Neanderthals and anatomically modern humans (AMH) differed in their perception of thresholds of cost versus gain in processing food. These
thresholds are points beyond which the investment of further time or energy is wasted. I highlight two subsistence thresholds relevant to both AMH and
Neanderthals: bone fat extraction and the use of fire. Exploiting a carcass for marrow and grease yields rapidly diminishing returns. Fire is a costly
resource to acquire and maintain. Higher cost thresholds for AMH may have been an adaptive advantage in glacial periods of the Paleolithic. I present
methodology for exploring differences in bone fat exploitation by Neanderthals and AMH, using a case study that applies this methodology to faunal
assemblages from the Quina Mousterian (Chez Pinaud Jonzac) and the Aurignacian (La Ferrassie) from southwest France. I then present a modeling
approach to fire use in the Paleolithic that predicts implications of different intensities of fire use for cooking on the competitiveness of Neanderthal and
AMH populations.
Goldstein, Lynne [30] see Steponaitis, Vincas
Goldstein, Lynne (Michigan State University)
[48]              Discussant
Goldstein, Paul (UC San Diego)
[219]             Tiwanaku Colonization in Historical Context—Directed, Diasporic or Daisy Chain? Evidence from Moquegua, Locumba, Azapa
The expansion of Tiwanaku civilization is the earliest example of large-scale demographic colonization under an Andean state. Between the seventh to
eleventh centuries C.E., household, mortuary, and settlement archaeology attest to large migrant populations of altiplano Tiwanaku cultural affiliation who
established permanent residence and governance in the western oasis valleys of Moquegua, Locumba, Sama, Caplina, and Azapa. However, the regional
historical context of this demographic colonization is not resolved. What does the dating, diversity, and distribution of Tiwanaku settlement tell us about the
timing, point(s) of origin and direction of Tiwanaku expansion? Was there “state colonization,” socially engineered and mobilized through the intervention of
one mediating center, as with Inca mitmaquna? Was the process entirely diasporic, with each Tiwanaku colonial stream the direct enclave of a distinct
source community? Or did Tiwanaku colonization “daisy chain” over time, from initial provinces like that of Moquegua to secondary and tertiary colonies in
a peripatetic refugee resettlement process that outlasted the state itself? New systematic survey data from the key intermediate Locumba Valley (2015–16)
are compared with settlement patterns from full coverage pedestrian surveys of the Moquegua (1993–98) and Azapa (1991–92) valleys to shed new light
on the regional history of Tiwanaku colonization.
[74]              Discussant
Golitko, Mark [149] see Cercone, Ashley
Golitko, Mark (University of Notre Dame), Ethan Cochrance (University of Auckland) and James Goff (University of New South Wales)
[296]             Coastal Development and Palaeoenvironment on the North Coast of Papua New Guinea: The Paniri Creek Sequence
Pleistocene-Holocene environmental variance in the southwestern Pacific plays a critical role in explaining the human settlement potential of islands, and
their respective settlement histories. In particular, prevalence of viable ecological niches for human settlement on the northern coast of New Guinea has
likely fluctuated due to a combination of eustatic and tectonic factors that may have constrained the size of human populations living there as well as its
potential as a route of movement between ISEA and the remote Pacific islands at times. We examine a long-term record of coastal development at Paniri
Creek, a location now 14 km inland from which near-coastal deposits and human remains were recovered during the 1920s. Our new analysis of the Paniri
sequence indicates a complex sequence of environmental change spanning the late Pleistocene to mid-Holocene, including potential palaeo-shore
deposits. Implications of observed changes in coastal morphology and environment are discussed in relation to the regional archaeological record as
currently understood.
Gomani-Chindebvu, Elizabeth [211] see Nightingale, Sheila
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             164
Gomez, Sergio [129] see Mejia Ramon, Andres
Gómez, Emmanuel [154] see Grave, Alfonso
Gómez García, Yajaira (UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL AUTÓNOMA DE MÉXICO)
[136]             Indicadores arqueológicos de talleres de cerámica en las unidades habitacionales de Cacaxtla-Xochitecatl
En las excavaciones realizadas en el 2011-2012 de las unidades habitacionales del periodo Formativo en la terraza VII el Proyecto Arqueológico El
hombre y sus recursos en el Valle Puebla-Tlaxcala registraron 42 formaciones circulares, 9 hornos y 3 concentraciones de materiales diversos en un área
de 802 m².
En esta ponencia se van a exponer el análisis de los materiales encontrados en el área y en el interior de dichas formaciones para explicar sus funciones
y su relación con los hornos.
Con el análisis del material y del contexto se propone la posible producción artesanal alfarera en donde las formaciones circulares se utilizan como
espacios para almacenar cerámica. Las unidades habitacionales del periodo formativo, excavadas en temporadas anteriores han presentado diferentes
áreas de actividad lo que ha permitido reconstruir la vida cotidiana de sus pobladores, en esta ocasión la posible producción de cerámica forma parte de
estas actividades cotidianas.
Gomez-Gastelum, Luis (Universidad de Guadalajara)
[154]             Cerámica atoyac inciso de la cuenca de sayula, jalisco. Aproximaciones a su iconografía
En esta ponencia se describe y analiza la cerámica denominada Atoyac inciso, propia de la cuenca de Sayula, ubicada en la región sur del estado
mexicano de Jalisco. Se trata de una manifestación propia de la fase epónima de la región, misma que se ubica entre los años 500 y 1100 d.C. La
intención es observarla no sólo como un producto cerámico, sino como un fenómeno social de importancia en la época. Así, se discuten sus contextos,
con la finalidad de ubicarla como un producto asociado con las élites de la localidad. Luego se hace una descripción de sus motivos decorativos,
buscando encontrar los patrones que pudieran tener. Por último, se efectúa un primer acercamiento iconográfico de los mismos, para prefigurar los
mensajes que existieron en esta cerámica como parte de un sistema de comunicación entre élites regionales y al interior de la sociedad sayulteca del
periodo en cuestión.
[154]             Discussant
[154]             Chair
Gómez-Puche, Magdalena [72] see Lozano, Sergi
Gonciar, Andre [24] see Bethard, Jonathan
Goni, Rafael (Instituto Nacional de Antropología/UBA)
[94]              Extensification in Archaeology
The concept of extensification was used in an ethnographical sense, particularly by L. Binford (2001). It was deeply related with the new organization of
American hunter-gatherers when horses were introduced in the continent by European people. The main examples to introduce this concept were the
Great Plains societies in North America and the Tehuelche society in Patagonia, South America.
However, the use of the concept of extensification in an archaeological perspective is not very usual. Furthermore, its definition is not very clear; more
related with its opposition, the concept of intensification; a term more well defined and used in Archaeology.
In this presentation, the main pourpose is to clarify this concept in terms of its use in an archaeological example of southern Patagonia. Also, the example
takes into account a case of European precontact, previous to the introduction of horses in the Tehuelche society. The use of Binford´s frame of
references, like environmental information and Effective Temperatures (ET), were a useful tool to identify cases of the process of extensification in the
study area.
Gonlin, Nan (Bellevue College)
[107]             Midnight Madness in Mesoamerica: Dark Doings in the Ancient World
After the sun went down, the world of ancient Mesoamerica was transformed into a dark landscape. Some sought sleep while others came alive for
nocturnal naughtiness. Ancient Mesoamericans simultaneously embraced and respected the dark. Are nightly practices destined to remain obscured from
our view, or can we illuminate such dark doings by expanding our focus from daily practices to include those of the night? A fundamental question explored
in this paper is the extent to which there is material evidence for what ancient humans did at night using ancient Mesoamerica as a case study. Nighttime
has left its mark on the archaeological record and we hope to shed light on this auspicious time of day through the exploration of several different types of
evidence and various cultures. Tasks of nightly living differed from those of the day. Ritual activities permeated the darkness and cosmological beliefs
constructed ancient conceptions of night and day. The nightly practices of ancient Mesoamericans were rich with meaning and transcended time and
space.
[32]              Discussant
[107]             Chair
Gonlin, Nancy [40] see Williams, Justin
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               165
Gonzales, Cristina [93] see Hankins, Sharon
Gonzalez, Albert (Cal State University - East Bay), Heather Atherton (Environmental Science Associates) and Javier Hernandez (Dudek
Environmental and Engineering Consulting)
[110]            Beyond Missions: Documenting Mexican and Mexican-American Adobes in California
In the foreword to their 1931 review of nineteenth-century adobe houses in California, historical architects Donald Hannaford and Revel Edwards express
despair at the state of such research in their time, noting that “printed material on the subject” could only be generated via discovery in the field. Eighty-five
years later, research is still lacking. California’s famed colonial missions tend to draw the bulk of archaeological attention while research associated with
Mexican- and Gold Rush-era adobes sits largely in the hands of conservation specialists, amateur historians, and national, state, and local parks
personnel. To be fair, much work has been accomplished in the hands of the latter. However, the problem statement as presented by Hannaford and
Edwards still holds: since the level of study and publication remains largely local and avocational, data associated with Mexican- and Gold Rush-era
adobes is not readily available in all or even most cases, making comparative study difficult. We aim to remedy the situation, facilitating the comparative
study of nineteenth-century California adobes by developing a comprehensive database documenting their condition, comparable attributes, and
associated research. This poster presents the preliminary results of that effort, highlighting several emerging comparative studies in the process.
Gonzalez, Juan [200] see Skowronek, Russell
Gonzalez, Sara (University of Washington, Seattle)
[266]            Field Methods in Indigenous Archaeology: Building Capacity through Community-Based Research and Education
There are few formal field schools in the United States where students can receive formal training in tribal historic preservation, community-based
collaboration, and archaeological field methods. Given the increasing role of consultation and collaboration in disciplinary practice, learning to effectively
communicate and build relationships with a Tribal Historic Preservation Office (THPO) and/or tribal community is a critical skill. The Confederated Tribes of
Grand Ronde Community of Oregon’s THPO and the University of Washington have thus partnered to develop Field Methods in Indigenous Archaeology, a
summer field school that offers both Grand Ronde community members and undergraduate students hands-on training in tribal historic preservation and
archaeological field methods. This program is an example of the ways in which community-based, indigenized approaches to archaeological research and
undergraduate education contributes to the capacity of the Grand Ronde THPO: 1) to care for tribal heritage on reservation and trust lands, and 2) to
educate the next generation of heritage managers and archaeologists—tribal and non-tribal—about what it means to care for tribal cultural resources.
[203]            Moderator
Gonzalez, Juan (The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley) and James Hinthorne (The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley)
[279]            Polished Edge Stone Tools from the Gulf of Morrosquillo, Caribbean Coast of Colombia, Evidence of an Advanced Lithic Industry
Highly polished edge stone tools occur in large numbers all along the Gulf of Morrosquillo’s coastal plain on the Caribbean Coast of Colombia. Despite the
remarkably large quantities of stone tools and the impressive craftsmanship they display, they have gone unnoticed by archaeological surveys. In an area
where the geology is dominated by a thick sequence of marine sedimentary rocks, the presence of stone tools made from high grade metamorphic and
igneous rocks suggest that these were likely imported as finished products. This study reports on an assemblage of over 200 edge stone tools found by
farmers at or close to the ground surface and as such lack chronological and cultural contexts. A combination of mineralogical analysis of a representative
suite of tools using non-destructive XRD, an assessment of the degree of surface weathering and comparisons with museum collections, are used to argue
that the majority of these elaborate tools were made by the Tairona people. The Tairona inhabited the southern and western flanks of the Santa Marta
Massif, 250 km to the north between 800 and 1600 A.D. Production at a large scale and a well-organized distribution system are required to rationalize the
large volume of lithic tools.
González, Sergio [97] see Romano, Francisco
Gonzalez Lauck, Rebecca
[178]            On the Question of Olmec Architecture and Sculpture Beyond the Gulf Coast
For over half a century, the ancient city located in La Venta, Tabasco, has served as a standard in defining what is commonly referred to as Olmec in the
time period between ca. 1000–400 B.C. This paper will examine the architectural and sculptural vestiges in sites that have been defined as Olmec outside
the Gulf Coast heartland, in order to define the component(s) that define it as “Olmec,” as well as to explain the differences observed.
Gonzalez-Macqueen, Felipe (University of Toronto), Giles Spence-Morrow (University of Toronto), Peter Bikoulis (University of Toronto), Willy
Yépez Álvarez (Royal Ontario Museum) and Justin Jennings (Royal Ontario Museum)
[205]            A New Methodology for Geoglyph Research: The Drone and Satellite Imagery Survey of the Sihuas Valley, Peru
Throughout the twentieth century, archaeologists have used aerial photography to record and study geoglyphs and other large features. This method,
however, has its limitations like expense, flying time, and image resolution. With the addition of satellite imagery and drone photography into the
archaeological toolbox, we can now obtain higher resolution images of variable landscapes. We conducted a preliminary survey of a section of the Sihuas
Valley, Peru, in order to better understand the landscape surrounding the Middle Horizon–Late Intermediate site of Quilcapampa (A.D. 600–1400). To
identify and map geoglyphs and other anthropogenic features scattered across this area of desert pampa, we used a combination of satellite and drone
imagery that were then integrated into a GIS setting. Initial satellite image reconnaissance allowed us to locate some of the most visible geoglyphs,
providing target areas for subsequent field study using drone photography and pedestrian survey. The results of this preliminary survey showed that each
drone pass revealed a significant amount of information neither visible solely by satellite imagery nor easily comprehensible by observers on the ground.
While not an exhausting survey, this study demonstrates how a combined satellite/drone/pedestrian survey methodology can provide accurate, detailed
imagery of past landscapes.
Gonzalez-Morales, Manuel
[170]            Lawrence Straus on Palaeolithic Art: How to Marry Art and Adaptation?
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              166
As a great specialist in Palaeolithic Archaeology of the Old World, and also a superb connoisseur of the painted and engraved caves of France and Spain,
Professor Straus had to deal with the problem of fitting the evidence of Palaeolithic “art” in the general adaptive framework of the processual Archaeology
he was practicing along his professional career. In this presentation, I want to analyze the evolution of his thinking about this topic, as a reflection on the
general theoretical problems involved in the relationship between symbolic representations and the everyday life of prehistoric social groups.
González-Sobrino, Blanca [236] see Aguirre-Samudio, Ana
Gonzalez-Tennant, Edward (University of Florida)
[221]             Cyberfeminism, Virtual Worlds, and Resisting the Feminization of Digital Archaeology
In feminist technoscience, feminist technologies are those which are good for the oppressed. Cyberfeminists view online worlds as one such technology;
although many question how they can support social transformation. The answer to this dilemma for many cyberfeminists requires that we resist
embedding new technologies with entrenched hierarchies of power. After a brief review of how hierarchical thinking is embedded in some familiar
technologies, I examine the possibilities virtual technologies hold for creating experiences and narratives which challenge dichotomous and hierarchical
views of the past. New technologies allow us to interact with past landscapes, inhabit the bodies of others, and even explore the surface of new worlds. Will
these technologies support hierarchical tendencies, or can we affect a new paradigm? What is archaeology’s role? Digital archaeology can help shape the
use of these technologies as they relate to heritage, community, and identity. In order to realize this goal, our discipline needs to resist the feminization of
digital archaeology. I end the paper with a frank discussion of how our discipline can avoid maligning technological methodologists. This includes drawing
inspiration from potentially surprising places, including the intersection of video games and popular culture.
Goodman, Steve [223] see Boivin, Nicole
Goodman Elgar, Melissa (Washington State University) and Amanda Logan (Northwestern University)
[177]             Earthen Dwellings from Banda, Ghana: Geoarchaeological Analyses of Archaeological and Modern Structures
West African earthen architecture is among the most elaborated in the world as recognized by the World Heritage site status of Asante buildings at
Kumasi. However, its history is poorly known. This study begins to redress this gap by employing bulk sediment analyses and soil micromorphology to
characterize building remains recovered at the Ngre Kataa site, in Banda, Ghana, and a contemporary earthen compound in the region. The study was
conducted in tandem with archaeological and paleoethnobotanical studies in the region which included excavation of superimposed fifteenth to
seventeenth century occupations and regional ethnoarchaeological studies. Here, we consider the technical choices revealed by construction material
properties. We found a broad range of material practices identified in the archaeological materials, which appear to be dramatically simplified over time.
We consider reasons for continuity and change in these technical practices with reference to socioeconomic and political shifts over the last five centuries.
Goodmaster, Christopher (Versar, Inc.) and Erin Helton (Resource Data, Inc.)
[168]             Paleolandscape Reconstruction and Modeling in the Lower Pecos River Valley
The Lower Pecos River valley in southwestern Texas provides an ideal location for the development of a three-dimensional landscape reconstruction using
modern geospatial methods, including LiDAR and digital photogrammetry. The goal of this project is to create a scientifically accurate, high resolution,
prehistoric landscape model of a portion of the Lower Pecos Valley, an archaeologically-rich region that has experienced widespread modifications to the
natural landscape during the historic period. The development of such a model will provide an accurate context for the myriad of prehistoric sites in the
area and contribute to landscape-scale analyses of the social, economic, and ritual aspects of prehistoric life in the region.
Goodwin, Whitney [27] see Kovacevich, Brigitte
Goodwin, Whitney (Southern Methodist University), Kacy L. Hollenback (Southern Methodist University), Fern Swenson (State Historical Society
of North Dakota) and William C. Hockaday (Baylor University)
[115]             Changing Foodways in Culture Contact Contexts on the Northern Great Plains: Lipid Residue Analysis at the Double Ditch Site, North
                  Dakota
Disentangling drivers of technological change and continuity in culture contact situations is complex. In the northern Great Plains, earthlodge village groups
are reported to have abandoned traditional ceramic containers for certain tasks by the early nineteenth century. The veracity of these observations is
confounded by other contact situation processes, such as epidemics, which also impacted ceramic production and use. Ethnoarchaeology has
documented the use of particular vessel types exclusively for particular food types when new materials, such as metal containers, are introduced. But
these changes occur based on assessments of performance characteristics of new and old objects and preferences of the people who use them. Did
Mandan groups stop cooking meat in ceramic containers as reported in historic texts? If so, how widespread was this change across space and time?
What other driving processes need to be considered? To track changes in cooking practices of earthlodge village groups in culture contact contexts, this
pilot research analyzes ceramics and their associated sediments from the Double Ditch site, North Dakota, for lipid signatures, with the goal of developing
a protocol for a broader study examining changes in ceramic use in protohistoric and historic period Mandan villages.
Goodwin, Joshua (University of Florida)
[133]             From Pots to Pits: Ritual Use of Waterbirds on the Northern Gulf Coast of Florida
The archaeological record of Hopewell cultures of the eastern Woodlands demonstrates the ritual importance of birds in the form of effigy pipes, copper
and mica cutouts, and mortuary vessels. Bird motifs continue to be prevalent beyond the Hopewell period in peninsular Florida, during Weeden Island
times (A.D. 200–900), when representations of waterbirds, among other avian taxa, appear on pottery, often in the form of effigy vessels. Because of their
ability to traverse worlds—air, land, and sea—waterbirds may have been accorded special significance in Weeden Island cosmology. In this paper, I
consider the extent to which cosmology goes beyond material representations of birds to involve ritual protocols for the handling and deposition of the
skeletal remains of waterbirds. Recent excavations at Shell Mound (8LV42), on the northern Gulf Coast of Florida, yielded hundreds of skeletal elements
identified to several species of waterbirds from a single silo-shaped pit feature. Given the spatial and temporal relationship of Shell Mound with a Weeden
Island mortuary facility (Palmetto Mound) and the relationship of the faunal contents with recurring iconographic characters of this time period, this paper
proposes that the presence of waterbird elements in the context of such pit features represents ritualized deposition.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              167
Goodyear, Albert C. [8] see Meer, Kelsey
Goodyear, Albert (SC Institute of Archaeology & Anthropology), I. Randolph Daniel, Jr., Christopher Moore and David Anderson
[159]             Paleoindian Responses at the Younger Dryas Boundary: A Case Study from the Carolinas
The onset of the Younger Dryas stadial is thought to have occurred during the Clovis Period. The cause of the Younger Dryas and the near simultaneous
disappearance of the Clovis techno-culture in North America continues to be a set of events that are not well understood. Debates exist regarding the
cause of the Younger Dryas and its possible affects on climate, plants, and animals, as well as humans. The archaeological record stands apart from these
disciplines as an independent source of data and possible insights. Archaeological studies in the Carolinas are providing compelling evidence regarding
Clovis settlement systems and demography and the immediately succeeding post-Clovis fluted point period. During Clovis times, two geographically
separate but adjacent macro bands are thought to have existed in North and South Carolina, respectively. In the immediately following time period defined
by instrument-assisted fluted points (Redstones), projectile point frequency drops dramatically and territorial ranges contract. Significant technological
change also exists between Clovis and Redstone points. During this period, a possible travel way running along the Fall Line from near Raleigh, North
Carolina, to the Savannah River suggests that some cultural connections between the former Clovis macro bands still existed.
Gopnik, Hilary (Emory University)
[87]              Grounded: A Late Bronze Age Fortress on the Şerur Valley floor, Naxçivan
The Middle to Late Bronze Age transition in the South Caucasus is generally characterized by a shift from small settlements and elaborate kurgan burials
to hilltop fortresses and smaller burials grouped in cemeteries. It has been argued that the hilltop fortresses with their broad view over the landscape
served as anchors to the mobile populations that surrounded them, and ultimately to the development of increased social hierarchies at these fortresses.
This pattern has been identified primarily in Armenia and Georgia while evidence from the south in Naxçivan has been largely absent. In 2014 and 2015,
the Naxçivan Archaeological Project undertook excavations on the Şerur Valley floor in an area that had been deeply cut into by an earlier Soviet
bulldozing operation. These excavations revealed a sequence of Middle Bronze burials and ritual deposits directly topped and cut into by a Late Bronze
elite building with large rooms and a buttressed cyclopean fortification wall—essentially a ground-level citadel. This presentation will present the results of
these excavations and will suggest that this sequence will force a reconsideration of the processes that created the fortress based polities of the Late
Bronze to Early Iron Ages.
[87]              Chair
Goralski, Craig (Cypress College) and Alexis Gray (Norco College)
[187]             Can We All Get Along? Bridging the Divide between Forensic Anthropologists, Forensic Archaeologists, and Law Enforcement Personnel
Despite being stakeholders with many shared goals, the working relationships between forensic anthropologists, forensic archaeologists, and their
colleagues in law enforcement are often strained. The authors argue that cultural differences among the groups have contributed to the underuse and
misuse of forensic anthropologists and archaeologists both in the United States and elsewhere, resulting in investigations that are neither as
anthropological nor as scientific as juries and the public are led to believe.
In the fall and winter of 2015, an anonymous online survey was given to forensic anthropologists, forensic archaeologists, and law enforcement personnel.
Respondents were asked to assess levels of anthropologist/archaeologist/law enforcement cooperation based on their own personal experience and asked
to identify common ways that disparate backgrounds, training, culture, and communication have impacted this cooperation. They were asked how each
stakeholder group contributed to forensic cases and whether that contribution was adequate, appropriate, and effective.
This paper will summarize the survey responses and highlight trends in the data. It will assess why and to what extent strain exists among forensic
anthropologists, forensic archaeologists, and law enforcement personnel. Finally, we’ll discuss the extent to which these issues can be resolved and
suggest directions for the future.
Gorczyk, John
[80]              Key Human-Animal Interactions in Neolithic Southeastern Europe: New Faunal Evidence from Bulgaria
Southeastern Europe has always played an important role in the story of the spread of Neolithic lifeways from the Near East into Europe. At times, it has
been seen as a bridge, barrier, or mosaic (Tringham 2000). As essential components of the “Neolithic Package,” animals have been critical to the telling of
this story. The availability of zooarchaeological data for the Neolithic in southeastern Europe has been uneven over the years, with some countries
enjoying more coverage than others. Bulgaria lies at the heart of the Balkan Peninsula and is home to some of the more spectacular developments related
to the spread of Neolithic lifeways. This paper presents new faunal evidence from several early and late Neolithic sites in Bulgaria and examines how our
current understanding of the animal bone data stands in relation to some of the long-standing research questions in Bulgarian prehistory. In so doing, it
reevaluates these issues within a social zooarchaeological framework, arguing that animals are constituents of Neolithic society, and that viewing them as
such will have fundamental implications for the way zooarchaeology is practiced in the future.
[80]              Chair
Gordon, Gwyneth [135] see Marsteller, Sara
Gore, Kathy [195] see Snow, Meradeth
Goring-Morris, Nigel (Hebrew University) and Anna Belfer-Cohen (Hebrew University)
[52]              “Off with Their Heads”: Skull Removal in the Prehistoric Near East
While there is a huge difference in every aspect of existence between simple human societies, i.e., hunter-gatherers and complex ones, i.e., industrial
groups, the head is always considered as the residing place of the essential part of what defines ‘us’ as rational human beings at the individual level. One
may thus assume that this was the case also in prehistoric times, which at least partially explains the special treatment of heads that one can observe
through millennia, from the pre-agricultural societies of the Natufian (beginning ca. 15,000 years cal B.P.) through the end of the Neolithic period (ca. 7,000
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              168
years cal B.P.) in the Near East. Indeed, this custom is one of the few clear-cut examples bridging between the prehistoric pre-agricultural, early
agricultural, and even pastoral societies throughout the region. We shall attempt to place this practice within a broader perspective, trying to see how and
why it continued through the turbulent times of changing lifeways occurring at the Paleolithic–Neolithic transformation.
Gosner, Linda [147] see Smith, Alexander
Goudge, Charlotte (University of Bristol)
[280]             Discoveries in Hatteras: European and Native American Cultural Contact and Assimilation
Excavations at the early contact Native American site on Hatteras Island, Outer Banks, North Carolina, has yielded an incredibly varied material culture
that displays all aspects of early Native/European contact in the area. Our collection of newly discovered early European expansion period artefacts, found
at the Cape Creek site, a major Croatoan town and trade hub, hints at intense contact between the natives and the first European settlers. This paper is the
first academic release of results from the Dig: Hatteras excavation on Buxton Island in the Outer Banks, pointing to the spread of colonists influence some
50 miles southeast of the settlement on Roanoke and strongly hinting at not only contact but possible cultural assimilation with the Natives. This paper will
discuss our data as well as methodological approaches to a complicated site of great cultural importance.
Gould, Peter
[71]              On the Case: Methodology in Public Archaeology
Public engagement by archaeologists has become well-entrenched in the ethics codes and practice of the profession. Specialized journals now present
reports on public and community archaeology projects, usually in the form of individual case studies. However, the growing number of public archaeology
projects been accompanied neither by the development of standard practice methodologies nor by a tradition of assessment of project outcomes against
defined objectives. As a result, the self-reflective project and program evaluation common in other social science fields is largely absent in public
archaeology. While it is true that public engagement with archaeology is contingent on the local context, the same is true in disciplines such as political
science or education, where methodology and outcome evaluation are priorities. This paper draws upon an analysis of the papers published since
inception in the journal Public Archaeology to illustrate the issues. It then proposes a case-study methodology derived from the international relations field
as an alternative approach to evaluating and reporting the results of public archaeology projects. Finally, the author’s application of this methodology to
research in communities in three countries provide a working example of the value of taking a more structured, hypothesis-driven approach to public
engagement projects.
Gourichon, Lionel [146] see Rendu, William
Graff, Emily Elizabeth (School of Anthropology, University of Arizona)
[103]             Troía's Three Roman Ladies: The Analysis of Three Cases of Trepanation at Necrópolis de Calderia (Setúbal, Portugal)
The Necrópolis de Calderia contains nearly 200 burials spanning from the first through fifth centuries A.D. The cemetery is located on the western edge of
the ancient Roman site of Troía, which is considered the largest fish salting, garum production, and distribution center in the Roman world. Among the
inhumations, three cases of trepanation have been identified. The three individuals are adult women. Trepanation, also known as trephination or
craniectomy, is the surgical practice in which a portion(s) of the cranial vault is permanently removed from the skull of a living individual. This form of
medical intervention was often used to treat headaches, cranial trauma, and neurological disorders such as epilepsy according to several ancient sources.
Trepanation also has been associated with ritual and magical practices, however, the cultural and social purposes of trepanation are difficult to
archaeologically discern. The three individuals appear to have not only survived the procedure but also endured multiple episodes of trepanation. This
paper discusses the analysis of Calderia’s trepanned individuals and medical practices of the western Roman Empire.
Grafft-Weiss, Amber J. [260] see Bennett, Sarah
Graham, Elizabeth (Institute of Archaeology)
[26]              Exchange and the Economy over Time
Exchange drove Maya economy at many levels, yet the political landscape changed dramatically from the Preclassic to early Colonial Period. How did
exchange networks respond to these changes? Or, we might ask instead if political change or upheaval was instigated by fluctuations or upsets in what
might be called the market economy and those who sought to manage or control networks of supply? Did the ability to exact tax/tribute provide rulers and
nobles with the economic power to invest and benefit from markets and trade, or did the tax system become unmanageable and problematic in terms of the
economic power wielded by tax receivers? These questions clearly cannot be answered in full, but hypotheses will be suggested and avenues explored
with particular attention to the Classic to Postclassic transition.
Graham, Martha (SRI Foundation)
[30]              Seeking Balance: The Role of the Review Committee in NAGPRA Implementation
As part of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), Congress established the NAGPRA Review Committee, and gave it
formal responsibilities covering various critical aspects of NAGPRA's implementations. In establishing the Review Committee, Congress sought to "ensure
a balance between differing viewpoints among Native Americans, museums, and scientific organizations." This paper considers the Review Committee's
involvement in NAGPRA and the important roles that the Society for American Archaeology played in support of fulfilling Congress's mandates and intent
for NAGPRA and the Review Committee.
Graham, Elizabeth [262] see Isendahl, Christian
Grant, David [185] see Burchell, Meghan
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               169
Grávalos, M. Elizabeth [219] see Hubert, Erell
Grávalos, M. Elizabeth (University of Illinois at Chicago), Patrick Ryan Williams (The Field Museum), Lauren Monz (Northwestern University) and
Erell Hubert (University of Toronto)
[219]             An Obsidian Stone Tool Workshop at Cerro Baúl?: Wari Provincial Craft Production and Political Economy
Here, we present a preliminary chaîne opératoire analysis of obsidian stone tools and associated debitage recovered from a single architectural compound
at the site of Cerro Baúl. As the only known direct interaction sphere of the prehispanic Wari and Tiwanaku empires, research at Cerro Baúl in the
Moquegua Valley, Peru, offers a rare perspective of colonial encounters and intertwined political economies. During the 2015 excavation season, we
exposed a dense midden context consisting of various obsidian lithics, including large bifaces in the typical Wari style, projectile points, retouch flakes, and
cores. Although previous researchers have recovered obsidian stone tools at Cerro Baúl, these have largely consisted of finished ritual objects bearing little
sign of wear. This discovery is the first evidence of on-site obsidian lithic production. Our chaîne opératoire approach permits a closer look at elite
production practices within the context of a potential Wari provincial obsidian workshop. Through this analysis, we highlight the trade networks and local
craft specialization of an expansive prehispanic state situated in a colonial frontier.
Grave, Alfonso (INAH Sinaloa) and Emmanuel Gómez (INAH Sinaloa)
[154]             La cerámica Aztatlán de Sinaloa y Nayarit
Desde la excavación de Gordon Ekholm en Guasave en 1941, se consideró a la cerámica Aztatlán como una importación del centro de México. Algunos
como el propio Ekholm y Hasso Von Winning mencionaron la posibilidad de que artesanos Mixteco-Poblanos hayan venido a enseñar su arte a los
primitivos habitantes de la costa nayarita y sinaloense. Otros, más mesurados como Clement Meighan; Charles Kelley; Helmut Publ, Beatriz Braniff y John
Pohl hablan de sistemas mercantiles de largo alcance e incluso se ha mencionado la palabra pochteca. Para la mayoría ha quedado en una influencia
directa y unidireccional del Centro de México ó Oaxaca, hacia la zona nuclear Aztatlán.
Sin embargo, para quienes hemos trabajado en la llanura costera de Sinaloa y Nayarit en los últimos veinte años, nos parece claro que la cerámica
Aztatlán es el resultado del propio desarrollo político y económico de los grupos que habitaron estos lares e incluso en la cerámica de la fase Baluarte del
sur de Sinaloa se encuentran ya varios de los diseños que serán comunes en la cerámica Aztatlán; incluyendo algunos motivos iconográficos. ¿Cómo fue
el proceso que propició la cerámica Aztatlán en el Posclásico?
Gravel-Miguel, Claudine (Arizona State University)
[72]              Analyzing Magdalenian Social Networks in their Environmental Context
This research argues for a refocus of the study of prehistoric social networks that involves contextualizing the inter-site links often interpreted as indicators
of social interactions between different groups. It focuses on the social networks created during the 3 sub-periods of the Magdalenian in the Cantabrian
region, and visible through similarities of portable art representations. It uses Species Distribution Modeling and Maximum Classification Likelihood on
faunal presence data to reconstruct prehistoric biomes and to contextualize the networks reconstructed through the art analysis. It demonstrates the
potential of mapping the recreated networks onto the reconstructed biomes and of identifying the linked sites' foraging and minimal band territories to
distinguish between a single group's local mobility and inter-group social alliances. Looking at the differences in contextualized networks over time also
allows understanding human-environment interactions, and how these affected human social organization in the Upper Paleolithic.
Graves, Tim [55] see Miller, Myles
Gravlin Beman, Ashley (Florida Atlantic University)
[163]             Ceramics, Migrations and Ethnic Identity at the site of Cosmapa Oriental, Department of Chinandega, Nicaragua
In the summer of 2015, we analyzed ceramics recovered from the site of Cosmapa Oriental in the municipality of Chichigalpa, Department of Chinandega,
Nicaragua. The research design calls for the investigation of ethnic identity and migratory processes through the identification, description, and sequencing
of the ceramics. Ceramics were recovered from one 1 x 2 m pit, eight stratigraphically excavated shovel tests, and various surface collections. The pottery
was analyzed using the Type: Variety-Mode system, with attention paid to chronologically sensitive modes, such as forms. Two occupations were
identified: an earlier Late Preclassic one containing Usulután groups and types; Santa Tecla Red; and Pinos Black-brown. This occupation is closely linked
to the Uapala and Verbena-Arenal ceramic spheres in nearby El Salvador. The later component, which dates from the Terminal Classic to the Early
Postclassic period, includes Ulúa polychrome (Santana Class, Bilbao subclass), Las Vegas Polychrome, and one or two sherds of Plumbate. The local
pottery associated with the later occupation is brown to buff, soft, friable, and tempered with local volcanic grit. Red and black slips are common. Because
of its location, we believe the site represents the Colonial Period settlement of Mazatega, and therefore was a Maribio settlement.
Gray, Jena (College of William & Mary)
[19]              The People Behind the Practice: An Ethnological Encounter with a Maya Forest Gardener
      In recent years, alternative subsistence strategies have been explored by archaeoethnobotanists and others to describe ways in which the ancient
Maya managed their land. Through a contextualized analysis of contemporary Maya interaction with their environment, ethnobotanists hope to gain insight
into the past. Forest gardening, a sustainable, agroforestry system similar to permaculture practices, offers a glance into how the Maya cooperate with the
land. This paper seeks not to provide an interpretation or comparison of contemporary to ancient Maya peoples but rather to illuminate an experience with
Maya forest gardening within the jungles of western Belize.
Through pairing a recent personal account with the academic field of archaeoethnobotany, this paper will entertain the intrinsic link between plants and the
people who cultivate and use them. Explored within this text are the cultivation, medicinal uses, and food usages of cacao, life-everlasting plant, and the
breadnut tree. Additionally, this presentation offers a brief portrayal of specific Maya ideologies and philosophies that lie behind their land management
practices in order to better and more adequately understand the people behind their practice.
Gray, Nadine [93] see Hyde, David M.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              170
Greaves, Russell (Peabody Museum, Harvard) and Karen Kramer (Department of Anthropology, University of Utah)
[279]             Ethnoarchaeology of Residential Mobility among Savanna Foragers and Archaeological Site Formation
Ethnoarchaeological observations of residential mobility provide crucial links between subsistence activities, landscape use, social behaviors, and
archaeological visibility of occupations. Pumé foragers of the Venezuela llanos move their camps up to six times a year. They occupy separate wet and dry
season main camps that are the hubs of central place foraging for different seasonal resources. Pumé hunter-gatherers also make temporary camps for
fishing, raw material acquisition, and to cultivate small amounts of manioc that complement foraging for wild tubers. Shifting between wet and dry season
camps follows changing groundwater levels, and movement to a main seasonal camp can involve up to three temporary moves determined by water
availability. Architectural differences between each of the main seasonal camps are dramatic, and social re-organization occurs during each camp
occupation event. Wet season camps are re-used up to three sequential years, but dry season camps shift every year. Observations based on 30 months
of ethnoarchaeological research among mobile Pumé foragers in a hyperseasonal savanna provide a longitudinal view of residential dynamics. These are
examined in relation to characteristics of the archaeological record to develop methods for integrating distinct kinds of residential sites representing diverse
hunting and gathering seasonal activities.
Greco, Catriel [259] see Cremonte, Maria
Green, Jennifer (Florida Atlantic University) and Nicole Pezzotti (Florida Atlantic University)
[6]               Using Species Richness To Examine Paleoenvironmental Conditions Of The Northern Everglades: A Preliminary Faunal Analysis Of
                  Wedgworth Midden (8PB16175) And The Bryant Site (8PB46)
The Wedgworth Midden Site (8PB16175) is a newly identified pop-up tree island site southeast of Lake Okeechobee, in Belle Glade, Florida. It is the last
stratified muck site to be excavated in Palm Beach County since Belle Glade Mound in 1977. The site presents with cultural occupations from the Late
Archaic into the Woodland Period and is considered a part of the Belle Glade Culture.
We compared Wedgworth to the nearby Bryant Site (8PB46) specifically because the ceramic types present at the sites indicate that they were occupied or
used contemporaneously. The ceramics also indicate that these people had closer ties to cultural groups from the northeast than other groups throughout
the state.
Analysis of the invertebrate remains show both apple snails and the Florida Spike were present at Bryant but not nearly in the numbers found at
Wedgworth. Wedgworth even contained apple snail pits, which have only been encountered at five sites throughout south Florida. The vertebrate species
assemblage was similar at both sites. However, at Bryant there was a larger presence of brackish and saltwater species. Additionally, the level of
fragmentation of the vertebrate remains was extensive compared to those at Wedgworth.
Green, Kelly (University of Sheffield)
[25]              Children and the ceramic Industry in Medieval England
This paper discusses the role of children in the ceramic industry in medieval England, using the work of medieval ceramics specialists Maureen Mellor and
Stephen Moorhouse as a starting point from which new evidence relating to this subject can be assessed. Children’s involvement in pottery production
manifests itself in a variety of ways, including fingerprints on ceramic sherds, decorative qualities on pots and tiles, and documentary references. Similar
studies relating to pottery production in Roman, post-medieval, and contemporary European societies provide context through which the evidence for
medieval England can be analysed. As such, this paper draws on a range of ethnographic and documentary evidence to inform our understanding of the
archaeology of child labour in the sphere of pottery production in the English Middle Ages, with a particular focus on the later part of this period. It will be
shown that children formed a significant (if not always highly visible) part of the work force in many domestic-based industries, and that play formed an
important component through which children learned various tasks relating to ceramic production.
Green, Debra (Metcalf Archaeological Consultants, Inc.)
[50]              Landscape Change at the Ceremonial Center of Tibes in Puerto Rico: A Late Holocene Hurricane Flood Event?
This paper presents the results of a geoarchaeological study of the depositional history at the Ceremonial Center of Tibes in Puerto Rico.
Geoarchaeological study of the sediment and soil relationship at Tibes reveals evidence of Holocene paleoflooding that occurred between A.D. 800 and
A.D. 900. This flood event caused significant changes to the cultural landscape at Tibes. These site formation processes include river migration farther
west and south of the paleochannel, deposition of reworked fluvial fine-grained sediments, cobbly gravel deposits, and cultural material across the western
portions of the site; and destruction of older cultural deposits and ceremonial features. The results of this study offer a comparative analysis of flood events
recorded at other archaeological sites in Puerto Rico and the Caribbean.
Green, William (Logan Museum of Anthropology, Beloit College) and Roland Rodell (University of Wisconsin-Rock County)
[258]             “The Wisconsin Idea” and the Production of Archaeological Knowledge during the Progressive Era, ca. 1900-1930
The social and political ferment of the Progressive Era (1890s–1920s) was associated with a golden age in Wisconsin archaeology for avocationals and
professionals alike. In 1901, a group of archaeological enthusiasts led by Charles E. Brown founded the Archeological Section of the Wisconsin Natural
History Society. The Section soon became the independent Wisconsin Archeological Society (WAS). Its promotion of the “scientific and educational value”
of archaeology was meant to engage “scientists, educators and students everywhere”—“students” denoting anyone interested in archaeology. As curator
of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW) museum, Brown brought archaeology to the forefront of the SHSW’s statewide historic preservation
and public education programs. Simultaneously, professional anthropology came to the Milwuakee Public Museum (MPM) when Samuel A. Barrett was
hired in 1909, and MPM archaeological fieldwork flourished through the 1920s with an ambitious excavation program directed by Will C. McKern. The MPM
program, and especially Brown’s leadership in the WAS and SHSW and his association with the University of Wisconsin Extension Division, engaged both
professionals and avocational archaeologists in the Wisconsin Idea, a concept born of the Progressive Era in which academic research addresses societal
needs and reaches citizens throughout the state.
Green, Kirsten (University of Montana), Ashley H. McKeown (Texas State University) and Roseanne Bongiovanni (University of Southern
Florida)
[288]             Tracing Mortuary Trends at Cahal Pech using Stable Isotope Data
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               171
Recent research focusing on environmental change in the Belize River Valley during the Classic Period provides clear evidence for deteriorating conditions
during the Late Classic Period. These findings help explain shifts in socio-political and religious systems, as well as fluctuations in population distributions
of the Late Classic and Terminal Classic Maya. Some archaeological research suggests complete abandonment of ceremonial sites occupied by the Maya
elite. Mortuary practices can be used to identify changes in the socio-political and religious systems of the living population, and this paper employs
archaeological and biological data from burials at Cahal Pech, a medium-sized ceremonial site in San Ignacio, Belize. Specifically, stable isotope values
from bone and teeth will identify geographic origin and diet/status of burials from the Late Preclassic to Terminal Classic periods, including intrusive burials
that occurred after central ceremonial structures were abandoned. Integrated with other biological data and burial context, these data will be employed to
discern whether Cahal Pech was occupied during the Terminal Classic, albeit by a much smaller population, or was used primarily as a ceremonial burial
site during this time.
Greene, James (Cardno, Inc.), Veronica Parsell (Cardno, Inc.), Kaye Grobe (Cardno, Inc.) and Kathleen Settle (Cardno, Inc.)
[111]             Kankakee Marsh Lifeways, Phase III Data Recovery, Northwest Indiana
Site 12LA0091 represents a unique archaeological setting in northwest Indiana. Located south of Lake Michigan on a sandy dune remnant situated
topographically above the historic Kankakee Marsh, this prehistoric site has yielded invaluable information in understanding regional prehistoric
subsistence activities from the Late Archaic to Upper Mississippian periods. A recent Phase III data recovery effort has provided data that can help refine
the prehistoric chronological framework for northwest Indiana, as well as provide information on prehistoric seasonal activities within the Kankakee Marsh
region over time. Through lithic, ceramic, faunal, and flora analysis, this investigation provides greater insight into the temporal sequencing of the region.
Additionally, the presence of intact human remains provides insight into burial practices specific to the Kankakee Marsh area. This investigation has not
only generated additional information important for understanding the prehistory of the region, but also represents a successful example of the positive
outcomes that can be achieved through the Section 106 process.
Greene, James [287] see Parsell, Veronica
Greenfield, Haskel [112] see Redmond, Brian
Greenlee, Diana (U of Louisiana - Monroe) and Stephanie Perrault (Poverty Point World Heritage Site)
[265]             Collections-Based Research at Poverty Point World Heritage Site
The Poverty Point World Heritage Site is a state-owned and -managed archaeological park in northeastern Louisiana. Named for the nineteenth-century
Poverty Point Plantation, the site’s cultural significance derives from its monumental earthen complex constructed 3,700–3,100 B.P. The complex includes
five mounds; six enormous, concentric, semi-elliptical ridges; and a large interior plaza. A sixth mound was built 1,700–2,000 years after the initial
construction. This culturally created landscape, the largest and most elaborate Archaic Period settlement in North America, was built by hunter-fisher-
gatherers.
The Poverty Point Archaeological Curatorial Facility has an immense collection of artifacts, numbering in the hundreds of thousands, associated with the
Late Archaic occupation of the site. The remarkably diverse cultural material available for study includes (but is not limited to) PPOs, decorative earthen
objects, figurines, pottery, spear points, microliths, atlatl weights, gorgets, plummets, stone vessels, and beads. Much of the lithic raw material was
imported from sources hundreds of miles away. The artifacts are the products of a vast surface collection and numerous excavation units that were placed
in the major earthen features across the site. There is an on-site dormitory for researchers and the location is ideal for those who seek a workplace with
few distractions.
Greer, John [115] see Greer, Mavis
Greer, Mavis (Greer Services, Archeological Consulting) and John Greer (Greer Services, Archeological Consulting)
[115]             Use of Old Photos in Rock Art Recording and Analysis: The Adams Collection of Central Wyoming
Historic photographs are particularly useful in rock art studies for assessing early and changing site conditions that show effects, rates, and chronology of
natural weathering and vandalism. This includes such alterations as removed and added figures, altered figures, entire affected panels, chalking, latex
recording, and deleterious effects of well-intentioned physical conservation. Such changes indicate not only physical changes in the art but also influence
on possible direct dating and modern conservation measures. Care should be taken to evaluate available data relative to use of old photos for a variety of
information.
Grier, Colin [124] see Dolan, Patrick
Grier, Colin (Washington State University)
[132]             Terraforming, Monumentality and Long Term Practice in the Coast Salish World
The archaeological record of the southern Gulf Islands of coastal British Columbia provides evidence of deliberate and long-term construction of coastal
landforms over the last 4,500 years. Local landscapes were altered, modified, and managed in the service of production, but the implications of such
practices for the construction of place, of inequality, and of political networks are profound. I document the magnitude and extent of landscape construction
spatially, focusing on quantifying investments in coastal spit sites from the southern Gulf Islands. I also address the temporal scale of this landscape
construction process, which, while fundamentally long term, also appears to have been punctuated by shorter term moment of contestation and
reorganization. My overarching objective is to better establish how material production, social inequalities, and political autonomy played out over deep
time, and refine notions of how ownership systems can emerge from the construction of built places.
[132]             Chair
Griffith, Cameron (Hanover College) and Nikolai Grube (Universität Bonn)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                172
[294]             Subterranean Sculptural Narratives of Ancient Maya Mythological Beliefs
In this paper, we present recent analyses conducted on the elaborate artwork in Actun Halal, an important ancient Maya cave site in western Belize. Actun
Halal contains a wide variety of art forms, ranging from monumental modified speleothem sculptures 4 meters in height to small, detailed bas-relief
sculptural works executed in layers of travertine only millimeters thick. Akin to the elegant scenes rendered in murals and on polychrome pottery vessels,
the sculptural works in Actun Halal tell a vibrant story with prominent actors in ancient Maya mythology such as the Fire God and the Jester God. The
research presented here details our most recent insights into this complex sculptural narrative.
Griffiths, Seren (University of Southampton), Erick Robinson (University of Wyoming, USA), Philip Buckland (Umeå University, Sweden), Ralph
Fyfe (Plymouth University, UK) and Kevan Edinborough (University College London, UK )
[218]             The 8.2ka Event Evidence for Human-Environment Interaction in North-West Atlantic Europe
The 8.2ka ’event’ is represented by significant cooling in multi-proxy palaeoenvironmental records (e.g., Alley et al. 1997; Kobashi et al. 2007; Thomas et
al. 2007; cf. Wiersma 2008). This temperature drop, and its related consequences, has been presented as factors in human social changes across Europe
and the Near East (e.g., Roberts et al. 2011; van der Plicht et al. 2011). However, given the complexity of regional and local ecosystems, the impacts
across broad geographical scales were likely variable, and possibly, time transgressive. Moreover, the time range of the signal in Dye3/GRIP/GISP2
records have been estimated by Rohling and Palike (2005) as indicating long-term cooling over 400–600 years. In order to address influences of climate
change on human societies, archaeological case studies need to address the temporal and spatial context of environmental changes over the span of the
‘event,’ but for several hundred years either side to better understand possible leads and lags in responses. This case-study presents one approach,
assessing the evidence for human activity, and pollen and beetle records either side of the 8.2ka ’event’ in northwest Atlantic Europe. Specific attention is
paid to problems of chronological resolution in archaeological and palaeoenvironmental data, and chronological data treatment.
Grimes, Vaughan [85] see Harris, Alison
Grimes, Vaughan (Memorial University), Rui Boaventura (University of Lisbon), Ana Maria Silva (University of Coimbra), Maria Hillier and
António Carlos Valera (NIA - ERA Arqueologia S.A.)
[103]             Strontium Isotope Evidence for Late Neolithic Mobility in South-Central Portugal
During the end of the fourth and third millennia B.C.E. (Late Neolithic/Chalcolithic) in South-Central Portugal significant movement of people has been
assumed due to the widespread distribution of ‘foreign’ artefacts found at coastal and inland archaeological sites. Counter to this, other archaeological
evidence from the region seems to suggest a more sedentary lifestyle among these people at that time. Here, we will present human strontium isotope
data from three Late Neolithic tombs, namely the dolmens of Estria and Carcavelos (n=14) near Lisbon (Estremadura), and the tholos tomb 1 at Perdigões
(n=27) in Alentejo, to directly address the scale of mobility vs sedentary behavior during the Late Neolithic. Our initial results suggest that in comparison to
measured isotopic baselines using contemporary archaeological fauna, over 20 percent, of humans from all three sites investigated could be considered
non-local, which may indicate a greater level of inter-regional mobility during the Late Neolithic than previously anticipated.
Grimstead, Deanna (The Ohio State University) and Barnet Pavao-Zuckerman (University of Maryland)
[176]             Historical Continuity in Southern Arizona Free Range Ranching Practices: Carbon, Oxygen, and Strontium Isotope Evidence from two 18th
                  Century Missions
Carbon (δ13C), oxygen (δ18O), and strontium (87Sr/86Sr) isotopes from cattle, caprine, and small mammal teeth from two historic-period Spanish
missions and modern cattle were assayed with the goal of reconstructing historic ranching practices in the Sonoran Desert of southwestern North America.
Carbon isotope ratios from modern cattle indicate that it is possible to distinguish cattle free ranged within upper elevations desert habitats compared to
lower elevation free ranged or possibly foddered animals. It is not possible to distinguish maize-foddering versus low elevation free-ranging of livestock in
the Sonoran Desert using δ13C. Historic-period livestock indicate they were free ranged at upper elevations, lower elevations, and/or foddered, and
several specimens show evidence of a mixed strategy. Oxygen isotope ratios (δ18O) suggest that missions managed water resources for livestock use,
and were, for the most part, kept away from riparian zones. 87Sr/86Sr results demonstrate trade was an important part of Mission ranching practices, as
several specimens are non-local; coming from a minimum distance of 40 km, but more likely greater than 150 km. Taken together, the δ13C, δ18O, and
87Sr/86Sr results are consistent with continuity in free-ranged herd management practices from the historic Mission era to present day within the Sonoran
desert.
Grinnan, Nicole [260] see Scott-Ireton, Della
Grinnan, Nicole (Florida Public Archaeology Network)
[260]             Submerging the Public: Perspectives on Developing Guided Archaeological Shipwreck Tours
Community interest in archaeological shipwreck sites is increasingly profound in Florida. Though laws protecting these submerged cultural resources in
state waters have been in place for nearly 30 years, many people are still unaware of the importance of these resources as heritage tourism destinations,
foci of archaeological research, and representatives of community identity. After award of a grant to explore the sixteenth-century Spanish Emanuel Point II
shipwreck in 2014, the University of West Florida (UWF) Division of Anthropology and Archaeology began considering new avenues for providing public
engagement built around a preservation message. This paper explores the recent development of the “PAST (Public Archaeological Shipwreck Tours)”
diving program. PAST allows FPAN and UWF archaeologists to offer local recreational divers an opportunity to learn more about shipwreck sites (like the
Emanuel Point shipwrecks) and participate in guided dive tours. Reflections on the program include a discussion of the successes of initial PAST events,
participant feedback, and plans for the future.
Grobe, Kaye [111] see Greene, James
Groff, Amanda (University of Central Florida) and Tosha Dupras (University of Central Florida)
[24]              Leprosy, Segregation, & Burial Context: Remote Desert Living in the Dakhleh Oasis, Egypt
Stable oxygen isotope analysis of tooth enamel and bone apatite from adults afflicted with leprosy from the Kellis 2 cemetery (50–450 A.D.) in the Dakhleh
Oasis provides insight into social perceptions of disease stigma during the Roman-Christian era in Egypt. Because there are no grave markers found in
Kellis 2, this research focuses on the spatial analysis of stable isotope results to develop an interpretation of the burial location of leprosy cases. In
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             173
particular, stable oxygen isotopes, which have been used to interpret migration and/or place of origin, are utilized to address the segregation of leprosy
cases in a burial context. Two primary questions are addressed in this is study: 1. Did the physical manifestations of leprosy cause the afflicted to be
segregated from the general public?; and 2. Was the Dakhleh Oasis used as a safe haven or place of banishment for the ill? Results of this study indicate
that foreign individuals with leprosy were primarily confined to one location in the cemetery, indicating segregation did likely occur. However, we argue that
while the ill may have been segregated, their appearance in the cemetery is likely related to the naturally occurring alum mineral used for healing.
Gronenborn, Detlef (Roemisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum), Hans-Christoph Strien (Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz), Christian Lohr
(Roemisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum) and Johanna Ritter (Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz) (Helmholtz-Centre Geesthacht for
Materials and Coas)
[95]              Adaptive Cycles and Resilience as Explanatory Templates for the Formulation of Coupled Climate-Culture Models
Simplistic scenarios of the role of climate on the dynamics of socio-political trajectories are increasingly being replaced by coupled models in which climate
and societies undergo mutually influential interactions. The concepts of adaptive cycles and resilience have been particularly helpful in understanding these
interrelations.
Based on an extensive body of data from Early to Upper (Young) Neolithic sites in western central Germany and adjacent regions, a model is proposed,
which takes into account both the potentially beneficial as well as the adverse influences of climate. These parameters are then set against markers of
social resilience, which at times forms independently, at times dependently, from climate fluctuations. The result is a complex basic module for a coupled
climate-culture interaction model which may eventually be taken as a template for mathematical modelling.
[95]              Chair
Gronniger, Grace
[111]             Setting the Table in Victorian Age St. Louis: The Utility of Glass Tableware Analysis in the Archaeology of Domesticity and Consumerism
The historical archaeology of domesticity and consumption rests heavily on the analysis of ceramic tableware artifacts. Few archaeologists have seriously
incorporated analyses of glass tableware into this body of research, even though glass tableware was a common, durable, and heavily marketed domestic
artifact class. My research addresses this problem through a study of glass tableware from Victorian Age (1830s–1900s) residential sites in St. Louis,
Missouri. This is done, in part, by adapting methods of historic ceramic artifact analysis to the analysis of historic glassware. The utility of this method is
assessed by applying it in a historical archaeological study of household consumption in relation to domesticity in Victorian age St. Louis, Missouri. The
results indicate that whether it is used independently or in conjunction with ceramic analysis, glass tableware analysis can contribute significantly to the
historical archaeology of domesticity and consumerism. Archaeologists can do this painlessly by using the method developed and applied in this study,
rather than continue to miss out on the potential contributions of this artifact class.
Grooms, Seth [111] see Flood, John
Grouard, Sandrine (Muséum National Histoire Naturelle Paris)
[222]             Island Extinctions and Invasions: Archaeozoological Advance in the French West Indies
Although island faunas are relatively well studied, there are few clear examples on faunal replacement, over periods of several centuries or a few millennia.
This paper brings together results from 10 years of zooarchaeological studies in three different Caribbean islands: Saint-Martin, Guadeloupe, and
Martinique. It presents data on presence (and absence) of terrestrial vertebrates (amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals), in relation to human activities
in insular environments during the Holocene. Examples illustrate mechanisms of biodiversity evolution under human pressure and through several waves
of human migration since 5,000 years B.P. These include natural colonisations, intentional or chance introductions, extinctions or disappearances (often of
endemic species) due to human activities (hunting and gathering, but also deforestation and other anthropogenic effects on the environment). Beginning
with the large original diversity, there is a partial turnover of the taxa within each human colonisation. Everywhere, human intervention causes an over-
saturation of the specific richness curve in regard to the MacArthur and Wilson Model, because of the numerous species introduced during each migration;
but in parallel, there is extinction of numerous indigenous and endemic species.
[14]              Discussant
Grouard, Sandrine [100] see Perdikaris, Sophia
Groucutt, Huw [22] see Brandt, Steven
Groucutt, Huw (University of Oxford)
[22]              Arabian Late Pleistocene Lithic Variability and Its Implications for Hominin Behavior and Demography
The last five years have seen a rapid acceleration in research on Late Pleistocene Arabia. A growing number of Late Pleistocene archaeological sites have
now been identified. While Pleistocene hominin fossil remains are currently unknown in Arabia, a fast expanding corpus of faunal remains and
paleoenvironmental archives provide important contextual information for hominin occupations. Claims have been made for close similarities between
Arabian and broadly contemporary east and northeast African lithic assemblages. Such analyses have, however, lacked chronological resolution and little
consideration has been given to the different environmental and landscape contexts of sites. In this paper, I focus on lithic assemblages from open air sites
in Arabia, as both surface scatters and excavated material, and seek to differentiate the various sources of variability influencing the morphological and
technological features of the assemblages. Identified sites fall into two major types: raw material procurement localities, and scatters associated with
paleohydrological features (particularly lakes). While the emerging picture suggests significant roles for autochthonous Arabian developments and
‘pragmatic’ influences such as differential reduction intensity, it also seems clear that several dispersals into Arabia occurred. Understanding the sources
and routes of these dispersals is proving an exciting, but challenging, area of research.
[22]              Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             174
Grube, Nikolai [294] see Griffith, Cameron
Gruber, Janna [140] see Bowman, R Doyle
Grund, Brigid (University of Wyoming), Todd Surovell (University of Wyoming) and Spencer Pelton (University of Wyoming)
[115]             Where the Buffalo Groan: Topographic Variables Governing the Placement and Spatial Organization of Wold Bison Jump, Wyoming
The Wold Bison Jump in Johnson County, Wyoming, is one of many prehistoric, mass kill sites scattered across the Plains. At Wold, a foraging basin of
prime ungulate grazing habitat abuts the gently sloping backside of a bluff. Funnel-shaped drivelines of cairns extend across the top of the bluff towards a
treacherous cliff. The drive was configured to constrain stampeding bison (Bison sp.) as prehistoric hunters communally drove them from the foraging
basin to the precipice. Previous GIS analyses of bison jumps inductively analyze surrounding landscapes by classifying jump locations as known,
unvarying focal points of analysis. While this approach can be informative, at Wold we attempt to obtain a more general understanding of how bison jumps
operate. Using iterative models of least cost paths, topographic cross-sections, and visibility analysis, we test which landscape-embedded variables are
optimized at Wold as compared to other potential localities across the study area. We find that this site’s placement is primarily explained by minimizing
the distance at which the cliff face is visible and secondarily by minimizing the cost of slope and curvature routes ascending into the drivelines. Our
procedure could hypothetically be used to predict optimal jump locations on similar landscapes.
Grundtisch, Katie [171] see Kohler, Tim
Grupe, Gisela [52] see Schulting, Rick
Guderjan, Thomas [130] see Krause, Samantha
Guderjan, Thomas (University of Texas at Tyler)
[130]             Did Restructuring at the End of the Maya Classic Period Include the Beginnings of Private Land Tenure?
The archaeological study of land tenure in non-literate societies is methodologically complex. However, by examining situations before, during, and after
transitions, insight can be gained. At the end of the Maya Classic Period, complexes of field walls were built, especially in coastal locations. These appear
to not have water control or land management functions but instead delineate space similarly to house lots in contemporary, but traditional, Maya villages.
Land tenure at the center of Blue Creek in Belize, specifically the Chan Cahal residential group, coastal field wall complexes and the use of house
perimeter walls in the Yucatec village of Yaxunah are compared to better understand the purposes and importance of the development of field walls in
understanding changing patterns of Maya land tenure.
Gudino, Alejandra [57] see Lippi, Ronald
Guengerich, Anna (Vanderbilt University)
[105]             The View from Above: Changing Experiences of the Built Environment during the Andean Late Intermediate Period
The highland Andes underwent major transformations in settlement organization between A.D. 1000–1300, in the first half of the Late Intermediate Period.
Settlement patterning shifted to higher altitudes, and in some areas, new sites were accompanied by defensive features. Most research has focused on
the structural pressures that led to these changes, such as an increase of violence in the wake of Middle Horizon polity collapse, or a shift to pastoralism as
a result of climate change. This paper focuses instead on how these changes in the built environment were experienced after their construction.
Settlements in many regions shared newly developed attributes such as stone masonry, freestanding domestic architecture, and communal ritual spaces
that were relatively small in scale and often ancestor-focused. Focusing on architectural changes developed in the Chachapoyas region during this time, I
suggest that these new built environments generated fundamentally different forms of habitus for their residents and radically altered the relationships that
communities sustained with each other and with the powers that inhabited the landscape. Stone-built, mountaintop villages of the LIP may have originated
as adaptive responses, but their spatial and material attributes also shaped new understandings of their inhabitants’ place in society and in the animate
cosmos.
Guenter, Stanley [59] see Hansen, Richard
Guerra, Rafael (Institute of Archaeology), Claire Ebert (The Pennsylvania State University) and Jaime Awe (Northern Arizona University)
[288]             Architectural Planning and Shared Political Traditions in the Belize River Valley
The presence of shared architectural elements and configurations between major ancient Maya centers has often been attributed to socio-political
affiliation and/or emulation of influential centers by their neighbors. In this paper, we examine the site plans and settlement systems for the monumental
centers of Cahal Pech and Lower Dover in the Belize Valley to identify parallel trends of the growth of monumental architecture through time. Cahal Pech is
one of the earliest permanently settled sites in the region (1200 cal B.C.), and experienced continual growth of monumental architecture and settlement
until the Terminal Classic Maya “collapse” (~cal A.D. 800). The site core of Lower Dover, established later during the Late Classic Period (~cal A.D. 500),
exhibits similar configuration of architectural elements as Cahal Pech, including an east-west spatial orientation. While the location of residential
settlements at each site may have been ecologically dependent, similarities in the placement of public and private spaces at the elite centers of each site
suggest that Lower Dover was closely tied to Cahal Pech, perhaps sharing a common socio-political lineage.
Gugora, Ariana (Department of Anthropology, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816), Tosha Dupras (Department of Anthropology,
University of Central ) and Erzsébet Fóthi (Department of Anthropology, Hungarian Natural Hist)
[147]             Childhood and Adulthood Mobility at Medieval (1240s A.D.) Solt-Tételhegy, Hungary Reconstructed from Stable Oxygen Isotope Analysis
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               175
Between 2005 and 2009, archaeologists excavated more than 100 skeletons from the medieval (1240s A.D.) Hungarian site of Solt-Tételhegy. Little has
been published about this archaeological settlement, and although previous stable isotopic research has described the migration patterns of medieval
European peoples, here we present the first such study performed on a medieval Hungarian population. Stable oxygen isotope analysis was conducted on
dental enamel from 23 individuals and on bone apatite from 21 individuals in an attempt to reconstruct origins and mobility from a life history perspective.
The enamel and bone δ18O values suggest that several of these individuals migrated to Hungary during their childhood. While the majority appear to have
traveled from central and eastern Europe, a few originated from more distant places, such as Italy, Spain, the Middle-East, or even north Africa. This
research adds to the understanding of the dynamic population movement throughout this time period in medieval Europe.
Guiducci, Dario (Université de Montréal)
[72]              Reading the Landscape: A Model of Environmental Legibility for Assessing Hominid Dispersals during the Late Pleistocene.
The ability of Anatomically Modern Humans (AMH) to successfully navigate complex topographies and variable environments is hypothesized to have been
a key adaptation for the long term success of our species, in comparison to other hominid groups. Additionally, the structure of the environment through
which human dispersals occurred is arguably important to our understanding of the speed and scale at which population movements occurred. This paper
demonstrates a new methodology for quantifying and modelling landscape legibility, an untested aspect of environmental structure adapted from landscape
studies. With the aid of case studies from north-eastern Spain, this paper illustrates the logic of a legibility metric based on two dimensions; 1) landscape
coherence, which affects the ability to single out significant landmarks useful for guiding navigation; and 2) ease of dispersability, measured by means of a
circuitscape model. The paper concludes with a discussion of what the patterns and differences between the study areas mean for Late Pleistocene
dispersals in the Western Mediterranean, and how an assessment of legibility fits in with other lines of evidence regarding hominid dispersals more
generally.
Guinard, Adam [265] see Clauter, Jody
Guiry, Eric and Michael Richards (Unversity of British Columbia)
[223]             Using Stable Isotope Analyses to Assess the Geographical Origins of Pork and Beef Products in a Historical New World Population Center
This presentation explores the utility of stable carbon and nitrogen isotope analyses as a method for tracing the geographical origins of meat products from
major livestock species. Samples (n= 250) from pigs and cattle consumed in the historical city of York, later renamed Toronto, in Canada are compared
with animals raised in other areas, in both local as well as distant regions. Results show how cultural as well as environmental isotopic variables can be
used to distinguish between animals raised in the city, the local region, or imported from the U.S. In particular, differences between the prevailing
agricultural regimes in southern Ontario versus the eastern U.S. appear to provide a robust isotopic contrast in regional livestock and may be a useful
marker of animals raised in and/or moved between different political and economic regions during the nineteenth century. We also use these data to
reconstruct consumption patterns between different social and economic groups within the urban settings of Toronto and discuss these findings in the
context of human translocation of animals and reshaping of ecosystems.
Gumerman, III, George J. [168] see Warren, Amy
Gunn, Joel D. [59] see Volta, Beniamino
Gunn, Christopher (University of Kentucky)
[127]             Seeding the Clouds: A Model of Late Classic Puuc Political Process
This paper synthesizes the growing body of chronological, settlement, economic, epigraphic, and iconographic data generated from recent research to
critically examine traditional models of a short Terminal Classic occupation for the Puuc. The Late Classic Period (600–800 A.D.) was the period in which
the political and economic systems of Puuc states crystallized. Settlement patterns suggest that land was a widely available resource during the seventh
century, but that the rapid infilling of the region over this century resulted in increased economic and political competition. Importantly, responses to this
tension were regionalized, with western Puuc settlements choosing to minimize tensions through the formation of inter-elite confederacies, while eastern
Puuc elites escalated inter-polity competition through increasing deployment of individualizing iconographic programs. In this way, the Puuc becomes a
microcosm for broader political processes sweeping the Maya Lowlands in the decades leading to the Terminal Classic ‘collapse.’
Gunn, Joel (University of North Carolina-Greensboro)
[162]             Three Tropical Thoughts: Vern Scarborough and the Migration to Tropical Ecology
Vern’s collaborative research fosters a number of insights both across investigators and disciplines. My top-three picks are tropical ecology, water cities,
and Gulf Coast origin of Lowlands occupation. (1) Vern focuses on understanding implications of tropical ecology, central to which is high diversity and
therefore low density. Working through the implications of this for human settlements has perhaps been his most important accomplishment. (2) Maya
water cities are obvious attempts to break the bondage of tropical ecology. They mark both the strength of Classical Maya culture creating one of the great
world civilizations, and a fatal vulnerability in their social engineering. While building dense, urban, commercial networks, they exposed themselves to
extremes of climate typical of the boundary between the tropics and subtropics, among them long-term drought. (3) Finally, the first thing in Vern’s writings
that caught my attention was that Maya probably started conquest of the Lowlands from the Gulf Coast. Understanding this has been an objective since the
1990s. With the help of coastal ecologist John Day and William J. Folan, our study of the origins of civilizations with Sea Level Stabilization has brought
the Gulf Coast hypothesis to fruition in the context of world-wide, low-density urbanism.
Gunter, Madeleine (College of William and Mary) and Christopher Stevenson (Virginia Commonwealth University)
[36]              Copper Exchange in Precontact Virginia: An LA-ICP-MS Study
Research into broad patterns of trade and exchange in prehistoric North America suggests that from A.D. 800–1700, objects made from copper featured
prominently in Native American exchange networks. Native polities saw copper as an insignia of social and economic power and sought to control its flow
and distribution. Scholars have long hypothesized that prior to European contact in the Middle Atlantic region (A.D. 1607), Native polities in Virginia
predominantly traded copper acquired from the Blue Ridge Mountains. This study tests this hypothesis, using Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma
Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) to compare the composition of copper artifacts and source material from a number of late prehistoric sites in Virginia.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               176
Results of this analysis suggest that native copper likely came from sources well outside the Middle Atlantic region.
Gupta, Neha (Memorial University)
[4]               Chair
Gurevitz, Anna (University of California, Merced) and Danielle Kurin (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[207]             Chanka Demographics and Diet: A Case Study in Commingled Remains from the South-Central Peruvian Andes
Burial sites in the Peruvian Andes, especially around Andahuaylas, Peru, frequently consist of many commingled individuals. Most date from ca. A.D.
1000–1400, placing the individuals in a time of much turmoil as the Wari Empire collapsed and environmental constraints affected the region. This unrest
resulted in an eruption of violence and a fight for resources, forcing individuals to restructure their identity. However, despite the plethora of human remains
from this area, no ranges for sexing the commingled long bones exists for modern or prehistoric populations in Andean South America, which creates
considerable challenges as we explore larger questions concerning identity and gender roles among the Chanka. Here, Chanka remains from Sonhuayo, a
short distance outside of Andahuaylas, Peru, are examined to fill this lacuna. In addressing this gap, we initiate an investigation of how identity was
restructured during a time of insecurity. Stable isotope analyses of bone collagen and tooth enamel as well as metric analysis of long bones, have allowed
us to construct a demographic profile of the Chanka from Sonhuayo and correlate behavior to ideas of gender and identity as manifests in diet.
Gurstelle, Andrew (Wake Forest University)
[265]             Archaeological Collections at the Museum of Anthropology, Wake Forest University
The Museum of Anthropology at Wake Forest University has several collections that are of great interest to archaeologists. Three of our collections are
presented: the Rights collection, the Lam collection, and the West Mexican collection. The Rights collection consists of nearly 20,000 artifacts collected by
the Rev. Douglas Rights in the first half of the twentieth century from archaeological sites near Winston-Salem and in the western Piedmont of North
Carolina. The Lam collection consists of over 500 Chinese ceramics made during the Tang Dynasty (A.D. 618–907) at the Changsha kilns, including bowls,
ewers, cups, teapots, small toys, and other pieces. The west Mexican collection consists of 1,040 artifacts, most dating to the Late Formative Period
(approximately 300 B.C.–A.D. 400), and includes 162 complete ceramic vessels, ceramic figurines, greenstone beads and necklaces, obsidian projectile
points, knives, and grinding stones. Though each of these collections were made outside of controlled, systematic archaeological investigations, they still
hold great potential for contributing to new research.
Gusick, Amy (California State University, San Bernardino)
[249]             Discussant
Gust, John [130] see Mathews, Jennifer
Gustafson, Martha [195] see Snow, Meradeth
Gustas, Robert (University of Alberta), Kisha Supernant (University of Alberta), Andrew Martindale (University of British Columbia), Bryn
Letham (University of British Columbia) and Kenneth Ames (Portland State University)
[174]             Least Cost Analysis of Movement Events during the Early Holocene/Late Pleistocene on the Northwest Coast
Spatial modeling of early prehistoric maritime movements on the Pacific Northwest Coast is important in contemporary archaeology as a site prospection
tool in a landscape which has radically changed over the last 16,000 years. GIS analysis can model ancient site locations now hidden by changing sea
levels. We present findings from a project which developed a new method for modeling maritime movement using least cost path analysis (LCA) of both
behavioral and cultural constraints to determine the areas most likely to have been traveled by Paleoamericans between 10,000 and 16,000 cal. yr B.P.
Using multiple cost weighting scenarios, spatial resolutions, and different considerations of overland travel movement, routes through five areas of
northwest British Columbia and southeast Alaska were predicted. The resulting movement paths were systemically analyzed and locations with high
probabilities of containing new sites identified. Additionally, a sub-model was run to test and check the methodology’s predictiveness by comparing travel
routes through Prince Rupert Harbour over the last 5,000 years to known site locations. This work is the first to apply LCA to seascapes and marine
movement and the results have the potential to lead to a better understanding of Early Holocene and Late Pleistocene travel.
Guthrie, James [236] see Renson, Virginie
Gutierrez, Maria (CONICET, INCUAPA)
[16]              Integrating Bones, Soils and Dates: Late Pleistocene-Holocene Settings and Human Occupations in the Pampas of Argentina
A great increase of archaeological knowledge from the Pampean region of Argentina occurred in the last 20 years. Three main approaches were explored
in detail by means of archaeological research that contributed to broadening our understanding of hunter-gatherers in the past: interdisciplinary studies,
geochronology, and taphonomy. These perspectives were either initiated or reinforced in our projects by Eileen Johnson. The aim of this presentation is to
highlight the main contributions that these approaches have done to the archaeology of the region. Specifically, we will discuss the impact of her work on
topics such as early human peopling, Pleistocene faunal extinctions and Holocene survival, and paleoenvironmental reconstruction.
[16]              Chair
Gutiérrez-Zugasti, Igor [49] see Duarte, Carlos
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              177
Guyah, Timothy
[5]               Discussant
Guzmán, Eulogio (School of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston)
[172]             Discussant
Gyucha, Attila [166] see Riebe, Danielle
H O'Rourke, Dennis [160] see Tackney, Justin
Haak, Wolfgang [276] see Llamas, Bastien
Haberle, Simon [223] see Clarke, Geoff
Haberle, Simon (Australian National University), Richard Cosgrove (La Trobe University), Asa Ferrier (La Trobe University), Patrick Moss (The
University of Queensland) and Peter Kershaw (Monash University)
[295]             Light Islands in a Sea of Dark Rainforest: Human Influence on Fire, Climate and Biodiversity in the Australian Tropics
The use of fire in Australian Aboriginal society has been well documented and has been pivotal to arguments about human impact on the Australian biota.
Continuous and well-dated palaeoecological sequences from the humid rainforests of NE Queensland are beginning to reveal detailed records of
vegetation transformation and shifting fire regimes within rainforest environments. The archaeological record is also providing new insights into plant
exploitation and adaptation strategies to enable people to live within a rainforest environment. In this presentation, we combine archaeological and
palaeoecological approaches to investigate the interaction between Aboriginal people, rainforest, and fire. The relationship between the intensity of human
occupation, climate variability, and the onset of burning builds a better understanding of the primacy of natural and anthropogenic firing events and the
Aboriginal maintenance of economically important plants within fire managed mosaics. It has also provided a greater understanding of the role of fire in the
maintenance of biodiversity.
Habicht, Michael [224] see Bouwman, Abigail
Hackenberger, Steven [113] see Davis, John
Hadden, Carla (University of Georgia)
[28]              Building on the Vertebrate Data: Invertebrate Analysis Offers New Insights on Southeast Coastal Subsistence-Settlement Systems
Mollusc shell is often the most conspicuous component of coastal archaeological sites in southeastern North America. The shear abundance and bulk of
the material presents logistical challenges during all stages of investigation, from excavation and recovery to analysis and curation. These challenges,
combined with the assumption that molluscs were low-ranked resources, result in the tendency for zooarchaeological analyses of the coastal southeast to
focus on vertebrate remains, and to exclude invertebrates. We argue that the benefits of systematic analyses of invertebrate fauna far outweigh the costs,
and should be a routine component of zooarchaeological investigations, despite the challenges involved. We present data demonstrating how the analysis
of shellfish remains has informed our understanding of coastal economies, site function, seasonality of site use, and procurement locations and catchment
areas in the coastal southeast. These new insights significantly add to the models of resource use which are primarily drawn from vertebrate remains.
Finally, we also offer some thoughts on mitigating the logistical challenges bulky shellfishes generate.
[28]              Chair
Hadden , Carla [133] see Colaninno, Carol
Haddow, Scott D. [215] see Milella, Marco
Hadley, Dawn (University of Sheffield)
[25]              Growing Up on the Move: Childhood Experience in the Viking Age
The involvement of children in the Viking Age migrations, and their experiences upon settlement in new regions, has been afforded little attention by
archaeologists. In part this derives from the perceived paucity of evidence for children and their lives. It is also arguably because migration is generally
overlooked as a facet of childhood because of an assumption that ‘the home’ is the environment in which childhood is experienced and thus this is where
analytical attention is often focused. This paper will explore how we might begin to examine children in the context of Viking-Age migration, and will argue
that a focus on children prompts some fundamental questions of the broad social processes that are central to the scholarly literature on migration,
including acculturation, ethnogenesis, and conversion, which are routinely discussed purely with reference to adults. As Jane Eva Baxter has recently
observed, ‘culture is learned and not inherited, making studies of children and childhood among the most natural areas of interest for all anthropologists’;
nowhere is this more relevant than to a period characterized by migration, in which the everyday lives of so many children were marked by mobility and
instability, and a frequent need to renegotiate social norms.
[25]              Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             178
Haeusler, Werner [145] see Wagner, Ursel
Hageman, Jon (Northeastern Illinois U)
[270]             Making the MED: Building an Online Ethnobotanical Database
Construction of the Mesoamerican Ethnobotanical Database (MED) began in 2010 and is wrapping up in 2016. The MED began as an informal collection
of images for the use of one archaeological project and became an NSF-supported online reference for public use. Based on the collections of the Searle
Herbarium and hosted by the Field Museum, this online searchable database contains images of over 2,500 plant vouchers, close-ups of reproductive
plant parts, and seeds where available. Images are linked to basic botanical information for each voucher, and a review of over 40 ethnobotanical sources
has yielded uses and common names. Creating the database involved considerations regarding sampling, equipment, time and labor, personnel,
institutional, and data issues that were not obvious at the outset of the project nor (in some cases) as the project evolved. This paper describes many of the
expected and unexpected hurdles that were overcome during the construction of the MED, and may be of interest to those constructing publicly available
online databases in the future.
[270]             Chair
Halbirt, Carl [8] see Taylor, Sarah
Halcrow, Sian (University of Otago, New Zealand), Nancy Tayles (University of Otago, New Zealand) and Gail Elliott (University of Otago, New
Zealand)
[25]              The Bioarchaeology of Fetuses
Until relatively recently, fetuses, along with infants and children, were largely overlooked in bioarchaeological research. Over the past 20 years there has
been increasing recognition of the importance of research on immature individuals in the archaeological context. However, although fetuses are now
sometimes included in analyses of population health and isotopic studies of infant weaning and diet in the past, most research focuses on postnatal
individuals. This paper reviews some of the bioarchaeological research that has been undertaken in this area and starts to build a theoretical framework to
conceptualize fetuses from an archaeological context and to identify areas for future research potential. We explore how the fetus is defined in the field,
including discerning whether the fetus is in-utero or not, and terminological issues. We outline the contribution that the bioarchaeology of fetuses can make
to understanding fertility and other demographic information of a population, epidemiology of disease, maternal and infant stress and the consequences of
early stress on later life experience, and cultural or social aspects of personhood.
Hale, Nathan [164] see Cook, Jessica
Hallett-Desguez , Emily [177] see Steele, Teresa
Halley, Claire (University of Cambridge)
[47]              Hand in Hand: the Physical and Symbolic Representation of Social Bonding in the Prehistoric American Southwest
A key theme of archaeological research in the American douthwest has been understanding the diverse ways people came together to form communities.
This paper examines the physical and symbolic practice of forming social bonds through the practice of hand-holding in communal performance.
Iconographic representations of hand-holding figures (on ceramic vessels and rock art) from the prehistoric period (A.D. 500–900) will be presented. These
images provide an exceptional opportunity to explore the issue of community formation by considering the sensuous experience and symbolism encoded in
these depictions. I review the physical properties of hand-holding. Bodily space boundaries are overcome when an individual takes the hand of another.
Trust, confidence, and bonding are implied by this simple act. When the practice is extended to include additional individuals, participants must coordinate
their bodily action with others. Individuals gain a feeling of inclusion and belonging to something bigger than themselves. I develop this interpretation by
proposing that the concepts of community and integration are symbolically represented through characteristic stylistic tenets which underpin the depiction
of hand-holding figures. In this interpretative framework, hands are generative and socially productive media through which concepts such as identity,
integration, and social bonding are embodied and communicated.
Hallgren, Fredrik (Uppsala University, Sweden)
[52]              On the Ritual Display and Deposition of Human Skulls at Kanaljorden, Motala, Sweden, 8000 cal B.P.
This paper discusses the ritual display and deposition of human skulls among hunter-gatherers in Scandinavia during the Mesolithic. The discussion focus
on the recently excavated site Kanaljorden, at Motala, Sweden, where select human bones—mostly skulls—from a dozen individuals have been deposited
on a stone-packing on the bottom of a small lake. Two of the skulls were mounted on wooden stakes still embedded in the crania. Beside human bones,
the finds also include artefacts of bone, antler, stone, and wood, as well as animal bones and botanical remains. The human and animal bones display a
distinct spatial pattern, with different species deposited in different parts of the stone-packing. The context have been 14C-dated to c. 7800 cal. B.P.
Halligan, Jessi (Florida State University) and Michael Waters (CSFA, Texas A&M University)
[218]             Flooding, Drought, Fires and Extinctions: How Did Florida’s Foragers Respond to the Pleistocene-Holocene Transition?
While directly-dated sites are somewhat rare, northern Florida contains an extremely rich archaeological record of diagnostic artifacts from the Paleoindian
and Early Archaic periods. Very commonly, Early Archaic diagnostics are discovered at the same sites as Paleoindian diagnostics. The Paleoindian
components are presumed to be Pleistocene in age, while the Early Archaic is generally but not universally associated with early Holocene ages. Recent
research we have been conducting in northwestern Florida has refined archaeological and paleoenvironmental records for the period 15,500–8,000 cal
B.P. at several multicomponent archaeological sites through improved radiocarbon records and numerous proxy records. We therefore can discuss local
system response to global climate change with increasing resolution. This also allows us to refine our discussion of human activity on this changing
landscape.
[249]             Discussant
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                179
Halling, Christine (Louisiana Department of Justice) and Ryan Seidemann (Louisiana Department of Justice)
[6]               Differential Diagnosis of an Unidentified Skeletal Anomaly: a Case Study of Mandibular Resorption from the Smith Creek Site, Mississippi
The Smith Creek Site (22WK526), located in Wilkinson County, Mississippi, is principally a Coles Creek Period site (A.D. 700–1400). Human remains were
recovered from this site in the 1960s by avocational archaeologists. Although the Smith Creek human remains are fragmentary and commingled, and the
records related to their collection are nonexistent, these remains still present a significant data source for this region and time period. Of particular interest
is an isolated adult mandible that exhibits an unidentified anomaly. This anomaly, predominantly characterized by resorption, is located on the buccal
surface of the mandibular body near the second molar, and is unilateral. A review of the current clinical and archaeological literature resulted in no similar
examples of this skeletal anomaly reported. A differential diagnosis performed suggests that the resulting lytic pitting may be due to soft tissue involvement
such as possible circulatory disorders or musculoskeletal involvement. A discussion of the potential causes of the pathology, including a summary of the
observed pathologies in the collection, serves as comparative material for the analysis of the resorption.
Halling, Christine [187] see Seidemann, Ryan
Halperin, Christina (Princeton University)
[108]             Intertwined Histories and Relational Personhood: Maya Co-essences (Spirit or Way Companions) Past and Present
It is widely recognized that co-essences or spirit companions (wayob) were a part of ancient Maya understandings of personhood. Partly because
ethnographic analogies are used to understand ancient practices, it is easy to assume that beliefs and experiences surrounding Maya co-essences were
static over many hundreds of years. In examining archaeological, epigraphic, ethnohistoric, and ethnographic data, this paper investigates the history of
co-essences and, in turn, the way in which co-essences made history. Such human-spiritual relations were intertwined with shifting social identities of
gender, class, and culture. As such, this paper considers relationality from a pluralistic perspective.
Halstad McGuire, Erin (Department of Anthropology, University of Victoria)
[25]              Making Medieval Toys: Using Experimental Archaeology to Engage Students in Academic Enquiry
The early medieval period is often thought of as a grim, violent era, characterized by conflict and social inequality. It is typically dominated by adult male
narratives, albeit with a growing body of work centred on women’s lives. Children have remained in the shadows, sometimes seen but rarely heard. There
is limited archaeological evidence for children’s activities and even less appears in textual sources from the Middle Ages. This paper explores the ways in
which medieval children’s toys and games can be used to engage learners in thinking critically about archaeology, children, and the past. It will examine
the use of experimental archaeology projects with undergraduate students, involving the production of toys and games. In particular, this project aims to
assess the character of research questions, hypotheses, and experiments developed by students tasked with researching medieval children through
material culture and actualistic experiments.
Hambly, Joanna (University of St Andrews)
[35]              Wemyss Caves 4D: A Review of a Community 3D Digital Documentation Project at a Challenging Heritage Site in Scotland
Former sea caves at East Wemyss in Scotland are unique because of the carvings within them. These include around 40 surviving Pictish (fifth–ninth
century A.D.) symbols and animal representations; a possible Viking boat; early Christian crosses; and nineteenth–century monograms and graffiti related
to local New Year rituals.
Located in a former coal mining area, today you are far more likely to read bad news stories about the impact of vandalism, structural instability, and
coastal erosion upon this unique Scottish site than about the heritage itself.
Between 2013 and 2016, a collaborative project between the local community and archaeologists applied a suite of non-intrusive range-based and image-
based 3D digital techniques to the caves and carvings. The purpose was threefold:
• preserve the landscape, caves, and carvings by 3D digital record;
• create digital tools for improved understanding, monitoring, and management;
• communicate the unique heritage of the Wemyss Caves to both local and global audiences in an innovative and engaging 3D medium.
We will review the contribution that this community 3D digital documentation project has made at a difficult, complex, and politically-charged heritage site,
and consider the challenges of meeting the expectations of the diverse stakeholders involved.
Hambrecht, George (University of Maryland College Park), Ennis Barbery (Museum of Chincoteague Island), Elizabeth van Dolah (University of
Maryland) and Kevin Gibbons (University of Maryland)
[191]             International Efforts to Engage with Climate Based Threats to Cultural Heritage
As climate change threats to cultural heritage become more apparent, a range of responses is emerging across the globe. This session will discuss
examples of different approaches to this problem in areas outside of the United States. While white papers and policy statements will be discussed, the
main focus will be on 'on the ground' programs that are monitoring, and/or implementing mitigation and adaptation actions to protect cultural heritage
around the world. Examples from Europe, South America, and the Arctic and Asia will be included. This paper aims to put actions taking place in the U.S.
and in Europe in a larger global context. The content of this paper arises out of an ongoing survey of international efforts to combat climate change threats
to cultural heritage taking place within the Climate Change Response Program of the U.S. National Parks Service.
Hambrecht, George [296] see Fitzhugh, Ben
Hamdan, Leila [83] see Damour, Melanie
Hamden, Leila [39] see Warren, Daniel
Hamilton, Marcus (Santa Fe Institute) and Briggs Buchanan (University of Tulsa)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              180
[16]              The Archaeology of Clovis Landscape Use at the Mockingbird Gap Site, New Mexico and Surrounding Regions
In this paper, we discuss recent work at the Mockingbird Gap Clovis site, New Mexico, and the surrounding region, designed to understand how Clovis
hunter-gatherers utilized and adapted to the regional landscape and its available resources. Focusing on lithic raw material use, we show that the Clovis
occupants of Mockingbird Gap had access to a wide diversity of high quality raw materials from a large area of the southwest. Moreover, Clovis raw
material network analysis across the continent suggests that Mockingbird Gap was an important link between the southwest and southern Highs Plains.
This work shows that Clovis people in this region of the southwest had an extensive and specific knowledge of the landscapes around them, and may well
have had connections to other Clovis peoples in neighboring regions. Further, this pattern of landscape use and regional adaptation is more consistent with
models that suggest Clovis hunter-gatherers used established regional home ranges rather than those that suggest Clovis populations swept across North
America rapidly and non-redundantly.
Hamilton, Derek (Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre), Kerry Sayle (Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centr),
Colin Haselgrove (University of Leicester) and Gordon Cook (Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centr)
[103]             What Did You Have for Dinner Last Night? Revealing Diet, Mobility, and Movement of People within Middle Iron Age British Society through
                  Multi-Isotopic Analysis
The Middle Iron Age in southern central Britain (c. 300–150 cal B.C.) is a period that is often seen as becoming regionally inward-looking. A primary focus
of the mixed agriculturalists is on building and maintaining massive hillforts. There is very little long-distance exchange or trade noted in the archaeological
record, and the metalwork at the time takes on insular forms (e.g., involuted brooches) that separate it from the Continental connections observable in both
the Early and Late Iron Age.
This paper will present the results of recent multi-isotopic work (δ13C, δ15N, and δ34S) on human and animal bone collagen undertaken at the Scottish
Universities Environmental Research Centre (SUERC) that have produced results that alter this narrative. We argue that the variability observed within the
animal populations may likely be the result of the movement of animals across large distances, in this case a minimum of 20 km, but potentially much
further. Also, this research has identified incomers to the human population that were interred within the Middle Iron Age burial ground, spawning questions
pertaining to identity, community, mobility, and trade.
[103]             Chair
Hamilton-Brehm, Scott (So. Illinois Univ. Carbondale), Lidia Hristova (University of Nevada Las Vegas), Susan Edwards (Desert Research
Institute), Jeffrey Wedding (Desert Research Institute) and Duane Moser (Desert Research Institute)
[63]              Parallel Analysis of Ancient Human mtDNA Sequences and Radiocarbon Ages of Quids from the Mule Springs Rockshelter, Nevada, USA
Ancient DNA research is revealing unprecedented information about past human migrations and residency. During the late Holocene, people exploited
food and material resources near Mule Spring Rockshelter in the Spring Mountains of southern Nevada. In the 1960s, hundreds of chewed plant remains
(quids) were recovered from the shelter deposits. To better constrain patterns of human residency, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) was extracted and partially
sequenced from 20 representative quids that have sat unstudied in a museum collection for decades. We report on the detailed analysis of mtDNA
sequences and time-resolved patterns of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from paleopeople who occupied this site.
Hammerstedt, Scott (University of Oklahoma), Amanda Regnier (University of Oklahoma) and Sheila Savage (University of Oklahoma)
[240]             Litter Burials from Spiro’s Great Mortuary Reconsidered
Artifact color has both chronological and symbolic significance at Spiroan burial sites in the Arkansas River drainage of eastern Oklahoma. In this paper,
we examine litter burials from the Great Mortuary and the Brown mound at Spiro. Ethnohistoric descriptions are used to suggest color symbolism in
Spiroan ritual displays. These data are compared with color usage in earlier burials at Spiro and mounds elsewhere in the drainage. We wish to determine
whether the Great Mortuary was the culmination of a long-standing burial program or if there was a distinctive change in symbolic ritual compared with
earlier Arkansas Valley grave periods.
Hampson, Jamie (Stanford University)
[10]              Contested Images: Rock Art Heritage on and off the Rocks
In many countries, cultural and socio-political identity is still shaped, manipulated, and presented through rock art. Both on and off the rocks, pictographs
and petroglyphs are powerful tools. In this poster, I present results from 10 years of fieldwork in southern Africa, northern Australia, and west Texas. I focus
on re-contextualised rock art images, in commercial settings, in academic publications, and as integral components of national symbols. I also consider
innovative new visitor centres concerned with conservation, job creation, promoting community archaeology, and—above all—challenging visitors’
preconceptions of rock art and of the Indigenous peoples who made it.
Hampton, Ashley (FAU)
[245]             Healers Also Gather Acorns: Examining the Division of Labor and Power Dynamics among California Hunter-Gatherers
Previous theories concerning women’s access to roles of power within Native American hunter-gatherer societies have focused on linking such access to
socially proscribed gender identities, role flexibility, and/or kinship systems. My work seeks to validate such models within the context of women’s access to
the role of healer among California hunter-gatherer groups by looking to written records from the 1800s and ethnographies from the early 1900s. Through
quantitative and qualitative analysis, I examine if cultures with multiple gender-linked innate qualities restrict women’s access to the role of healer and/or if
women having greater access to circumstantial labor roles equating to greater access to power.
My research tests notions about the strict binary division of labor via statistical reassessment of correlations between subsistence labor-roles and gender.
By seeking to highlight how social roles were (or were not) seen as concordant with gender-identity, I posit that a more nuanced view of labor and gender
is necessary. My research provides a better analytical framework from which archaeologists can interpret past distributions of power by showing the
usefulness of ethnographic analogies that are more inclusive of engendered methodologies.
Han, Tao [180] see Zhang, Qun
Haney, Jennifer [176] see Welker, Martin
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                181
Hankins, Sharon, Yarely Meza (University of Texas at Austin) and Cristina Gonzales (University of Texas at Austin)
[93]              Experimental Ceramic Technology Studies: Programme for Belize Archaeology Project
This is a multifaceted approach utilizing environmental, ethnographical, and ceramic studies from various instructors with feedback from students, faculty,
and experienced potters. Incorporating this project in our field schoo, generates more knowledge and curiosity in the observation of materials in the field
pertaining to this technology.The environment and its contribution to our needs such as clay, water, temper, fuel, and firing methods are some of the most
important aspects of research. These components are interactive. I regard pottery manufacture as a continuum. If any component is lacking or unavailable,
adjustment or adaption must be initiated. The major component is the environment. This is an interactive economy. Manipulation of clay, temper, water,
slips (pigments), and fire must be adjustable. This project has become a working lab in the field. Visual observation and participation of students, and our
local community of Belize, may inspire more discussion and knowledge of pottery manufacture. We utilize only materials from our local surroundings. We
are grateful to Dr. Fred Valdez, Programme for Belize, and my students (from 2000–present) for their participation. This poster includes participation of
students: Cristina Gonzalez, and Yarely Meza. This poster will include examples of components, tools, and results of manufacture.
Hann, Don [165] see Walker, Jeff
Hanna, Jonathan and Michael Jessamy (Ministry of Tourism, Government of Grenada)
[183]             Community Archaeology at the St. John's River Site, Grenada
The St. John’s River site is an early Late Ceramic Age settlement on Grenada’s west coast, largely destroyed by the expansion of a public cemetery,
stadium, and bridge. The St. George’s Community Archaeology Project (SGCAP) was a summer program developed to engage young people and
community members in the investigation and preservation of the remaining areas of the site. During the summers of 2011 and 2012, surface collection,
shovel testing, and four excavation pits were implemented. The artifacts recovered fit mostly within the Troumassoid Period typology (A.D. 600–900),
though local pastes, tempers, and paint combinations were observed for the ceramics. This paper summarizes the work of SGCAP and presents a
template for a community-based approach that is now being applied to the heavily looted site of Pearls, Grenada.
Hanowell, Ben [38] see Brown, William
Hanratty, Colleen (Maya Research Program)
[292]             Dating Maya Classic Ceramics in Northwestern Belize via OSL
Twenty-four years of investigations conducted by the Maya Research Program at numerous Maya archaeological sites in northwestern Belize offers
special opportunities for the investigation of the social and political dynamics at the end of the Classic Period in this region. In this paper, we discuss the
Late Classic time period, including rapidly increasing populations, political reorganization, declining soil quality, and expansion of agricultural systems. We
discuss the specific responses that are documented in the Terminal Classic Period and how the remnant populations of the Early Postclassic made use of
the Classic Period agricultural infrastructure. Key to these insights are a precise understanding of the temporal dynamics of the Classic Period. The
IIRMES OSL analysis of Terminal Classic Maya ceramics from this area has provided a great deal of insight into bounding this time period. In addition, the
IIRMES study laid the groundwork for a larger OSL analysis of Classic Maya ceramics in conjunction with the University of Glasgow and Australia Catholic
University. This research illustrates the utility of OSL dating techniques in archaeological contexts.
Hansen, Richard, Edgar Suyuc (FARES Foundation; Mirador Basin Project), Stanley Guenter (FARES Foundation; Mirador Basin Project),
Beatriz Balcarcel (UNAM, Mexico City) and Carlos Morales (Universite Paris 1, Pantheon-Sorbonne)
[59]              Economic Interaction and the Rise of Socio-Political Complexity in the Maya Lowlands: The Case from the Mirador Basin
Investigations in 51 ancient cities of varying sizes in the Mirador Basin of northern Guatemala have revealed a variety of data relevant to the economic
catalysts that were involved in the rise of social, political, and economic sophistication among the Preclassic Maya. The real "business" of the early Maya
dealt with agricultural productivity and a powerful distribution mechanism to distribute and facilitate unification among a web of sites in the Mirador Basin.
However, a variety of other economic indicators such as the importation of exotic shells, domestic fauna, obsidian, jade, basalt, granite, coral, ceramics,
and other lithic tools demonstrate the varying degrees of social and economic power that provided the foundations of rank, status, and functional
requirements during the rise of Maya civilization. While religious, political, and social ideology provided the foundations for a homogeneous society
throughout the Maya Lowlands by the Middle and Late Preclassic periods, the economic manifestations of this ideology are well represented in the
archaeological record, and provide additional understanding of the role of economic interactions in the rise of cultural complexity in the Maya Lowlands.
Hansen, Linda
[117]             The Myth of the Willing Human Sacrificial Victim in Ancient Messoamerica: Transformation of the Symbolic Complex of Ritual Sacrifice in
                  Ancient Oaxaca and Teotihuacan
Past scholarship concerning human sacrifice in ancient Mesoamerica has suffered from oversimplification and misuse of traditional theoretical models of
sacrifice. In addition, many scholars are still suffering a hangover from a twentieth century Western scholarly binge that romanticized notions of an iconic,
peaceful Maya civilization (a type for all Mesoamerica) with exceptional interactions with nature. As a result, pan-Mesoamerican cosmological principles
are still endorsed as the ubiquitous causal force behind all ritual sacrificial symbolic systems and practices. This theoretical miscarriage involves several
shortcomings: 1) It disregards the multifaceted and shifting nature of ritual activity and varied expressions at different levels of social strata, 2) it
solemnizes the participants in the sacrificial act, the sacrifice, and the sacrificial victim, as equal participants in a communal operation of reciprocity with the
gods, and 3) it ignores the issues of power relations. In this paper, I will exhibit a more complex arena of sacrificial rites and reveal dialectical ideological
constructions of sacrifice on different echelons of society in both ancient Oaxaca and Teotihuacan. In both case studies, increased urbanization and social
complexity introduced new symbolic complexes which included human sacrifice increasingly aligned with warfare, domination of foreigners, and unwilling
sacrificial victims.
[117]             Chair
Hansen, Brooke [227] see Rossen, Jack
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              182
Hanson, Sydney, Jade d'Alpoim Guedes (Washington State University), Steve Weber (Washington State University) and Thanik Lertcharnrit
(Silpakorn University)
[19]              An Archaeobotanical Analysis of Four Prehistoric Central Thai Sites: the Preliminary Results
Thailand is a relatively new frontier for archaeobotanists, having suffered in the past from a shortage of archaeobotanical research. While archaeologists in
southeast Asia have begun to chart when and how rice and millet agriculture developed and spread, a clear picture of prehistoric agriculture in central
Thailand has yet to emerge. This paper describes some preliminary results from a series of sites that have been occupied from ca. 2500 B.C.E. to 500 C.E.
These are Non Pa Wai, Non Mak La, and Nil Kham Haeng, as well as data from a new site, Phromthin Tai. Climate has been implicated as a factor behind
differential patterns in plant use across the time period and area examined. We examine these patterns in the light of new archaeobotanical data as well as
an improved understanding of ecological and climatic boundaries.
Hantman, Jeffrey [284] see Gallivan, Martin
Hara, Kristyn
[252]             Urbanizing Forests: Paleoethnobotanical Research at the Royal Capital of Angkor, Cambodia
Upon his ascension to the throne, King Yaśovarman I (r. 889–910 A.D.) founded a new capital at Angkor in northwestern Cambodia that was to become
the major center of the Khmer Empire and a dynamic religio-political landscape marked by extensive urbanization and environmental change. Religious
institutions played a particularly important role in localized human-environment engagements while contributing to broader processes of polity-building.
Drawing on historical ecology, this paper underscores the importance of forests in particular as sites of material and symbolic resources in understanding
the production and transformation of the Angkorian landscape. Paleoethnobotanical data collected from archaeological excavations at the
Yaśodharāśramas—monastic institutions founded by King Yaśovarman I as part of his building campaign—provide insights into vegetation change,
resource use, and social practices as a step towards understanding forest histories and management within the context of urban development at Angkor.
Hard, Robert (Univ of Texas at San Antonio), John R. Roney (Colinas Cultural Resource Consulting), A.C. MacWilliams (University of Calgary),
Mary Whisenhunt (University of Texas at San Antonio) and Mark Willis (Blanton and Associates)
[168]             Early Agricultural Period Cerros de Trincheras on the Upper Gila River, Arizona
Early Agricultural Period (EAP) occupations in the Upper Gila River in southeastern Arizona indicate that EAP cerros de trincheras are more widespread
than previously thought. Recent fieldwork evaluates evidence from these sites to address issues related to chronology, agriculture, and warfare. Sites
include both cerros de trincheras (hilltop sites) as well as valley sites. The site of Round Mountain contains 1.9 km of berm walls and terraces, 16 rock
rings, and was built on a 640 foot hill during the Cienega phase (ca. 800 B.C.–A.D. 100). The DotMon site is situated on a 400 foot ridge above the Gila
River and includes 250 m of walls and six rock rings. The Duncan Doughnut site is in a valley setting containing a midden, evidence of maize use, and at
least two pithouses and lies below Round Mountain. Recently acquired drone, surface, and test excavation data will be evaluated in light of questions
related to chronology, maize use, and warfare.
Harding, Gregg (University of West Florida), Jason Wenzel (University of Florida) and Alita Huff Mikiten (University of Central Florida)
[7]               Beyond the Theme Parks: Community Archaeology in Greater Orlando
From 2006 to 2012, an extensive community-based archaeology program operated throughout the Greater Orlando area that was comprised of a team of
researchers associated with regional colleges. In conjunction with local governmental agencies, nonprofit organizations, and private property owners, the
efforts of the team led to the documentation and study of new and existing archaeological sites and the development of local museum exhibits. The poster
will visually convey the scope and success of these efforts, as well as illustrate heightened public awareness and community outreach efforts. The effects
of this work are still being felt, resulting in continued study of archaeological and historic resources throughout Greater Orlando.
Hardy, Thomas [206] see Hoover, Corey
Hardy, Meredith (National Park Serivce) and David Morgan (National Park Service)
[229]             The NHPA and the Southeast Archeological Center at 50: Reflections on Learning, Inclusion, and Stewardship
Sharing a birth year with the National Historic Preservation Act, the National Park Service’s Southeast Archeological Center has served as steward to the
cultural resources and archeological heritage for the national park units across the southeastern United States. For 50 years, SEAC has overseen and
conducted the majority of NHPA-related activities in these parks, provided training and education to both NPS staff and the public. This paper examines the
roles SEAC has played in resource stewardship, protection, and education and how these roles have changed over time, reflecting a continuing maturation
of understanding of significance, inclusion, and diversity of our nation’s heritage.
Hardy, Thomas (University of Pennsylvania)
[233]             Colonial Practices in the Imperial Heartland: The Inca Conquest and Transformation of the Lucre Basin, Cuzco, Peru
This paper will present data from the author’s dissertation research at the site of Minaspata, located in the Lucre Basin at the eastern end of the Cuzco
Valley, Peru. Minaspata has a long history of occupation, dating to the Early Horizon to the end of the Late Horizon, but was conquered as the final
component of the Inca heartland immediately prior to the early imperial excursions by the Inca.
The results of recent excavations at Minaspata and the different phases of occupation and material culture will be discussed, as well as the implications for
the cultural history of the Cuzco area and the Andean area more generally. I will focus primarily on various aspects of the Late Intermediate Period (A.D.
1000–1400) and Late Horizon (A.D. 1400–1532) occupations, particularly the transformation of Minaspata and the Lucre Basin as well as changes in local
material culture, and the appearance of Inca state-controlled material culture under Inca rule. I will close by exploring the implications of these changes for
social and cultural transformations in the local populations through the lens of colonialism, and for Inca imperial practices more broadly—especially close to
the heartland, which is rarely interpreted in this manner.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                183
Hare, Timothy [26] see Masson, Marilyn
Hare, Timothy (Morehead State University)
[121]             Mapping Mayapán’s Archaeological Remains and Environmental Characteristics Using UAVs and Photogrammetric Software
The integration of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and photogrammetric data processing into existing field techniques simplifies and accelerates mapping
and environmental reconstruction. Ongoing investigations in and around Mayapán face the common challenge of mapping archaeological and
environmental features and attributes in the context of difficult terrain and dense surface cover. The 2015 field season depended on UAV photography and
photogrammetric processing for site and excavation photos as well as production of 3D modeling of archaeological remains and excavation units. In this
presentation, I outline the technology used, the data processing workflow, and the resulting products including oblique photos, orthorectified aerial photos,
digital elevation models, 3D models, and data layers for use in geographical information systems. I conclude with a discussion of extending and modifying
the new technologies, including integrating LiDAR, to better serve archaeological research.
[158]             Discussant
Harkleroad, Eric
[70]              Colonizing Yourself: The British Colonization of Britain
Often discussing Colonialism means discussing the colonized and the impact of the colonizers on them highlighting indigenous responses to the situation
as well as looking at methods of resistance and signs of the agency of the colonized. All too often we overlook the impact of this process on the colonizer. I
argue that during the rise of the British Empire, the role of colonizer became such a part of national identity that it colored interpretations of British
prehistory. This is most evident when looking at the conquest of Britain by Rome. The coming of Rome is often seen as unproblematic, an all too familiar
encounter of an indigenous population with a colonizing power, the British identifying as the colonizer rather than as the indigenous population. I highlight
how our understanding of this period is still largely based on Britain’s experience of those it encountered during its role as a colonizer. I examine the extent
to which Roman involvement in Britain can be looked at as an example of colonialism. Evidence from the end of the Iron Age and the beginning of the
Romano-British period will be analyzed in light of this discussion, showing more evidence of continuity than change.
Harland, Jen [210] see Mainland, Ingrid
Harman , Robert [214] see Macdonald, Danielle
Harmon, Brian [268] see Dalpra, Cody
Harper, Charlie (Florida State University) and Daniel M. Seinfeld (Florida Bureau of Archaeological Research)
[7]               Woodland Period Settlement Patterns at Letchworth Mounds (8JE337), Jefferson County, Florida
The Letchworth Mounds site (8JE337), located near Tallahassee in Jefferson County, Florida, is a predominately Woodland period site that encompasses
the largest earth mound in Florida. In addition to this monumental earthwork, a number of smaller mounds survive and it is thought that as many as 20
mounds may have been lost to modern land use. During the summer of 2014, the Florida Bureau of Archaeological Research and the Florida State
University conducted a field school at the Letchworth Mounds site. This poster discusses the use of GIS to correlate the results of the 2014 fieldwork with
the patchwork of controlled excavation, shovel testing, and surface collection that has occurred on the site since 1995. Through the study of artifact
distributions, the assembled GIS data is used to explore both the overall chronology of the site and the nature of discrete activity areas in relation to the
surviving earthen architecture. The results of this analysis provide a diachronic picture of activity and settlement patterns at the Letchworth Mounds site,
which is compared to patterns visible at other Woodland period sites in the southeastern United States.
Harper, Thomas (SUNY at Buffalo)
[95]              Population Dynamics and the 5.9 ka Event: A Methodology for Relating Climate Change and Demography in Eneolithic Romania,
                  Moldova, and Ukraine
For over a decade, it has been suggested that several events of the fourth millenium B.C. in Romania, Moldova, and Ukraine—the rise and
fall of the giant-settlements of the Tripolye culture in central Ukraine, the abandonment of Gumelnița tell settlements in the Danube Valley, and
the dissolution of the “Old European” complex and advent of the Bronze Age—were influenced by climatic factors, notably the 5.9 ka event
and the beginning of the Subboreal Period. However, the simple synchronicity of these events with changes in super-regional climate proxies,
taken alone, constitutes a poor argument for climatic causality. In order to make such an assertion, it is necessary to reconstruct the entire
chain of events through interrelated climatic, environmental, and cultural systems. In the context of my study region, this takes the form of
quantitative reconstruction of ca. 3,300 years of demographic development, modeling spatially variegated environmental time series using pollen
core data, and performing GIS-based site suitability analyses at multiple time references. In this way, the super-regional scale may be linked to
the regional and local scales, and the revealed detail may provide more coherent and specific arguments for the effects of climatic variability
on cultural systems.
Harrenstein, Tristan (Florida Public Archaeology Network)
[260]             What Have We Here?: Demonstrating the Opportunities for Heritage Preservation to Local Governments
Part of the Florida Public Archaeology Network’s mission is to work with local governments to both protect archaeological sites and to ensure that these
communities receive the benefits related to their preservation. However, many of the smaller communities in Florida are unaware of the opportunities
available for state and federal assistance in preserving their heritage. This paper details a new project designed to educate local governments and
historical societies about the benefits and legal pitfalls associated with archaeological and historic resources.
Harrington, Katherine (Brown University) and Eve Dewan (Brown University)
[90]              Curricular Collaboration: Exploring Strategies for Sustainability in Educational Outreach in Providence, RI
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              184
University-based educational outreach programs face various challenges in sustainability from year to year. As student leaders graduate and professors or
museum professionals change positions, programs can lose momentum. Similarly, programs designed without clear input from the communities they serve
are less likely to succeed. Here, we present some of the strategies for sustainability explored by the “Think Like an Archaeologist” program, a collaboration
between the Joukowsky Institute and the Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology at Brown University and the RISD Museum, which has provided
archaeological programming for local 6th grade social studies classrooms in Providence since 2010. Recently, we explored modifications to the program
which would align it even more with the Common Core State Standards, which Rhode Island adopted in 2013. By slightly tweaking our presentations and
activities, we could ensure that we were providing more useful programming for area teachers. We also discuss the integration of the program into the
graduate and undergraduate curriculum at Brown in a course called “Community Archaeology in Providence and Beyond.” This course not only trained an
interdisciplinary group of additional instructors for the outreach program, but also prompted students to think critically about issues in community
archaeology more widely.
Harrington, Victoria
[158]             Discussant
Harris, Alison (Dept. of Archaeology, Memorial University of Newfoundland), Ana T. Duggan (McMaster University), Stephanie Marciniak
(McMaster University), Hendrik Poinar (McMaster University) and Vaughan Grimes (Memorial University of Newfoundland and Max Plank )
[85]              Stable Isotope Evidence for Precontact Amerindian Diet in Newfoundland, Canada
For a millennium, the island of Newfoundland was home to two cultures: the Palaeoeskimo, and the Amerindians who later became known historically as
the Beothuk. Evidence from site distribution patterns suggests that each culture negotiated the shared space by utilizing different resources. However, after
1,500 years B.P., the cultural dynamics of the island began to shift as a period of climate warming altered the resources that were available on the outer
coast. While the Palaeoeskimo may have been forced to retreat to mainland Canada, the generalized marine-terrestrial economy of the Amerindians is
credited with their successful sustained occupation of insular Newfoundland. Biomolecular research undertaken as part of an interdisciplinary research
project investigating Amerindian origins, diet, and mobility patterns in Newfoundland has allowed us to test these hypotheses, yielding new evidence for
subsistence patterns. This paper considers agency and subsistence adaptability in light of stable isotope data from Amerindian (n = 21) and faunal skeletal
remains spanning over 1,000 years of Newfoundland history. We model the dietary strategies enacted by the Amerindians that enabled them to
successfully cope with the demands of the island environment.
Harris, Khadene (Northwestern University)
[126]             Postemancipation Bois Cotelette: An Update on Current Fieldwork
This paper is a summary of the ongoing analysis of artifacts and spatial data recovered from postemancipation house sites on the Bois Cotelette Estate in
Dominica. This project began as an examination of the social and economic impact of emancipation on the lives of the formerly enslaved. The projects goal
is to explore how a shift in labor conditions altered the physical layout of postemancipation settlements and determined the kinds of access individual
households had to local and regional markets. Preliminary findings of three summers of fieldwork reveal very little diversity in artifact assemblages.
Smaller assemblages can be explained by shorter occupation periods, natural erosion processes, or that freedom did not necessarily provide laborers with
greater opportunities to accumulate wealth. The lack of material culture, however, does beg a reconsideration of the methodological and theoretical
associations that drive an interpretation of postemancipation social life. With this paper, I emphasize how artifacts on their own cannot answer
fundamental questions we have of this time period. I point to the results of a mapping exercise used alongside the collection of oral histories from present-
day residents and laborers to illustrate alternative interpretations of the impact of emancipation on the Bois Cotelette Estate.
Harris, JWK [177] see Hlubik, Sarah
Harris, Matthew (AECOM Technologies)
[247]             In Defense of Data: Realigning Archaeological Modeling Theory with Modern Statistical Learning Approaches
The acceptance of statistical modeling as common practice in archaeological studies is highly varied across applications and methodological focus. As a
field, we lack a unified body of model building theory, best practices, and examples that demonstrate the successes and failures of various techniques
applied specifically to archaeological data. The literature on archaeological predictive modeling (APM) provides a notable example in the form of the
“Inductive” vs. “Deductive” debate. This false dichotomy unduly influences the general perception and approachability of these methods. Though there is a
recent uptick in model-based analysis in archaeology, progress has been hampered by the APM tumult and anemic publication rate for quantitative
methods research following the post-processual critique. Quantitative approaches in archaeology have lagged behind the trends in neighboring fields such
as social sciences, ecology, and economics. Recent advances in statistical methods, analytical software, and the open science initiative present an
opportunity for the construction of a framework for model based archaeology from which the evaluation of techniques and findings can be more accessible
to the entire field. This presentation will discuss the motivations for such an approach, explore the theory of APM through examples, and offer potential
routes for constructing such a framework.
Harris, Michael (Florida Atlantic University)
[253]             A Generous Spirit
This paper offers a reflection on Jerry Kennedy’s manifold contributions to the Department of Anthropology at Florida Atlantic University and their
continuing influence a decade past his retirement. These contributions include his work on the archaeology of south Florida and elsewhere, the training of
students at both undergraduate and graduate levels, the creation of programs, and the lending of his administrative acumen to department causes. Jerry’s
work as an archaeologist has been conditioned by his generous spirit, putting student and program achievement above that of his individual career. As a
result, his legacy endures not just in archaeology, but in the students and colleagues with whom he has partnered.
Harrison, James (Spokane Tribe)
[29]              Preserving Cultural Landscapes beyond the Reservation Boundary
The Spokane Tribe of Indians Preservation Program conducts a range of projects within the Tribe’s ceded areas in northeast Washington State. The goal
of this work is to increase tribal sovereignty and to help preserve intact portions of the Tribe’s traditional landscape and resource patches in order to secure
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              185
long-term access for tribal members to a mosaic of traditional cultural sites beyond the reservation boundary. The program competes with private CRM
firms for archaeology consultation projects, particularly those located in high probability landforms. We work to document and protect traditional places
such as hunting/fishing/gathering localities. Cemeteries and other cultural sites located are periodically monitored to ensure they remain undisturbed. In
summary, this paper describes how indigenous archaeology can serve as a much needed new paradigm in the field of cultural resources management.
Harrison, Jessica [238] see Rosado Ramirez, Roberto
Harrison, Ramona (University of Bergen, Norway), Thomas H. McGovern (City University of New York) and George Hambrecht (University of
Maryland)
[296]            Comparative Ecodynamics of North Atlantic Islands: A Progress Report
Support from U.S., Canadian, Scandinavian, and U.K. funding bodies 2007–16 has made possible a sustained multi-investigator multi-regional
interdisciplinary series of investigations of the offshore islands of the North Atlantic (Faroes, Iceland, Greenland) coordinated by the NABO research
cooperative. These islands were connected by Viking Age migrations from mainland Scandinavia and the British Isles, and the diverse fates of their human
populations during the Middle Ages and Early Modern periods have become iconic examples of human impact on island ecosystems, unintended
consequences of introductions, and disastrous impact of climate change. The case of Norse Greenland has become a controversial but influential example
of a society that “chose to fail.” This presentation provides an overview of the new work in field and laboratory that is both expanding our understanding of
the Norse North Atlantic and offering major challenges to established scenarios of resilience, human impact, and social collapse. “Island laboratories” in
the North Atlantic continue to provide new perspectives on long term human ecodynamics.
Harrison-Buck, Eleanor (University of New Hampshire)
[221]            Male-Female Sexuality in the “Fruit Bearing” Maya New Year Celebrations: Understanding the Past and Present Heritage through
                 Participatory and Archaeological Studies
Among contemporary Tz’utujil Maya, the Mam are the “Year Bearers” of an ancient 260-day ritual calendar still used today in highland Guatemala,
celebrated annually when the seasons change from dry to wet. This spring celebration corresponds with Semana Santa (Holy Week) and is when the
maize is planted and cacao and other fruits are harvested. Preceding Easter, young male initiates travel on foot down from the highlands to the cacao
groves that have existed in the coastal lowlands since ancient times. For the Maya, maize and cacao are personified male and female, respectively. These
gendered goods are paired as regenerative beings and reflect the life cycles of plants and humans that are planted (born) and harvested (sacrificed) in
hopes of being reborn again. Male-female exchange partners are historically linked to sacrificial rites, even today, despite heavy Christianization. Following
Strathern (1988), we suggest male-female pairings are simultaneous expressions of movement and regenerative powers, where same-sex and cross-sex
relations constitute a mutual interdependency. For the Maya, this distinct way of knowing the world emphasizes one’s reciprocal relationship with it. Our
understanding of this gendered relational ontology comes from our own archaeological work and participation in contemporary Tz’utujil rituals and
pilgrimage events.
[158]            Discussant
Harrod, Ryan (University of Alaska Anchorage) and Aaron Woods (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[24]             A Line in the Sand: Bioarchaeological Interpretations of Life along the Borders of the Great Basin and Southwest
Prior to A.D. 1300, several archaeologically defined cultures were identified at the intersection of the American Great Basin and southwest. Human skeletal
remains were analyzed from sites that represent the borders and the heartlands of the Fremont, the Virgin Branch Puebloan, and the northern San Juan
Puebloan cultural areas. The goal was to examine how life in the crossroads of these regions affected the experiences of individuals and groups. The
following indicators were used to reconstruct morbidity and mortality profiles: age-at-death and biological sex, markers of stress and pathological
conditions, and scars of traumatic injury. In addition to these reconstructions, health and demography was contextualized using analyses of material culture
from key sites in their respective regions. By considering both human remains and material culture, distinct and blended cultural traits were delineated in an
attempt to better understand how borders structure inter-social relations. The value of an interdisciplinary approach is that it provides a more integrated
understanding of each culture that considers not only how bodies record an individual’s experience in life, but the way that groups interacted with one
another.
Harrod, Ryan [104] see Woods, Aaron
Harrower, Michael (Johns Hopkins University)
[138]            Comparative Water Histories: An Outline of Contrastive Juxtaposition as Method in Anthropological Archaeology
Anthropology has long been marked by tension between emphasis on commonalities among histories and cultures on one hand, alongside emphasis on
histories and cultures as unique, contingent, and exceptional on the other. Vernon Scarborough is one of few who have pioneered new understanding of
water among ancient societies through both focused study of particular regions, as well as broad, synthetic comparison of water among ancient societies
worldwide. In an era marked by a daily increasing plethora of information, global syntheses conducted by individuals become less and less feasible, and
comparison as an addendum to research such as in edited volumes is a helpful but insufficient mode of analysis. I describe and argue for contrastive
juxtaposition of two or a few cases, which can thus be examined in greater detail. Although comparison of two or three cases in analysis is not new, as
exemplified in the work of Margaret Mead, Clifford Geertz, Marshall Sahlins, Robert Mc. Adams, and Timothy Earle, this mode of comparison remains
underutilized. We need not seek to prove cases are the same or closely similar; but rather, contrasting cases that are very different also yields critical
insights with regard to inconspicuous similarities, differences, and foundational dynamics.
Harry, Karen (University of Nevada-Las Vegas)
[292]            Early Puebloan, Late Puebloan, or Paiute? Using Luminescence Dating to Address Issues with the Virgin Branch Ceramic Chronology
The Virgin Branch ceramic typology is poorly defined. Definitions and chronologies of most types were established more than half a century ago, when
little work had been conducted in the region. Further, because of an absence of tree-ring dates, the placement of most types has relied on cross-dating
with Kayenta pottery styles. These situations can create problems when using ceramics to date archaeological contexts, as illustrated by recent
excavations at the Pete’s Pocket site. This site, located on the Arizona Strip, contains Puebloan architecture and gray ware pottery. Unexpectedly,
however, it also contained numerous ceramics with brown pastes, some tempered with olivine and some with sand. Traditionally, brown olivine-tempered
sherds are considered associated with Basketmaker or early Puebloan occupations, and brown sand-tempered sherds with early historic Paiute
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            186
occupations. Because the site is multicomponent and many of the rooms are filled with trash from earlier occupations, the temporal placement of these
ceramics cannot be resolved using traditional dating methods. To determine the temporal and cultural association of these ceramics, therefore, we relied
on luminescence dating of selected sherds. The implications of the results for understanding both Virgin Branch ceramic typologies and the occupation of
the Pete’s Pocket site are discussed.
[68]             Chair
Harry, Karen [68] see Horton, Shannon
Hart, Siobhan (Binghamton University)
[221]            Gender, Masculinity, and Professional-Avocational Heritage Collaborations
Relationships among professional and avocational archaeologists have changed in the last few decades with the increase in collaborative heritage projects
worldwide. Professionals and avocationals often work side-by-side on archaeological sites, collaborate on research, and engage in mutual knowledge
sharing. However, little attention has been paid to the gendered dimensions of these relationships. Feminist critiques of research and practices within
professional archaeology, along with demographic shifts in the field, have transformed practice in many ways, but little attention has been given to the way
gender structures our social relationships with contemporary partners in archaeological projects, including descendant communities, local residents, and
avocationals. In this paper, I consider the gendered dimensions of avocational-professional relationships, drawing from experiences with a multistakeholder
collaborative project in New England. Masculinist notions of archaeology and authority pervade avocational-professional relationships and can create
tensions in all phases of community-based projects. This paper examines avocational-professional relationships as a step towards: (1) discerning how
gender structures and intervenes in the social relationships of archaeologists and avocationals; and (2) exploring the implications of engendering
professionals and avocationalists for collaborative efforts.
Hart, Kelsie [286] see Cox, Maria
Hartford, Alexis (Harvard University)
[236]            Classifying Classic Period Ceramics from Azcapotzalco: A Comparison of INAA and Petrography
This pilot project used petrographic analysis to examine 15 Classic Period sherds from the site of Azcapotzalco, Distrito Federal, Mexico. These sherds
had already undergone instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA), which separated the sherds into two chemical groups—Azcapotzalco-B and
Tenochtitlan—and left one-third of the sherds unassigned. This project aimed to compare the INAA results with results obtained through the visual analysis
of the microstructure of the sherds and determine how the two methods relate to each other. Additionally, the project attempted to determine whether these
large chemical groups could be segmented into subgroups using visual analysis and to attempt to connect the fabric of the unassigned sherds with the
fabric of sherds that had been assigned to a chemical group. Three fabric groups, two with variants, were created through a visual analysis of the
microstructure of the sherds, only one of which corresponded fully with its chemical group assignments. This project has broader implications for pottery
production at Classic Period Azcapotzalco and trade throughout the Basin of Mexico in the Classic Period.
Harvey, Virginia (University of Manchester), Mike Buckley (University of Manchester), Phillip Manning (University of Manchester/College of
Charleston), Victoria Egerton (University of Manchester/College of Charleston) and Andrew Chamberlain (University of Manchester)
[183]            Mammal Species Diversity on Cayman Brac (Cayman Islands) via Collagen Fingerprinting
The endemic terrestrial mammals of the Cayman Islands in the western Caribbean Sea all appear to have become extinct since the start of human
colonisation 500 years ago. Extinct fauna include two species of the soricomorph Nesophontes and three species of Capromyid rodent. Introduced rodents
and domesticated species now exclusively represent the terrestrial mammal fauna of the Cayman Islands. The Cayman Islands are carbonate-dominated
successions typified by karst limestone that includes numerous caves and rock fissures. The sedimentary deposits within the caves preserve sub-fossil
remains documenting island biodiversity through time in a tropical environment that would not usually conserve organic remains. We have used collagen
fingerprinting, Zooarchaeology by Mass Spectrometry (ZooMS), to rapidly mass-identify fragmentary skeletal samples from the caves of Cayman Brac and
screen for those amenable to radiocarbon dating, potentially utilised to reveal extinction chronologies. ZooMS and 14C dating in combination enable us to
establish a biodiversity ‘catalogue’ to showcase species presence and abundance throughout the zooarchaeological record—spanning human colonisation.
Such knowledge can improve our understanding of anthropogenic impacts in this locality and can easily be transposed to other comparable biomes.
Harvey, Amanda R. [230] see Schmitz, Kirk
Haselgrove, Colin [103] see Hamilton, Derek
Haslam, Michael (University of Oxford)
[167]            Wild Capuchin Monkey Archaeology
The known record of tool use in the human lineage now extends back 3.3 million years. For other animals, however, we have very few clues as to how and
when their tool use behaviors evolved. Study of tool use among extant primates, in particular, offers an opportunity to develop comparative models and
analogies for human technologies. Here, I present the results of recent archaeological investigations into stone pounding behavior by wild bearded
capuchin monkeys (Sapajus libidinosus) in Brazil. These monkeys leave a distinctive pattern of tools on the landscape, including accumulation of selected,
transported, use-worn stones. Our excavation and dating of capuchin sites demonstrates that their tool use extends at least to the Brazilian precolumbian
era, making these the oldest known non-hominin tools outside Africa.
Hastorf, Christine (University of California-Berkeley)
[122]            Discussant
Hauser, Mark [100] see Oas, Sarah
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               187
Haussner, Elizabeth [64] see Carr, Christopher
Haviser, Jay (St. Maarten Archaeological Center), Menno Hoogland (Leiden University), Joost Morsink (Leiden University), Ruud Stelten
(Terramar Museum) and Corinne Hofman (Leiden University)
[220]             Early Human Occupation on Bonaire and Curacao, Dutch Caribbean
In January 2016, Leiden University initiated a project on Bonaire, Dutch Caribbean. Through a multidisciplinary perspective, and in comparison with earlier
Leiden research on Curacao, the goal of this project is to examine how people utilized the landscape during the earliest occupation of the islands.
Archaeological investigations focus on two locations: Wanapa II site and caves. Located behind Lac Bay, the Wanapa II site will yield data on settlement
dynamics and house structures on Bonaire. The caves will provide proxies on how people envisioned their ritual landscape and utilized the caves within
their daily routines. Wanapa II’s unique setting, at the edge of a tidal flat, protected by the bay and mangroves, also warrant a paleo-ecological and coastal
dynamics study to reconstruct the environmental setting in which people settled these locations. Through a detailed reconstruction of settlement and
environmental proxies, it is possible to determine Bonaire and Curacao’s roles in larger pan-Caribbean networks of exchange and interaction.
Haviser, Jay [222] see Morsink, Joost
Hawkins, Shaunna (White Mountain Apache Tribe)
[203]             Discussant
Haws, Jonathan [146] see Holst, Melissa
Haws, Jonathan (University of Louisville)
[170]             Human Occupation of Lapa do Picareiro (Portugal) during the Last Glacial Maximum
During the Last Glacial Maximum, abrupt climate changes created highly variable paleoenvironments inhabited by human populations across the Iberian
Peninsula. Pollen and sedimentary analyses from deep-sea cores off Portugal provide records of regional-scale paleoenvironmental responses to the
climate shifts that punctuated the LGM. Archaeological assemblages from caves and rockshelters offer a more local-scale understanding of human-
environment interactions during this period. One site in particular, Lapa do Picareiro, has yielded a continuous, stratified sedimentary sequence that
provides a diachronic record for MIS 2 human occupation and environmental change. Here, I present archaeological data from the Late Gravettian and
Solutrean (Levels U-O). The taphonomic study of the faunal remains informs on local paleoenvironments and human diet choice during the LGM.
Sedimentological analyses including magnetic susceptibility link the cave deposits with global scale records of LGM climate from the Greenland ice cores.
The results are used here to understand human responses to long-term environmental change in central Portugal. The spatial distribution of artifacts,
animal bones, and charcoal concentrations suggest sporadic, short-term visits to the cave prior to and during the LGM.
Hawthorne, Paige (Washington State University) and Lori Phillips (Washington State University )
[148]             Reaching Out: Public Archaeology at Washington State University
Cougar Quest is an academic summer camp for students on the Washington State University campus and is designed to meet the educational and social
needs of college-bound students entering grades 7-13. By attending three workshops of their choosing, students are immersed in a variety of fields and
subjects that are taught by WSU professors and graduate students. This past summer, a workshop focused on archaeology was conducted by graduate
students to show students the processes of archaeological methods and ideas. By including hands-on programs and activities, students were able to
experience the technological processes of artifact creation as well as their own archaeological “excavation.” This poster highlights the programs initiated at
this past summer’s Cougar Quest camp, the benefits of community outreach and public education, and future approaches to communicating appreciation
for archaeology and heritage resources.
Hayashida, Frances [259] see Salazar, Diego
Hayashida, Frances (University of New Mexico)
[259]             Chair
Hayes, Katherine (University of Minnesota, Twin Cities)
[18]              The Spiritual Economy of Shell in Native North America: Still Circulating
Shell material, particularly marine shell, has long been recognized in the archaeology of precolonial America as a “prestige” good of complex meaning.
Particularly in the Mississippian world, shell traveled great distances and appeared in richly meaningful contexts of use. Even in areas abundant in
shellfish, however, it played a complex role: food, adornment, pottery temper, landscape alteration. After colonization shell use did not disappear, and oral
traditions indicate some of the ways in which its spiritual significance demanded continued circulation. Yet the spiritual economy and value of shell in the
more recent past has not been widely explored as a continued (even if altered) circulation. In this paper, I explore some of the material properties of shell,
its contexts of use in deep and recent history, and its movement among and between people. I propose a sense of “spiritual economy” which implies the
mutual and ongoing influence of materiality, spirituality, and sociality. The movement of shell parallels a circulation of interpretation and memory between
past and present, when we consider the conditions of possibility for interpreting the past and present.
[70]              Discussant
Haynes, Gary [177] see Wriston, Teresa
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               188
Hays-Gilpin, Kelley (Northern Arizona Univ) and Peter J. Pilles, Jr (Coconino National Forest)
[258]            Amateur and Professional Archaeologists: Who’s Who?
Archaeology in the state of Arizona has been a partnership between professionals and “amateurs,” or avocationalists, for more than a century. From an
early focus on collecting “antiquities” for display, both professionals and avocationalists have followed a parallel course in the development of method and
theory and the specialization of skills and interests that today has blurred the distinction between “professionals” and “amateurs.” This paper will discuss
the growth of avocational involvement and the concerns, as well as encouragements, expressed by professionals, institutions, and bureaucrats during this
time. Examples will be presented to demonstrate some of the important contributions “amateurs” have made and continue to make in advancing our
understanding and appreciation of Arizona’s prehistory.
Hayward, Michele (Panamerican Consultants), Frank Schieppati (Panamerican Consultants) and Michael Cinquino (Panamerican Consultants)
[131]            Zoomorphs in Caribbean Rock Art
While Caribbean rock art is characterized by its high percentage of human-like facial and body images, realistically-depicted and stylized zoomorphic
motifs are also present. Fish, turtles, birds, and marine mammals are among the animals found amidst anthropomorphic, geometric, and abstract designs.
We identify a number of zoomorphic forms and describe their distributional patterns from our current set of rock art sites, particularly Puerto Rico. We also
discuss the roles or functions these particular animal representations may have had in prehispanic native societies.
Headrick, Annabeth (University of Denver)
[117]            Discussant
Heath, Barbara
[293]            Characterizing Colonowares from Three Sites in the Central Virginia Piedmont
First described in the literature in 1962, colonowares were initially interpreted by Ivor Noël Hume as low-cost provisions to enslaved people that substituted
for more costly colonial ceramics. Later, archaeologists argued that they were the products of enslaved potters or represent a creolized folk pottery that
mixed Native American, African, and European potting traditions. Whoever made them, a growing body of evidence indicates that they were used by
enslaved and free people across racial boundaries. While significant research has been undertaken on assemblages recovered from the tidewater and
northern piedmont regions of the state, comparatively little is known about the manufacture, distribution, and use of colonoware in the central Virginia
piedmont during the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Drawing on small assemblages from two sites in Bedford County and one in Powhatan
County, this paper describes variability in paste, surface treatments, and rim, handle, and base forms within each assemblage, explores the distribution of
colonowares across each site, and places them within the context of the historic communities within which they operated.
Hechler, Ryan [196] see Pratt, William
Hechler, Ryan (Tulane University), William Pratt (Texas State University) and David Brown (University of Texas at Austin)
[279]            Beyond the Cultural Pale?: Contextualizing El Morro de Tulcán within Regional Earthen Mound Development in the Northern Andes
El Morro de Tulcán is a massive earthen mound located near Popayán in southern Colombia. This structure towers over the surrounding landscape with a
height of 50 meters at its highest point. This pyramid is an anomaly within the surrounding cultural vicinity, where tolas (i.e., earthen mounds) are a rare
form of construction throughout much of Colombia. The closest region of tola development is in high concentrations in northern Ecuador, amongst the
Caranquis and Yumbos. Research at El Morro de Tulcán has revealed some peculiar similarities in construction style, building materials, burial methods,
and even grave goods with tolas from northern Ecuador; however, unlike northern Ecuador, this Colombian earthen mound was characterized by adobe
brick construction. The aim of this paper is to contextualize El Morro de Tulcán within the northern Ecuadorian-southern Colombian region and to better
understand the nature of this cultural isolate.
[279]            Chair
Heckel, Claire (CNRS 5608-TRACES)
[278]            The Slow Revolution: Chronological and Geographic Variability in Ornament Assemblages of the Early Upper Paleolithic in France
The gradual, mosaic nature of the development of symbolic material culture has become increasingly apparent due to discoveries outside of the Eurasian
Upper Paleolithic. Even so, much remains unclear about the mechanisms and circumstances surrounding the production and use of personal ornaments in
early societies. The idea that the intensification of symbolic behavior was the result of some sudden cognitive/behavioral shift is not well supported by
current evidence, and finding more complex explanations requires a close re-examination of objects of adornment and the contexts (social, environmental,
economic) of their production and use. Such examination reveals that, even in the Early Upper Paleolithic, artifacts of personal adornment (ranging from
perforated teeth and shells to meticulously-carved beads in ivory and soapstone) are not universal, but subject to substantial chronological and geographic
variation and to a more gradual and mosaic trajectory of development than is often acknowledged. Drawing on data from Protoaurignacian and Early
Aurignacian sites in France, this paper presents patterns of chronological and geographic variation in the intensity and nature of ornament-production in
these contexts and examines their implications for explanations of the emergence and intensification of systems of personal adornment on a broader scale.
Heckenberger, Michael (University of Florida)
[295]            Pre-Columbian Agro-forestry, Production Cycles and Forest-to-forest Conversion in Southern Amazon Garden Cities
This paper considers landscape domestication in the Upper Xingu region in the southern Amazonian transitional forests of Brazil. Archaeological research
provides detailed information on major late precolumbian settlements, ca. 1000–500 B.P., within an environmental history to >30,000 B.P. and cultural
history extending over the past two millennia. Late precolumbian agricultural systems involved forest farming and agro-forestry, including forest conversion
within patchy, mosaic forests, including garden plots, grass fields, orchards, and successional forest rather than in clear-cutting in long-standing field areas.
These high productivity systems maintained high biodiversity of tree species, including industrial plants managed in forest and wetland settings. Specific
hypotheses consider alternative agro-forestry systems within long-term sustainable cycles emerging from a Garden City model of a multi-centric urbanism.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 189
These results are considered with respect to current debate on the composition of Amazonian forests and sustainable contemporary land-use, as well as
indigenous cultural heritage and land rights.
[23]              Discussant
Heckenberger, Michael [263] see Crones, Charles
Hedenstierna-Jonson, Charlotte (Stockholm University, Sweden) and Torun Zachrisson (Stockholm University, Sweden)
[192]             Back and Forth Along the Eastern Slave Route. Archaeological Traces of Long-Distance Trafficking
With the expansion of the Eastern trade route during the ninth and tenth centuries, a regular contact with the markets of the Muslim world was established.
Long-distance trafficking of slaves became an important commodity. It was a high risk venture that required a new level of organisation, control, and
logistics. The full extent of the trafficking is not known but it included moving people and goods in both ways along a route that offered little infrastructure
and difficult terrain. Trafficking of this kind would inevitably have left its mark along the route. Focusing on the trade route from eastern Scandinavia to the
slave markets of the Volga Bulgar region, this paper poses the question if it is possible to distinguish the archaeology of the slave trade?
Heffter, Eric (The University of Arizona) and Dušan Mihailovic (The University of Belgrade)
[146]             The Role of Artifact Surface Scatters from the Western Morava Valley, Serbia in Understanding Human Population Movements during the
                  Early Upper Paleolithic
There is strong evidence for the spread of anatomically modern humans (AMH) 45,000 to 35,000 years ago in Europe using two major migration routes: a
northern one along the Danube River, and a southern one leading through Bulgaria and Greece. Despite being situated between these routes and near
some of the earliest AMH sites in Europe, most of Serbia and the Central Balkans seem to lack evidence of these occupations. Part of the reason for this
absence of evidence may be due to limited research on this time period in Serbia. This is especially the case with open air localities and artifact surface
scatters. However, in areas such as Serbia and the Central Balkans, certain lithic artifacts from these scatters can serve as indirect evidence for early AMH
occupations. In the last few years, the Western Morava River Valley in central Serbia has been the focus of systematic survey and documentation of
surface scatters. Survey data show that this region, while plentiful in Middle Paleolithic artifacts, lacks artifacts characteristic of early AMH. This poster
discusses possible reasons for such a disjunction in the early AMH archaeological record of central Serbia and the surrounding region.
Heilen, Michael (Statistical Research, Inc) and Monica Murrell (Statistical Research, Inc)
[64]              An Experimental Project to Conduct Digital Survey for Ring Midden Features using Aerial Lidar Data
This poster presents an experimental research project performed for the U.S. Bureau of Land Management’s Permian Basin Mitigation Program exploring
the use of aerial lidar data to identify and document ring midden features. The project was carried out in three study areas in southeastern New Mexico
situated along the eastern foothills of the Guadalupe and Sacramento Mountains. Previous archaeological surveys indicate that ring middens are common
along rocky escarpments in the piedmont zone and suggest that thousands of these features may be located within the study areas and adjacent areas.
The unique shape and prominence of ring middens suggested these features could be identified and analyzed using remote sensing techniques. Aerial
lidar data were obtained and processed to create high-resolution topographic models and visualization datasets for each of the three study areas. A
sample of each study area was digitally-surveyed using GIS to identify ring midden features. A subsample of these were ground-truthed and thoroughly
documented during field verification efforts. The results of this study provided a better understanding of the distribution and morphology of ring midden
features in southeastern New Mexico and showed that many, but not all, could be reliably identified using digital survey methods.
Heilen, Michael [180] see Ciolek-Torello, Richard
Heiser, Kasey (Binghamton University)
[90]              Ritual Apprenticeship? A Case Study from The Eastern Finger Lakes of New York State
The Early Woodland Period In New York state is a unique time period with many changes from the preceding Late Archaic and Transitional periods. Many
of the western Finger Lakes were not only used for their abundant resources, but were integral parts of the landscape used as ceremonial spaces. We
know much less about the role of the eastern Finger Lakes, but the Canadarago Lake I site can shed new light on the role they played. Excavations
conducted as part of a Cultural Resource Management project produced a unique lithic assemblage that suggests the lake or the specific site itself played
a greater role than just subsistence. Caches of bifacial blades in mortuary contexts became highly standardized and distributed during this time period.
Based on preliminary analysis, The Canadarago Lake I site appears to be a cache blade production site where a mastercraftsmen worked alongside one or
more apprentices. Skill differences are reflected in the vast amount of debitage and less abundant bifaces recovered at the site. In one distinct area, over
5,500 flakes and dozens of bifaces were recovered. Apparent in the debitage is a skill level not seen in the discarded bifaces.
Heitman, Carrie (University of Nebraska-Lincoln), Worthy Martin (University of Virginia) and Stephen Plog (University of Virginia)
[261]             Legacy Records and Digital Innovation: The Chaco Research Archive and Beyond
Over the last 12 years, the authors of this paper have been involved in a range of digital curation activities pertaining to legacy records and the integration
and manipulation of those data to create new knowledge about the past. Primarily, we have worked together to create the Chaco Research Archive (CRA)
and a variety of complementary projects including a mobile application and, more recently, the Salmon Pueblo Archaeological Research Collection
(SPARC). In this paper, we describe the creation, maintenance, and preservation aspects of the CRA and SPARC; outline nascent efforts focused on the
digital curation of Ohio Hopewell legacy collections; and review our involvement in discussions of digital heritage ethics. In sum, we outline how these
projects have and continue to add value to existing collections and review the challenges that lie yet ahead.
Heller, Eric (University of California Riverside)
[209]             Power, Placemaking, and the Production of Sacred and Political Landscapes at La Milpa North, Northwestern Belize
Although ethnographic and ethnohistoric sources offer insights into the practices of producing political and sacred landscapes among contemporary and
colonial era Maya, the scarcity and separation in time and space of written sources from most Classic Period contexts complicates the examination of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             190
placemaking strategies in more ancient settings. In the near absence of written sources, landscapes, which are inscribed by built environments and the
material remains of inhabitation, may be read as texts to discern ancient practices used to produce meaning and make places. Integrating traditional
archaeological methods with digital reconstructions and phenomenological approaches, this paper explores the deliberate efforts of ancient Maya elites to
control processes of placemaking at the site of La Milpa North, northwestern Belize. La Milpa North, a Late to Terminal Classic hinterland palatial
compound, functioned as an important node within sacred and political landscapes of the La Milpa polity. Through analyses of avenues of movement,
arrangements of buildings and monuments on the landscape, and the placement of features within structures, La Milpa North can be read as a text, or
perhaps multiple texts, each designed to craft embodied experiences of place and convey subtly divergent meanings to a diverse array of interactants.
Helmer, Matthew (SWCA Environmental Consultants)
[56]              Early Horizon Foodways and Settlement Nucleation: Preliminary Insights From Samanco, a Maritime Center in the Nepeña Valley, North-
                  Central Peru
This paper examines the relationship between foodways and settlement nucleation at Samanco, a maritime center located in the Nepeña Valley littoral.
Samanco comprises hundreds of orthogonal stone structures agglutinated into compounds spanning over 40 hectares. The site is similar to several other
contemporary settlements in Nepeña, interpreted to be part of an integrated peer network. Excavations at Samanco yielded extraordinary amounts of food
refuse, including mollusk, fish, faunal, and plant remains, all of which have been preliminarily analyzed. Results indicate that rather than being a
specialized maritime community, Samanco residents relied on intensive exploitation of a variety of plants and animals. Excavations documented plant
cultivation along stone terraces just below the site, on-site rearing of animal domesticates including camelids, net-based fishing focused on large-scale
harvesting of smaller fish species, and shellfish exploitation along rocky and sandy outcrops of Samanco Bay. Preliminary results suggest that Early
Horizon maritime centers were able to live with considerable autonomy as related to foodways, and that trade was more localized within lower-middle
valley pockets. More broadly, the results bring important insights into the ways in which non-state complex societies were able to develop early urban life
forms through the production and distribution of food.
Helmke, Christophe (University of Copenhagen) and Ismael Arturo Montero García (Universidad del Tepeyac)
[294]             A la sombra del Gólgota: Observancias rituales en el Cerro de la Estrella del Periodo Clásico hasta hoy
El ritual calendárico conocido como la ceremonia del Fuego Nuevo era en muchos sentidos el rito fundamental de las culturas del altiplano central de
México. Aquí, examinamos este ritual y su conexión a las cuevas, como se manifiesta en el Cerro de la Estrella, donde la última ceremonia del Fuego
Nuevo fue celebrada por los mexicas en el año 1507. Sobre la base de las continuidades en el arte rupestre y las evidencias arqueológicas sugerimos que
ceremonias del Fuego Nuevo ya se celebraban en el Cerro de la Estrella durante el Epiclásico (c. 750–950 d.C.), si no durante los últimos siglos del
Clásico Temprano. Se presentan los resultados de las investigaciones y se contextualizan nuestras conclusiones en relación con las fuentes
etnohistóricas que pertenecen a la ceremonia del Fuego Nuevo.
Helton, Erin [168] see Goodmaster, Christopher
Hemmings, C. (Mercyhurst Archaeological Institute MAI), J. M. Adovasio (Mercyhurst Archaeological Institute MAI), A. E. Marjenin (Mercyhurst
Archaeological Institute MAI), F. J. Vento (Mercyhurst Archaeological Institute MAI) and A. Vega (Clarion University of Pennsylvania)
[159]             The Old Vero Man Site (8IR009): Current Investigations Indicate a Late Pleistocene Human Occupation
Recent work near Sellards's 1916 excavation demonstrates that the 8IR009 stratigraphy is more complex, and better preserved, than previously described.
The modern excavations in 2014 and 2015 have recovered thermally altered bone and sediments along with charcoal from anthropogenic surfaces that
                                                          2
range 14,000–11,100 cal yr B.P. in age. To date, 50 m have been excavated to mid-Holocene-age horizons, and Pleistocene-age thermally modified
                                                2
materials have been recovered in a ca. 28 m area adjacent to a probable hearth. Continued archival research has relocated specimens and documents
(including Sellards’s original notebooks) from the 1913–1917 project, permitting spatial correlations between existing landmarks and the original
excavations. All of the available evidence indicates that Sellards was correct about the co-occurrence of extinct Pleistocene fauna with evidence of an
anthropogenic presence at the Old Vero Man Site.
[159]             Chair
Henderson, John [47] see Hudson, Kathryn
Hendrix, Jillian [120] see Chenvert, ErinMarie
Henebry-DeLeon, Lourdes
[266]             NAGPRA Human Remains Inventory: Making Our Work More Vsible
In 2008, Central Washington University NAGPRA Program and the Columbia Plateau Tribes created a more visible, participatory osteobiography process.
CWU let go of the “culture of secrecy” around our NAGPRA human remains documentation process and found the benefits outweigh fears. The change
showed the tribes what we really do and generated research questions from Tribal representatives.
Henrikson, Suzann [113] see Byers, David
Henry, Edward (Washington University in St. Louis)
[17]              Interaction Spheres or Networks of Participation? Organizing Institutional Complexity in Adena-Hopewell Societies of Kentucky’s Bluegrass
                  Region
Since the 1960s, Joseph Caldwell’s notion of the interaction sphere has endured as a global framework through which archaeologists interpret regional
systems of trade and exchange. However, a tension exists in this framework between the homogeneous and heterogeneous nature of exchanges within
overlapping territories. Implied in the Interaction Sphere approach is that, through their interactions, autonomous social groups engage in homogeneous
religious, economic, and sociopolitical institutional profiles. More recently, archaeologists working in areas of the world where the Interaction Sphere
concept has been applied are discovering that societies are often organized in a multitude of non-uniform ways. I employ recent studies of institutions from
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              191
archaeology, sociocultural anthropology, and sociology to explore a notion of Participation as an alternative to Interaction Spheres. Understanding the
heterogeneous ways in which humans coordinate institutional participation allows us to consider the nuances of regional trade and exchange relationships,
elucidating shared and divergent principles in the organization of society. I draw upon new data from excavations at several Adena-Hopewell ditch-and-
embankment enclosures in Central Kentucky to assess how collective labor events help delineate the creation of, and involvement in, networks of
participation in Middle Woodland institutions across the Eastern Woodlands of North America.
Henry, Jamie (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee)
[63]             The Orphaned Archaeological Collections and its Place in the Modern Museum: A Case Study from Tell Hadidi, Syria
Destruction of ancient sites along the Euphrates River in northern Syria due to the construction of the Tabqa Dam and the formation of Lake Assad led to
salvage excavations conducted between 1974 and 1978 by the Milwaukee Public Museum (MPM) at the site of Tell Hadidi, Syria, under the direction of Dr.
Rudolph Dornemann. The 300,000 artifacts collected by the project are now housed at the MPM but this material has never been completely published. In
1991, with the retirement of Dr. Dornemann, the collection began a gradual fall into obscurity often experienced by material not intended for extensive use
in programs or exhibits. Such collections present particular problems for new museum staff members who have no expertise in the geographic area from
which the material was excavated. For over 35 years the collection languished in storage while institutional memory of its significance gradually faded.
More recently, through collections management and programming, as well as graduate thesis projects, it has become a valuable resource for a new
generation of museum professionals. This paper will present both the biography of this collection, from exciting new project to orphan collection, and will
suggest strategies for rehabilitation of similar material in the process.
Henry, Edward [132] see Kidder, Tristram
Hepp, Guy (University of Colorado)
[135]            Movement of Goods and Ideas in Early Formative Western and Central Mesoamerica: New Evidence from Coastal Oaxaca, Mexico
For decades, scholars have discussed Mesoamerica as a land characterized by two ancient linguistic and cultural traditions: Mixe-Zoque to the southeast,
and Otomanguean to the west. Recent evidence from the initial Early Formative (2000–1500 cal B.C.) village site of La Consentida in coastal Oaxaca
suggests that early “Red-on-Buff horizon” ceramics of Otomanguean-speaking peoples compete temporally with the earliest southern pottery traditions,
such as that of the Soconusco region’s Barra phase (1900–1700 cal B.C.). In this paper, I discuss the movement of goods and ideas between the people of
La Consentida and its interaction partners, both near and distant. With particular attention to ceramic and lithic evidence, I suggest that La Consentida was
a village of the Otomanguean tradition, and that the site’s Tlacuache phase (1950–1500 cal B.C.) ceramics exemplify early Red-on-Buff pottery. While
pottery forms, iconography, and obsidian exchange evidence indicate extensive interaction with peoples of western and central Mesoamerica, La
Consentida was also in contact with communities to the southeast. I thus conclude that the aforementioned linguistic and cultural “boundary” was a porous
one. I therefore agree with other scholars who have suggested that Mesoamerica was a land defined in part by far-reaching interaction, exchange, and
mobility.
Herbig, Alexander [223] see Bos, Kirsten
Herckis, Lauren (Carnegie Mellon University)
[77]             Marine Fossils and Domestic Ritual in Maya Commoner Households: Two Neighborhoods in the Classic Maya City of Palenque
Marine fossils carried an important symbolic load for elites in the Classic Maya city of Palenque. Recent excavations demonstrate that marine fossils were
intentionally employed in a variety of ways by commoners in hinterland domestic contexts, as well. Despite a shared symbology, such use varied across
the landscape: inhabitants of different neighborhoods had different practices surrounding these materials. The special significance of marine fossils in
commoner households is particularly evident in the preparation of riverine resources for consumption and in domestic ritual. It is particularly notable during
the Late Classic, a time when marine fossils were being incorporated into monumental architecture and ritually significant contexts in the city center. The
current paper presents a discussion of the functional and ritual uses of these objects. It additionally explores marine fossils as a lens through which to
reveal the role of the city in hinterland identity and vice versa, as commoners in the hinterland of Palenque simultaneously performed their affiliation with
the city and with the sacred, and elites in the center performed their affiliation with the people of the broader region.
Heredia, Verenice [169] see Martínez Rojo, Iziar
Heredia Espinoza, Verenice Y. [27] see Antorcha Pedemonte, Ricardo
Heredia Espinoza, Verenice (El Colegio de Michoacan)
[101]            What the "Teuchitlan Tradition" is, and What the "Teuchitlan Tradition" is Not
Recent full coverage systematic surveys in the Tequila region have produced new and significant data to understand the nature of the well-known
Teuchitlán tradition which has been variously described as a state-like society, a segmentary state, and a chiefdom. The evidence presented for these
various models remains shaky and speculative. Here, I evaluate and test the current evidence, including the published literature, while providing empirical
data from the region. Then, I interpret these data in light of a processual model on the character of this complex society and its political economy.
[101]            Chair
Hermes, Taylor (University of Kiel), Michael Frachetti (Washington University in St. Louis), Farhod Maksudov (Uzbekistan Academy of
Sciences), Alexei Mar'yashev (Kazakhstan Academy of Sciences) and Paula Doumani Dupuy (University of Kiel)
[134]            Tethered, Ad Hoc, Resilient, or Structured? An Isotopic Investigation of Pastoral Strategies in Montane Ecosystems of Central Asia
This paper focuses on tracking the mobility and diets of domesticated animals using isotopic analysis. We present two archaeological contexts from
mountain regions of central Asia: 1) A ninth–tenth century (medieval) iron smelting town located at 2,000 masl in the Zaamin Mtns. of Uzbekistan, and 2) a
series of Bronze Age (2500–1200 B.C.E.) pastoral settlements located between 900 and 1500 masl in the Dzhungar Mtns. of eastern Kazakhstan. We are
curious about pastoral productivity as it relates to social organization and cultural traditions across ecological gradients. We expect the case of Bronze Age
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               192
pastoralists will show a diffuse and highly variable pastoral industry which may have provided more resilience to socio-ecological changes, resulting in a
high degree of variability in social interaction. For the medieval case, we expect that a centrally organized economy, like iron metallurgy, would result in a
greater demand for pastoral foodstuffs and likewise would structure pastoral management, resulting in more rigidity in socio-ecological adaptation and
more environmental degradation. The differences between these two examples are important for understanding the interface of herd management and
economic organisation across agricultural landscapes of high socio-ecological dynamism.
Hermitt, Elijah (Pennsylvania State University) and Kirk French (Pennsylvania State University)
[235]             The Palenque Pool Project: Preliminary Investigations into Monumental Construction Costs
The Palenque Pool Project began excavations of the largest pool of the Picota Group in the Classic Maya site of Palenque in 2014. This group is located 1
kilometer from the Palace on the western edge of the site. Although the function of the pool is still unknown, its placement adjacent to one of Palenque's
two stelae and its similarity to modern Maya examples suggests ceremonial use. As a part of the 2015 field season, samples were taken from two regions
that appear to have been limestone quarries. The first possible source of stone is situated roughly 275 meters southwest of the Main Picota Pool. The
second, which can be found about 350 meters to the southeast, lies directly uphill from the Templo Olvidado in the Piedras Bolas Group. These samples
have been comparatively analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) testing with sections extracted from cut stone found in and around the pool. This is the
first of many steps in developing a comprehensive analysis of the monumental construction cost of the pool and the connected aqueduct system.
Hernandez, Javier [110] see Gonzalez, Albert
Hernández Álvarez, Héctor [100] see Alexander, Rani
Hernandez Sarinana, Daniela (Department of Archaeology, Boston University), Gina Buckley (The Pennsylvania State University), Doug Kennett
(The Pennsylvania State University), Brendan Culleton (The Pennsylvania State University) and David Carballo (Department of Archaeology,
Boston University)
[129]             New Research on Ceramics and Chronology from the Tlajinga District
The Proyecto Arqueológico Tlajinga Teotihuacan (PATT) undertook two excavation seasons in the southern district of the city known as Tlajinga. These
have provided new information concerning the growth of the city southward and life in residential apartment complexes. Tlajinga comprises a group of
residential neighborhoods where commoners lived and engaged in both local and city-wide interactions. Analysis of ceramics from the project provides an
understanding of the temporality of household practices and the city’s extension processes.
By examining the ceramic artifacts obtained from compounds 17:S3E1 and 18:S3E1, as well the southern extension of the Street of the Dead, we discuss
new insights into the ceramic sequence and other chronological considerations. Using high precision Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS), we evaluate
the radiocarbon (14C) assays provided by wood charcoal and bone samples to establish dates and occupation phases. We correlate these lines of
evidence to provide preliminary conclusions regarding urbanization of the south of the city and the household practices that took place in Tlajinga.
Hernández Venegas, Maryam (Maryam Hernández)
[14]              Spatial Analysis of Anthropogenic Landscapes, A Research Tool for Natural and Cultural Heritage Protection: San Jorge River Valley as a
                  Study Case
The archaeological research on San Jorge has focused on the identification and characterization of the various structures comprising hydraulic adjustment
systems such as canals, ditches, ridges, and mounds. Such identification has been accompanied by the spatialization of their features most significant and
the interpretation of historical and cultural processes that have accompanied the construction, use, and abandonment of such structures. However, this
work has also neglected the study of the current state of these structures and there is a need for clear guidelines for using and preserving this cultural
heritage. Therefore, this research is an attempt to understand how current ecosystems reflect different historical processes of appropriation of territory.
Sustainable development is coupled with the recognition of historic forms of construction and appropriation of territory from ancient times to the present,
only the recognition and analysis of these dynamics allow us a real understanding of the possibilities of utilization of diverse ecosystems whose current use
is far from preservation.
Herr, Sarah (Desert Archaeology, Inc.) and J. Scott Wood (Tonto National Forest (retired))
[66]              Recent Research on Western Apache Roasting Pits
Hundreds of western Apache roasting pits have been documented by archaeological surveys in central Arizona, but prior to A.D. 2000 few had been
excavated. These large, visible, accumulations of fire-cracked rock and dark soil are essentially the only enduring western Apache modifications of the
physical landscape and the best candidates for planned research on past western Apache experience, as pre-reservation sites and features in the region
are often far more subtle. Two large roasting pits, similar in their surface appearance, were excavated as part of the on-going State Route 260-Payson to
Heber project, substantially augmenting available information. We present the results of the new and previous fieldwork and analyses, compare those with
investigations of earlier Hohokam roasting features in the same region, and draw on ethnographic and historical documentation to explore the potential of
these features to answer questions about chronology, land use, foodways, and cultural persistence from the pre-reservation to post-reservation period.
Herrmann, Nicholas [7] see Zaleski, Sarah
Herrmann, Edward (Indiana University Department of Geological Sciences) and Rebecca Nathan (Indiana University Anthropology; Crow THPO
office)
[123]             Where Men Get Their Meat: Predicting Jump Locations at the Grapevine Creek Buffalo Jump Complex
Buffalo jumps have long been part of Crow oral histories. In 1962, at Grapevine Creek in Montana, Joseph Medicine Crow recounted oral histories to
identify two buffalo jumps and associated drive lines above cliffs overlooking the floodplain. In 2015, a team of archaeologists and Crow tribal monitors
from the Tribal Historic Preservation Office employed geoarchaeological methods to investigate whether bison bones might be preserved in primary
context in the drainage. We focused on recorded oral histories of land use at Grapevine Creek, and incorporated GIS mapping to visualize topographic
landscape features and prehistoric site distributions in order to predict where additional buffalo jumps might be found. The resulting model uses oral history
documents, digital elevation models, geologic and soil maps, site distributions, chert extraction locales, and prehistoric trail locations to predict buffalo jump
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 193
site locales. In a relatively small portion of the drainage, our team identified two additional buffalo jumps and drive lines spanning 2,000 years. Both the oral
histories and predictive model suggest that other jumps may be present in the Grapevine Creek drainage.
Herrmann, Corey (Colorado State University)
[279]             Culture at an Andean Crossroads: New Analysis of Chorrera Ceramics from the Jama River Valley, Manabi, Ecuador
The archaeology of Late Formative Ecuador (ca. 2800–2000 B.C.E.) remains only partially explored and understood, especially when compared to studies
of contemporary cultures in the Andes of Peru and Bolivia. However, ceramics looted from these contexts suggest a vibrant and complex array of cultures
in this region. Excavations in the Jama River Valley of northern Manabí, performed in the early 1990s but largely unpublished, explored multiple sites
pertaining to the Chorrera style, one of Ecuador’s most stunning and poorly understood cultures.
 This paper synthesizes results of recent modal ceramic analysis of the materials recovered from these excavations, with the intent of comparing results
from northern Manabí to prior modal analyses of Chorrera ceramics from the Guayas region. This research will motivate future study in the Jama River
Valley, as it begins a renewed effort to understand the nature of Chorrera’s cultural hegemony and its connections to coastal Colombian and Peruvian
contemporaries. Bringing more archaeological contexts into discussions of Late Formative Ecuador also serves to better inform and unite the narrative of
Ecuadorian museum collections with the region’s archaeological studies.
Hertfelder, Paula (Binghamton University)
[66]              A Spatial and Predictive Model for Archaeological Sites in the Lincoln National Forest, New Mexico
 The Lincoln National Forest has produced a wealth of GIS data on archaeological sites in southeastern New Mexico. This data has not yet been analyzed.
This poster presents a predictive spatial model of archaeological sites on the Lincoln National Forest. In this project, I have developed a predictive model of
archaeological sites based on a statistical analysis of environmental variables and test it by withholding a sample of sites. I also examined the distribution
and density of archaeological sites relative to geographic and environmental factors, site distribution, and density over time, as well as the changing use of
the landscape of the Lincoln National Forest. As southeast New Mexico is a region often overlooked in archaeological research, this project represents an
important preliminary exploration of spatial data in the region.
Herzog, Irmela [282] see Yepez, Alden
Hicks, Keri (USDA Forest Service Alaska Region)
[165]             Fish Traps, Kayak Surveys, Culture Camps—NHPA in Alaska National Forests
In an effort to meet the spirit of the NHPA, USDA Forest Service Alaska Region has a long history of collaboration and partnering with a wide variety of
tribal, state, federal, not-for-profit, and educational entities, institutions, agencies, and volunteers throughout the state and beyond. The Alaska Region
consists of the two largest national forests in the system, totaling 21.9 million acres. Over the last 18 years, the Ketchikan-Misty Fiords Ranger District
(KMRD), located on the Tongass National Forest in southeast Alaska, has been conducting annual Windows on the Past sea-kayaking expeditions and a
cooperative educational program with the University of Alaska Southeast-Ketchikan. Through this program, volunteers and students have helped to locate
and document 59 new pictograph sites, bringing the total number of rock paintings to 65 on the KMRD and representing 58 percent percent of the state’s
known pictographs. A current example from the Chugach National Forest located in southcentral Alaska includes an annual culture camp with the
Sovereign Nation of the Kenaitze and Applied Archaeology International; Kenaitze youth and elders, and representatives from traditional owner groups
from western Australia participate in projects to mitigate damage to village sites as part of an ongoing exchange program to share cultural knowledge.
Hicks, John (Univ. of Illinois at Chicago/The Field Museum)
[219]             Ampare y Perjuicios: Land and Legality in a Colesuyo Village during the Colonial Period
Land tenure is a prominent theme in the study of political and economic transition during the Spanish Colonial Period (A.D. 1550–1824) in Peru. Previous
investigations have tended to focus on the concentration of land ownership into the hands of the ethnically Spanish elite minority, first through encomienda
and later through the evolution of haciendas. However, native Andean communities were just as active in engaging the legal system to delineate their
holdings and defend them from encroachment. My presentation outlines an early eighteenth century case brought by the citizens of the Village of Estique,
located in the precordillera of modern-day Tacna, seeking legal protection and damages from squatters and trespassers, primarily from the nearby Village
of Tarata. I discuss this case within the context of land use and rights in the Colesuyo region during the Colonial Period.
Hicks, Katherine
[284]             Using GIS to Investigate Mortuary Practice and Identity at the Historic Spring Street Presbyterian Church, Manhattan
This paper focuses on the use of a geographical information system (GIS) as a tool to identify the distribution and association of mortuary artifacts and
skeletal remains within the Spring Street Presbyterian Church burial vaults (ca.1820–1846). The GIS study presented here is one component of a
microhistorical approach to exploring a nineteenth century neighborhood in New York City’s 8th Ward during a period of rapidly changing urban, social, and
economic landscapes. Viewing the city through the lens of this radical abolitionist church congregation provides an avenue of inquiry that considers these
changing landscapes with regard to the social, religious, and mortuary ideologies espoused by the Spring Street Presbyterian Church. By spatially
reconstructing the Spring Street burial vaults, this GIS assists in the identification of patterns associated with the demographics of the interred congregants,
both in the distribution of the interments and artifacts within the vaults, as well as how those spatial relationships reflect identity and mortuary custom as
practiced by the Spring Street congregation.
Higelin Ponce De Leon, Ricardo (Indiana University Bloomington)
[169]             Cultural Modification of Human Remains at Cerro Jazmín, Mixteca Alta
Bone modification in human remains is a common practice among ancient civilizations. In Mesoamerica, important cultural modifications on human bone
have been reported, such as cranial deformation, dental modification, groves in long bones, and mandibles used as ornaments. In Oaxaca, within the
Valley of Oaxaca, some of these cultural modifications of human remains have been dated to the middle Formative Period in the Rosario Phase (B.C.
700/500). Meanwhile, cultural modifications, such as cranial deformation in the Mixteca Alta, have been reported since the Late/Terminal Formative (B.C.
250/A.D. 250). This study explores the diversity of bone modification at the Cerro Jazmín, Mixteca Alta, in the Late/Terminal Formative and Early
Postclassic periods, and sees how these modified human remains could be related to social status from the context that were found. In addition, in the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                194
process of integrating these data, it will be necessary to identify the techniques used to modify the bones, hypothesizing the possible tools that were used.
Evidence of bone modification at this site is based on recovered remains that display different types of cranial deformation, dental modification, and groves
in long bones, cremation, and fragments of the cranium used as ornaments.
Higelin Ponce de León, Ricardo [236] see Bellomia, Valeria
Hilbert, Lautaro Maximilian (University of Exeter), José Iriarte (University of Exeter), Eduardo Góes Neves (Universidade de São Paulo) and
Francisco Pugliese (Universidade de São Paulo)
[49]               Investigating Plant Management in the Tucumã (Pará-Brazil) and Monte Castelo (Rondônia- Brazil) Shell Midden using Phytoliths Analysis
This paper will address and evaluate the micro botanical remains of the Monte Castelo (9343 cal B.P.) shell mound in southwestern lowland Amazonia
(state of Rondonia) and the sambaqui do Tucumã (7,000–4,000 B.P) located on the southeast lower Amazon River (state of Para). The focus in identifying
and evaluating the floral dietary peculiarities of these specific precolombian settlements from the principle that the south and southeast Brazilian shell
mound occupants are known to have had a broad-spectrum diet based on the exploration of their environment. The mound inhabitants are referred to
within modern dietary studies as fisher-hunter, mollusc and plant gatherer societies. However, the presence of plant processing tools collected in the
previously mentioned sites (Monte Castelo and Tucumã) leads to the main question that guides this research: is it possible to comprehend the mound
inhabitants of Monte Castelo and Tucumã as part of an agricultural sustainable society?
Hilditch, Jill [214] see Knappett, Carl
Hill, David (Metropolitan State University of Denver)
[41]               Using Petrographic Analysis to Identify Pottery Production: Shoshone Pottery Making at the Ravens Nest (48SU3871) Southwestern
                   Wyoming
Petrographic analysis has been commonly used to identify trade in ceramics and stone tools. At the Raven’s Nest site petrographic analysis was used to
characterize the compositional variation in the ceramic assemblage recovered during excavation. The homogeneous nature of the ceramic pastes of the
assemblage prompted additional petrographic study of local soils and geologic outcrops. Comparison of the local resources with the ceramics indicated the
possibility for the local production of pottery at the site. A high concentration of kiln wasters and the recovery of a unique ceramic vessel support the
identification of Ravens Nest as a location for the production of pottery by the Shoshone.
Hill, Erica (University of Alaska Southeast)
[108]              A Relational Geography of Humans and Animals in the Bering Sea Region
New approaches to animal geography have rapidly emerged over the last 20 years and have challenged accepted views of human–animal relations in a
variety of contexts. While archaeologists studying past relational ontologies have explored the spatial components of human interactions with animals, so
far archaeology has not explicitly engaged with animal geography. This paper investigates how the “new” or “third wave” animal geography (Urbanik 2012)
might inform our understanding of the human past. Using archaeological, ethnohistoric, and ethnographic data from the Bering Sea region, I explore how
Yup’ik and Inupiaq Eskimo constructed, traversed, and maintained boundaries between human and animal worlds, focusing on the definition of human
spaces relative to those of animals and on liminal spaces where land met water and ice.
Hill, David [123] see Trabert, Sarah
Hill, Rebecca (Tulane University)
[127]              Over the Hills: Decline and Abandonment of the Bolonchén District
This paper examines the final decades of the Terminal Classic and the beginning of the Postclassic in the Bolonchén district of the Puuc region of the
northern Maya Lowlands. Archaeological evidence for the decline and abandonment of the Bolonchén district at the close of the Terminal Classic Period is
presented. Particular attention is given to the material remains of a late Terminal Classic population at Huntichmul, an example of a Puuc center in decline
and most likely abandoned by the close of the Terminal Classic, with a comparative analysis of select archaeological contexts investigated by the
Bolonchén Regional Archaeological Project (BRAP).
Hill, Allison (California State University, Northridge)
[245]              Social and Economic Implications for Identifying Basketry Production in the Californian Archaeological Record: A Case Study from the
                   Interior Chumash Region
Poor preservation of fiber technologies in the archaeological record has caused the importance of basketry in precolonial California society to be often
overlooked. Subsequently, studies of the social and economic elements of basketry manufacture, primarily done by women in precolonial California
communities, have been impacted. Despite preservation issues, the archaeological record can be used to study the socioeconomic contexts of this
engendered craft production by identifying the tools used to make baskets. Through the use of experimental replication and comparative microwear
analysis, it is possible to identify stone tools used to process plants for weaving material. Further, locating these tools at specific places in the enculturated
landscape may indicate where people were making baskets, thus informing us about the social settings in which these crafts were produced. Here, I
explore these themes in the form of a case study and present the results from a lithic microwear analysis of multiple sites in the Emigdiano Chumash
territory. Situating the intangible process of engendered craft production in the archaeological record allows us to explore new questions about the
socioeconomic status of basketry and basket makers in precolonial California society.
[245]              Chair
Hill, Mark (Ball State University), Kevin Nolan (Ball State University), Mark Seeman (Kent State University) and Laure Dussubieux (The Field
Museum)
[285]              Elemental Analysis of Scioto Valley Hopewell Copper
Artifacts of copper occupy a position of prominence in the Hopewell societies of Ohio’s Scioto Valley. Earspools, repousse plaques, effigy cutouts, celts,
and a wide variety of other forms represent a technological and artistic mastery of the medium. These artifacts also represent the social contacts and long
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                195
distance interactions that brought copper to the Scioto Valley and yet our understanding of copper acquisition for Ohio Hopewell, and the movement of
copper artifacts within the social networks of the Scioto Valley and beyond, is limited and often contentiously speculative due to the limited availability of
geochemical data concerning provenance and variability. This project begins to develop the foundation for our understanding of these important social
issues by examining the elemental variability of Hopewell copper through the use of laser-ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-
MS). Dozens of samples from several prominent sites in the Scioto Valley have been analyzed using the elemental analysis laboratory at the Field
Museum in Chicago. We explore the elemental variability in Hopewell copper across this region, enhancing our knowledge of both acquisition methods
and the social processes through which copper represented important meanings and identities.
Hillier, Maria [103] see Grimes, Vaughan
Hills, Kendall (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[262]               Investigating Integrative Mechanisms among Early Tropical States
Early archaeological discourse depicts tropical environments as unsuitable loci for the emergence of the world’s “great” civilizations. Scholars now know
this to be demonstrably untrue, as evidence of early complex societies with state level organization has been identified in tropical environments throughout
the world. Like their counterparts of the more arid zones, amalgamation and increased integration would have been of great importance to early tropical
states. In general, states seek to increase economic, socio-political, and ideological integration, which is simultaneously achieved through both vertical
power relationships of inequality, and horizontal group affiliation. This paper explores early tropical state use of integrative mechanism, archaeologically
expressed in the form of monumental public structures and spaces of the anthropogenic landscape. Informed through case studies from the latter part of
the “Charter Era” (C.E.800–1400) in South And Southeast Asia, this analysis explores an avenue for comparative studies of integrative mechanisms of
early tropical states. Monumentality emerges as a dominant integrative mechanism, and provides an interesting stage for exploring integration from a
dialectic perspective between state power and localized identity.
Hilton, Michael (Black Hills National Forest)
[165]               Preserving Our Heritage and History: Maximizing Partnerships to Professionally Archive and Manage a Sizable Forest Service Historical
                    Collection
The Black Hills National Forest (South Dakota and Wyoming) created the Historical Collections Archival Project (Project) to grapple with an issue that
practically every U.S. Forest Service unit will eventually encounter: the proper long-term archiving of their unit’s historical collections. The Project objective
is to digitize all images and selected print documents from the Forest’s extant historical collection. The materials are professionally archived under
agreement at the Leland D. Case Library for Western Historical Studies on the campus of Black Hills State University, Spearfish, South Dakota. The
collection includes an estimated 166 cubic feet of materials (64,000 items) that document the history and heritage of the Black Hills National Forest. The
majority of the collection has been inventoried and properly processed. The ultimate objective is to provide free and easy access to the collections by
researchers, students, U.S. Forest Service personnel, and other interested members of the American public and beyond. This paper cites notable Project
achievements and stresses that Project success would not have been possible without developing multiple partnerships with local cooperators.
Himes, Sarah (Department of Anthropology, Texas State University), Maryse Beirnat (Department of Biology, Stockton University, 101 Ve),
Fikremariam Sissay (Paleoantrhopology and Paleoenvironment Program, Ad), David Patterson (Hominid Paleobiology Doctoral Program &
Center for) and David Braun (Center for the Advanced Study of Human Paleobiolog)
[181]               Landscape Stability and Paleoecology at East Turkana, Northern Kenya: A Spatial and Temporal Analysis of Paleosol Gross Morphology
                    and Stable Carbon Isotopes during the Upper Burgi, KBS, and Okote Members (2-1.4 Ma)
The Upper Burgi, KBS, and Okote Members of the Koobi Fora Fm. in northern Kenya span the period between 2 and 1.4 million years ago and document
some of the most important events in hominin evolution. Although previous archaeological and paleoecological investigations suggest hominins occupied
specific niches within this ecosystem, we understand little about relationships between landscape variability and hominin adaptation. In this study, we
combine stable carbon isotope data from fossil soils and enamel with a high-resolution reconstruction of landscape variability from the gross
characterization of paleosols from 30 localities. These data assess hominin resource use and landscape dynamics through time and across space. More
specifically, we focus on fossil- and artifact-rich areas of Ileret and the Karari Escarpment and find that the landscape within these two regions was
extremely diverse across space, yet relatively static temporally as supported by statistically significant differences in soil morphology. Emerging patterns
are mirrored in enamel isotopic ratios between these regions with taxa, particularly suids, reflecting differing dietary adaptations across space. Finally, our
analyses suggest that the East Turkana landscape was highly variable in terms of landscape stability and vegetation structure, which would have resulted
in a distinct adaptive scenario for Pleistocene hominins.
Hinthore, James [200] see Skowronek, Russell
Hinthorne, James [279] see Gonzalez, Juan
Hinton, Peter (Chartered Institute for Archaeologists)
[89]                Moderator
[89]                Discussant
Hinz, Martin [95] see Weinelt, Mara
Hiquet, Julien (Université de Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne), Eva Lemonnier (Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne) and Julio Cotom
(Universidad San Carlos de Guatemala)
[96]                Time and Space at Naachtun: The Chronological Sequence, Settlement, and Land Use Patterns.
Since 2011, a program of surveying and mapping together with a series of more than 80 test pits have been conducted during four field seasons around
the monumental epicenter of Naachtun, over a large residential area covering approximately 175 ha. These programs resulted in an accurate map of
constructed and empty spaces, and in a relatively complete sequence of the site's occupation, from the very onset of the Early Classic to the Terminal
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   196
Classic. The first objective of these investigations is directly related to archaeological issues, since it aims to reconstruct spatial layout of this area through
time. The second objective deals with agriculture and subsistence questions: it intends to document land use pattern by identifying and characterizing the
different land management features, in connection with residential units. This paper offers a diachronic presentation of the different components of the site,
be they social or environmental. The idea is to reconstruct the dynamics of population according to the place where resources were managed, particularly
soils and water supplies.
Hirth, Kenneth G. [129] see Buckley, Gina
Hirth, Kenneth (Penn State University), Mark Dennison (Tulane University), Sean Carr (Penn State University), Sarah Imfeld (Penn State
University) and Casana Popp (Penn State University)
[129]             Obsidian Craft Production at Teotihuacan: A View from Tlajinga 17
In 1986, John Clark published a seminal article that questioned the scale of obsidian craft production at Teotihuacan as reconstructed by the Teotihuacan
Mapping Project (TMP). Clark argued that many of the areas identified as obsidian workshops from surface materials were concentrations of production
refuse deposited as fill and eroding out of residential and public architecture. Excavations by the Projecto Arqueologico Teotihuacan-Tlajinga (PATT) in
2013 explored the stratigraphic relationships in Tlajinga 17, a domestic apartment compound in the southern portion of the city where the TMP had
identified the presence of a small obsidian workshop. This paper evaluates the subsurface contextual associations of obsidian production debris with the
residential architecture to determine if surface indications of obsidian production represent in situ craft activity. The excavations provide the first empirical
attempt to evaluate the accuracy of TMP model of obsidian craft production and what it implies about the organization of the city’s ancient urban economy.
Hirx, John [121] see ONeil, Megan
Hitchcock, Robert, Amber Johnson (Truman State University) and Luke Edwwards (Truman State University)
[94]              Macroecological Analysis of Recent Kalahari Site Structure
In the 1980s, Lewis Binford (1931–2011) started an analysis of hunter-gatherer site structure that was later put on hold in order to organize ethnographic
and environmental data to use in the analysis (Binford 2001). Although the frames of reference were constructed, Binford never completed his analysis of
site structure. This poster represents an initial attempt to realize Binford’s vision of a controlled analysis of site structure at a large regional scale using data
he organized for this project and data organized more recently by Robert Hitchcock. Site structure data comes from the Kalahari Desert Region of
Botswana, collected over a period from August 1976 to July 2014 during a total of 17 years of work in the field. Variables include site area, distances
among huts in and between clusters, numbers of occupants, duration of occupation, seasonality, facilities, and presence of domesticated animals. Key
variables in the Kalahari include location, temperature, rainfall, and the presence of surface water, ground water, wild animals, plants, and domestic
animals. Activities taking place in each site were recorded. Seventy maps were produced, analyzed, and compared to the findings of other archaeologists
and anthropologists including John Yellen (1977), Lawrence Bartram (1993), and George Silberbauer (1981).
Hitchens, Gail (University of York)
[25]              Transformations in the Palaeolithic: Searching for the Social and Cultural Role of Neanderthal Children
Early prehistory presents a particular challenge for investigating children, and consequently previous work has almost exclusively consisted of biological
accounts of health and growth. However, as traditional views of Neanderthals are becoming increasingly overturned, it has become clear that the social
and cultural role of children could be crucial in furthering our understanding of Neanderthal society, and in turn the interactions and differences with modern
humans. Through investigating treatment at death (both burial and the previously unexplored role of disarticulated remains) and treatment in life (such as
material evidence of cultural learning), the emerging picture contrasts sharply with the traditional view of a particularly harsh and difficult upbringing.
Evidence may even suggest that Neanderthal children were central to symbolic and cultural practices at this time, and may have had an important role to
play in the major transformations taking place in Europe 40–50,000 years ago.
Hlad, Tucker [149] see Capece, Matthew
Hlubik, Sarah (Rutgers University), Francesco Berna (Simon Fraser University), Russel Cutts (University of Georgia - Athens), David Braun (The
George Washington University) and JWK Harris (Rutgers University)
[177]             Identifying Fire in Early Stone Age: A Study of Site FxJj20 AB, Koobi Fora, Kenya
Fire use by human ancestors may explain changes seen in Homo erectus and be responsible for the development of later human species. Anthropogenic
fire claims in the Early Stone Age (ESA) are disputed because many of these sites are in secondary deposits and contain no association between human
behavior and fire evidence. Careful excavation producing high-resolution spatial data, detailed micromorphological analysis, Fourier transform infrared
spectrometry (FTIR), and high-resolution spatial analysis can provide more information about the nature of fire evidence in the ESA. FxJj20 AB, Koobi Fora
Formation, Marsabit County, Kenya, a locality dated to 1.5 million years ago, is in proximity to FxJj20 East and Main which claim to have the earliest
evidence of anthropogenic fire. Here, we document new excavations utilizing multiple lines of evidence to clarify the nature of fire at FxJj20 AB.
Micromorphological analysis indicates that the archaeological material at FxJj20 AB is in primary depositional context. FTIR analysis documents that there
are in situ archaeological and sedimentary samples that have been exposed to fire. Spatial analysis documents the relationship between burned
specimens and human activity. This research was supported by USNSF IRES grant 1358178, DDRIG Grant # BCS-1443339, Wenner Gren Gr 8984, and
SSHRC #430-2013-000546.
Hlubik, Sarah [269] see Cutts, Russell
Hockaday, William C. [115] see Goodwin, Whitney
Hockett, Bryan (Bureau of Land Management) and Evan Pellegrini (Nevada State Museum)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                197
[69]              Continuing the Search for Pre-Clovis Aged Cutmarked Bones in the Great Basin: Recent Results
Hockett and Jenkins (2013) suggested that two bones directly AMS dated prior to the Clovis era (ca. > 13,100 calendar years ago) recovered from the
Paisley Caves, Oregon, displayed stone tool cutmarks. Since this publication, additional bones were identified as possibly exhibiting cutmarks from Paisley
Cave #2. In addition, in the 1950s, Phil Orr recovered a number of burned large mammal bones from Pleistocene-aged deposits in several caves flanking
the eastern margins of the Winnemucca Lake Basin, northwestern Nevada, including Fishbone Cave. Bones exhibiting possible cutmarks from both
Paisley and Fishbone Caves were directly AMS dated, utilizing the same methodology described in Hockett and Jenkins (2013). The results are reported
for the first time in this presentation.
Hodge, Christina [215] see Nystrom, Kenneth
Hodge, Christina (Stanford University) and Camilla Mazzucato (Stanford University)
[265]             Visualizing with GIS at Stanford University Archaeology Collections: Open for Interpretation
GIS-based data visualization offers a dynamic, compelling tool not only for promoting on-campus collections, but also for studying and managing these
resources within frameworks of engagement, openness, and reflexivity. The Stanford University Archaeology Collections (SUAC) cares for over 30,000
archaeological and ethnographic artifacts from campus lands and around the world. These items manifest a range of complex histories and present-day
significances. The collections were recently re-installed on campus in an active learning/curation space. To connect collections successfully with
stakeholders, SUAC must raise awareness of its existence, accessibility, and scope. SUAC also strives to engage theoretical and ethical positions within
broader practices of anthropology and heritage. To these ends, this poster uses GIS data to illustrate the composition, origins, and activities of SUAC’s
diverse collection. GIS also permits querying and arranging collection data according to different attributes with the opportunity to focus on singular objects
or aggregates, blending qualitative and quantitative content. Thus, this technology responsively illustrates the interconnected and ever-changing nature of
SUAC as a living collection, highlighting spatial/cultural components and development through time. This digital humanities project provides a useful
product for SUAC outreach efforts and, for curators, managers, and users alike, reveals new insights about the collection itself.
Hodgkins, Jamie [278] see Meyer, Dominique
Hoffecker, John (INSTAAR) and Vance Holliday (University of Arizona)
[16]              Early Upper Paleolithic Horse Hunting on the East European Plain
Between 40,000 and 30,000 cal B.P., small herds of horses were hunted in Europe. Much of the evidence is derived from the central plain of eastern
Europe, including multiple sites at Kostenki-Borshchevo on the Middle Don River (Russia) and Mira on the Lower Dnepr River (southern Ukraine). These
sites contain large bone beds analogous to the bison bone beds of the Great Plains, and the analysis of their depositional context and taphonomic
characteristics yields information on how horse mare-bands were killed and butchered in an open landscape during early Upper Paleolithic times.
Hoffman, Brian [124] see Taivalkoski, Ariel
Hoffmeister, Kristin (Texas A&M University) and Lori Wright (Texas A&M University)
[86]              The Origins and Identities of the Colha Skull Pit Skeletal Remains
The lithics production center of Colha in northern Belize provides skeletal evidence relevant to ongoing debates about the role of violence among the Maya
of Central America. The Colha Skull Pit (Op. 2011) dates to the Terminal Classic Period and consists of 30 individuals, represented only by cranial
remains. The skeletal remains include both males and females and range in age from children to old adults. Cranial and dental modifications are prevalent
in this feature and many of the skulls exhibit cut marks. This unique mortuary deposit has been interpreted in a variety of ways, ranging from sacrifice, to a
reverential, ceremonial treatment of elites and planned abandonment of the site, to the systematic, violent destruction of the ruling class. We examine the
origins and identities of these individuals directly using strontium (87Sr/86Sr), carbon (δ13C), and oxygen (δ18O) isotopic ratios of human tooth enamel.
We evaluate variability in diet and mobility patterns during the lifetimes of the Skull Pit individuals in order to better understand the Skull Pit feature and the
cultural behavior that produced it.
Höfle, Bernhard [188] see Pattee, Aaron
Hofman, Courtney [110] see Shirazi, Sabrina
Hofman, Courtney (University of Oklahoma), Torben Rick (Smithsonian Institution), Sabrina Shirazi (Smithsonian Institution/ University of
Maryland) and Jesus Maldonado (Smithsonian Institution)
[160]              Archaeogenomics and the Mammals of California’s Channel Islands
As many recent genetic and archaeological studies have shown, humans have intentionally and unintentionally moved plants and animals around the
world. The California Channel Islands provide a unique environment to explore ancient translocations due to their close proximity to the California
mainland, long human occupation (~13,000 years) and limited terrestrial diversity. Here, we present our interdisciplinary approach to investigating the
origins of California Channel Island terrestrial mammals integrating archaeological, isotopic, genomic, and radiometric datasets to explore the role of
human agency in island biogeography. We propose a number of possibilities for why ancient peoples might have introduced these taxa.
Hofman, Corinne
[220]             Archaic Age Voyaging, Networks and Resource Mobility Around the Caribbean Sea
This paper builds on the idea that Caribbean Archaic Age communities were highly mobile and connected. Study of fisher-collector sites in the northeastern
and southern Caribbean has shown that Archaic Age communities managed extensive subsistence/resource/activity systems, involving intra-archipelagic
and mainland-island voyaging. The connectivity patterns and resource landscapes of these two regions will be discussed. We see a set of vital resources,
which would remain important for later Ceramic Age communities, which guided the formation of early procurement and, by extension, social networks. For
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             198
the northern Lesser Antilles, one important node is the flint sources on Long Island (Antigua). This is well evidenced at the Plum Piece campsite in the
tropical forest of Saba, which record suggest a yearly cycle of archipelagic resource mobility of which the flint sources on Long Island were a crucial part.
For the southern Caribbean islands, the rich marine shell resources may have fulfilled a similar role. The Lobatus gigas heaps at Spanish Water Curaçao
evidence intensive exploitation of shellfish and preparation potentially for transport to the mainland. Using computer models of reciprocal voyaging and
archaeological network exploration, new insights are put forward into the early formation of social networks around the Caribbean Sea.
[220]             Chair
Hofmann, Dani [52] see Schulting, Rick
Hogg, Alan [56] see Ghezzi, Ivan
Hoggarth, Julie (Baylor University) and Laurent Cases (The Pennsylvania State University)
[288]             Climate, Chronology, and Collapse: Comparing the Classic Maya and the Roman Empire
Increasing literature has focused on the role of climate change in the collapse of complex societies. These studies suggest that abrupt shifts in climate can
exacerbate existing political, social, and economic issues by affecting the basic subsistence systems on which populations depend. Here, we compare
archaeological, historic, and climate proxy data from two state-level societies: the Classic Maya and the Roman Empire. A strong focus on the impact of
multi-decadal droughts from the ninth to eleventh centuries has emerged in the investigation of the ‘Classic Maya collapse.’ Archaeological and historic
investigations on the collapse of the Roman Empire have focused less on the climatic context for the breakdown of the expansive empire in the fourth and
fifth centuries. Here, we present comparative methods to identify chronological correlations between climatic change and the breakdown of political
systems. We focus on compiling multiple climate proxy records and compare these data with the available archaeological and historic record to enrich our
understanding of the role of climate in the political collapse of both cases.
Holcomb, Justin [184] see Fallu, Daniel
Hollenback, Kacy L. [115] see Goodwin, Whitney
Hollesen, Jørgen (National Museum of Denmark) and Henning Matthiesen (National Museum of Denmark)
[210]             Climate Change and the Preservation of Archaeological Sites in Greenland
Archaeological sites in Greenland represent an irreplaceable record of extraordinarily well-preserved material remains covering more than 4,000 years of
human history. Out of the more than 6,000 registered sites, very few have been excavated and it is anticipated that thousands of sites are still to be
discovered in the many unexplored parts of the country. However, the climate is changing rapidly in Greenland leading to accelerated degradation of the
archaeological sites. Since 2009, the National Museum of Denmark and Greenland and the University of Copenhagen have been collaborating in order to
obtain an improved understanding of the link between climate change and the preservation of archaeological sites in Greenland.
In this presentation, we will give examples of how permafrost thaw, coastal erosion, increased vegetation, and farming are threatening to destroy
archaeological sites in Greenland. We will show the results from our decay studies were we have investigated how different organic materials respond to
environmental changes. Finally, we will present our future research plans and elaborate on how we aim to develop new methods for locating sites at risk.
Holliday, Vance [16] see Hoffecker, John
Holliday, Vance (University of Arizona)
[16]              Discussant
Hollinger, Eric (Smithsonian Institution), Edwell John Jr. (Tlingit Dakhl'weidi Clan) and Robert Starbard (Hoonah Indian Association)
[266]             Repatriation Collaborations Using 3D Technology: The Smithsonian-Tlingit Experience
Smithsonian repatriation efforts have resulted in close consultation and collaboration with tribes and Alaskan Native communities that have enabled
exploration of museum resources and shared interests taking the communities and the Institution far beyond what was envisioned by most when the
repatriation legislation was first enacted. In particular, the Tlingit Dakhl'aweidi clan and the Hoonah Indian Association have worked with the National
Museum of Natural History to pilot collaborations using 3D digitization and replication of repatriated objects. In these cases, already repatriated items are
digitized by the museum and in close consultation, replicated using 3D printing and milling technology. These collaborations show that the replication
capabilities are not exclusive to museums and institutions and will rapidly be integrated into community cultural preservation/perpetuation programs. The
replicas serve as important educational media for both the community and the museum and bring parties closer together, enhancing relationships, and
understanding between the museums and tribes.
Holloway, Caitlin (University of Alaska Fairbanks)
[148]             An Archaeobotanical Analysis of the Upward Sun River Site, Central Alaska
    Vegetation and plant resources can impact forager mobility and subsistence strategies. However, misconceptions about the preservation of organics in
subarctic archaeological contexts and underestimations of the importance of plant resources to foraging societies limit paleoethnobotanical research in
high-latitude environments. This research addresses these issues with analyses of archaeobotanical remains found in hearth features from multiple
components (approximately 13,300 through 8,000 cal B.P.) at the Upward Sun River site in the Tanana River Basin, central Alaska. Final results from
macrobotanical and charcoal identification suggest the presence of several key taxa on the landscape while the site was occupied, including birch, willow,
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              199
Populus sp., and bearberry. This research contributes to our understanding of plant resource use among foraging populations and broadens our
understanding of human-environment interaction in subarctic regions.
Holmes, Charles [21] see Potter, Ben
Holst, Melissa (University of Louisville) and Jonathan Haws (University of Louisville)
[146]             New Data on Late Magdalenian Lithic Technological Organization at Lapa do Picareiro
Few Paleolithic sites in Portugal possess enough data to provide for a comprehensive analysis of Upper Paleolithic site function. However, Lapa do
Picareiro, a cave site in the Estremadura region of Portugal, is exceptional in that it possesses continuous chronology and is continuing to produce high
resolution data sets pertaining to site function, lithic technological organization, and subsistence. This poster compares and contrasts old and new lithic
data sets from the late Magdalenian at Lapa do Picareiro. The comparison will focus particularly on changes in raw material use, tool function, and
reduction sequence. This project contextualizes the observed patterns found in the lithic technological assemblage in the broader context of site function at
Lapa do Picereiro during the late Magdalenian.
Holt, Emily (University at Buffalo) and Anke Marsh (University College London)
[257]             Water Management, Ritual Ideology, and Environmental Change in Bronze Age Sardinia
The Nuragic culture of Bronze Age Sardinia (c. 1700–900 B.C.E.) is known for building thousands of monumental stone towers called nuraghi throughout
the island. However, toward the end of the Bronze Age, Nuragic leaders stopped building nuraghi and instead constructed underground temples over
naturally occurring springs. Previous research assumes that this architectural shift took place rapidly in the Final Bronze Age (c. 1175–1020 B.C.E.),
representing a sudden rise in the importance of water ritual. Hypotheses accounting for the shift include an increase in the power of Nuragic leaders or a
revolution in which religious leaders successfully challenged a military elite. The Pran’e Siddi Landscape Project, which investigates environment and
society at a Nuragic settlement system in south-central Sardinia, has uncovered new evidence that water was ideologically important from the beginnings
of the Nuragic culture, challenging the assumptions that underlie narratives of late Nuragic social upheaval. Recent fieldwork suggests that water ritual
became increasingly linked to ideologies of power from the Middle through the Late Bronze Age. Rather than socio-political change, the developing political
potency of water in the Siddi region may have been linked to hydrological changes that altered the locations of water sources and made water's availability
appear unpredictable.
Holyoke, Kenneth (Stantec Consulting Ltd.), Susan Blair (Department of Anthropology, University of New Brun) and M. Gabriel Hrynick
(Department of Anthropology, Bates College)
[85]              Hunter-Gatherer Watercraft during New Brunswick's Woodland Period: Social Implications
For many hunter-gatherers, watercraft are crucial technologies for the transportation of humans and things, and may have had great social import. In this
paper, we discuss ways in which hunter-gatherer watercraft may have been a key way by which people constituted, and in turn were constituted by, their
interactions with interior waterways in present-day New Brunswick. We suggest that watercraft in this region may be one way to approach the complex
question of pre-European identity on the Maritime Peninsula. The ethnographic record provides a rich record of watercraft use in the region and its
importance to identity during that time. We draw on that record and archaeological data to posit the same for human interactions with watercraft during the
Woodland Period.
Homburg, Jeffrey [180] see Ciolek-Torello, Richard
Hoogland, Menno L.P. [160] see Ziesemer, Kirsten
Hoopes, John (University of Kansas)
[178]             Absolute Chronology of the Early Formative Revisited: Bayesian Analysis, Radiocarbon Chronology, and the Emergence of Pottery in the
                  Americas
In 1987, the author’s doctoral dissertation featured a comprehensive analysis of calibrated radiocarbon dates associated with the earliest ceramic
complexes in the Americas towards a model for the emergence of sedentary lifeways. This resulted in a critical evaluation of James Ford’s posthumously
published model for the Early Formative diffusion of pottery as well as other cultural features in a region extending from the southeastern U.S. through
Mesoamerica and the Isthmo-Colombian Area to the central Andes. This paper provides a detailed update on the current absolute chronology for initial
ceramic technology in the Americas, applying revised radiocarbon date calibration standards and Bayesian statistical analysis to evaluate how three
decades of additional, accumulated data have contributed to our models for the invention and diffusion of Formative ceramic technology, patterns of
cultural interaction, and their relationship to emergent social complexity.
Hoover, Corey (University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee) and Thomas Hardy (University of Pennsylvania)
[206]             Food Consumption and Animal Exploitation at Minaspata, Cuzco, Peru
Minaspata, a site located in the Cuzco Valley of the south-central Peruvian Andes, contains evidence of occupation spanning continuously from the Early
Horizon through the end of the Inca Empire. In 2013, several units were excavated in order to better understand the social transformations which occurred
in local populations due to colonial practices, focusing primarily on the early consolidation of the Inca heartland during the early Late Horizon (A.D. 1400–
1532). Analysis of the faunal remains can shed light on the shifting patterns of food consumption, butchery, and bone tool manufacture which occurred
during the various phases of occupation. The results of the securely dated faunal remains from the 2013 excavations will be presented, focusing on the
changing patterns of food exploitation and increasing concentration of certain animals over time, and will be placed within a larger cultural and regional
context related to the cultural trajectory of the Cuzco region from the late Early Horizon to the Late Horizon.
Hopkins, Maren [267] see Coleman, Julie
Hoppa, Kristin (University of California, Santa Barbara) and Sherri Andrews (ASM Affiliates)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              200
[110]             Charmstones, Pendants, and other Special Objects from San Clemente Island, CA
This poster presents information on charmstones, pendants, and other specially curated objects recovered during a recent site-recording project
undertaken by ASM Affiliates for the U.S. Navy on San Clemente Island, California. I report on several rare artifacts, including four pendants (two stone
and two abalone), steatite effigies, a ceramic object, and several marine mammal ear bones. These finds represent rare or previously un-recorded artifact
types on San Clemente Island. I discuss the significance of these findings in relation to ethnographic and archaeological evidence from other sites on the
southern Channel Islands and within coastal southern California. In particular, I examine evidence for how these artifacts may have functioned as magico-
religious objects.
Horn, Sherman (Tulane University)
[288]             Artifact Distributions, Interaction Networks, and Social Complexity: Middle Preclassic Development at Cahal Pech from a Small-World
                  Perspective
The temporal position of the Middle Preclassic (c. 900–350 B.C.), situated between the earliest permanent settlements and hierarchically organized Late
Preclassic polities, makes it a critical period for understanding the development of complex societies in the Belize Valley and the Maya Lowlands. From
2004–2009, the Belize Valley Archaeological Project’s excavations produced a trove of information on the Middle Preclassic occupation beneath Plaza B in
the epicenter of Cahal Pech. Variability in platform architecture, construction sequences, caching patterns, and the consumption of local and exotic
materials suggest this early community was structured in ways not easily explained by current conceptions of early ranked societies. This paper presents a
synthesis of the Plaza B excavations and proposes a new model for understanding the development of complex social organization from a network
perspective. Analyses of architectural investment and artifact distribution patterns suggest the Middle Preclassic inhabitants of Cahal Pech differentially
participated in socioeconomic networks that integrated the early community and connected it to others within and beyond the Belize Valley. Dynamic
interactions within Middle Preclassic small-world networks, which linked lowland communities within and between regions, were crucial to the development
of the institutionalized hierarchy that characterized later Maya civilization.
Horn III, Sherman [237] see Howie, Linda
Horowitz, Rachel (Tulane University) and Marcello Canuto (Tulane University )
[26]              When is Chert More Than Just Chert? Case Studies of Elite Distribution of Utilitarian Goods in Northwestern Peten, Guatemala and
                  Western Belize
At a basic level, the lowland Classic Maya economy was a complex web of prestige exchange, centralized distribution, and local market economies. In fact,
while it is important not to consider the lowland Classic Maya economic system as monolithic, it is also as critical to understand how it articulated with the
different levels of social hierarchy. Beyond this, we should also make a point of understanding the roles these specific economic systems played in the
distribution of utilitarian goods among the ancient Maya.
In this paper, we will address the role of centralized distribution of utilitarian goods in the ancient Maya economy. In other words, did elites mediate
resource scarcity through centralized distribution when raw materials for utilitarian goods were absent? We compare cases of differentially distributed chert
resources in northwestern Peten and western Belize to understand the impact of local availability and abundance of raw materials on elites’ role in
resource distribution. We will address whether elites are less involved in the acquisition and distribution of utilitarian goods when raw materials are locally
abundant than in cases where local raw materials are scarce.
Horton, Shannon (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Karen Harry (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[68]              A Comparison of Ceramic Function between the Virgin Branch and Kayenta Ancestral Puebloan Cultures
The Virgin Branch culture is the least understood of the Ancestral Puebloan branches. It is considered most similar to the Kayenta branch; however, there
are significant differences between the two, particularly for the Virgin Branch settlements located in the lowland region of southern Nevada. Compared to
the Kayenta people, who lived primarily in small settlements and relied on dry farming techniques, the lowland Virgin people occupied more aggregated
settlements and relied on irrigation farming. In this poster, we compare data obtained from whole vessels recovered from both the lowland Virgin and
Kayenta regions, to explore how these differences in settlement and subsistence patterns are reflected in the ceramic assemblages, and what the ceramic
data can tell us about how these differences impacted their social organizations.
Horton, Mark (University of Bristol)
[280]             The Hatteras Project: Late Woodland Settlement and Assimilation on the Outer Banks NC
Hatteras Island is one of the few stable landforms on the Outer Banks of North Carolina, and archaeological survey and excavation over many years has
located numerous sites particularly from the Middle and Late Woodland. Our research which commenced in 2009, and has continued annually since then,
has added to this archaeological record, though a community based approach, that has enabled us to work on private property and conduct over 80 test
pits and excavations. The results show that Hatteras Island had a long term and stable population, exploiting an exceptionally rich environment that was
offered by the island’s ecology and adjacent Sound. Most famously, Hatteras is well known for the destination of the ‘Lost Colonists’ of the 1587 expedition.
The seventeenth–eighteenth century archaeology of the island is of particular importance is trying to understand when there was assimilation of the English
colonists into this community, and whether it was able to display a distinctive features through the fusion of Native American and European technologies,
within an isolated community.
Hoskins, Andrew
[200]             A Point of Order on Great Basin Projectile Typologies and Chronologies
Archaeological sites in the Desert West are primarily open-air lithic scatters lacking organic preservation. Often, the only way these sites can be dated is
via typological cross-dating using projectile points. This method of dating assumes that morphological types represent discrete and uniform time periods
across large geographic areas; these time periods are based on the ages of point types at a handful of well-dated sites. Although typological cross-dating
remains common, research has shown that morphologically similar points can date to very different time periods in different places. My research highlights
morphological characteristics useful for distinguishing two dart point types in the eastern Great Basin (Elko and Large Side-notched), which have
discrepancies in their associated age ranges across the region. Additionally, I present results from AMS radiocarbon dating organic hafting materials on
dart and arrow points found across the Great Basin. These dates may be used as sub-regional reference ages for projectile types.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               201
Houk, Brett (Texas Tech University)
[158]            Discussant
Hovers, Erella [22] see Leplongeon, Alice
Howard, Joshua (SUNY University at Buffalo), Caroline Funk (SUNY University at Buffalo), Debra G. Corbett (Nanutset Heritage) and Brian W.
Hoffman (Hamline University)
[124]            Bone Tools of the Rat Islands: Aleut Identity, Subsistence, and Interaction with Landscape and Seascape
Aleut bone tools offer a unique opportunity to study Aleut identity, relational ecology, interaction with seascape, tool technology, materiality, and
subsistence strategies. A study of the Rat Islands was conducted in 2003 and 2009 by the Rat Islands Research Project to examine the Aleut sites found in
the area in order to better understand the subsistence strategies, use of the environment, and the importance of landscape and seascape to the Aleut
culture. During this study, due to the excellent preservation of bone at the RAT-081 site, over 6,000 faunal remains were recovered including 500 bone
tools. The bone tools date from 2,500 to 250 years ago and are made of fish, sea mammal, and bird species. The recovery of bone tools allows for an
examination of the everyday lives of the coastal Aleut through perishable artifacts that are under most conditions lost in the archaeological record. Aleut
bone tools in particular are under-represented in scholarly literature. The paper will discuss Aleut identity, use of bone tools, relational ecology, bone tool
technology, seascape, human-animal interaction, Aleut role on the landscape, and subsistence strategies using the Rat Islands bone tool assemblage.
Howard, Jerry
[258]            Changing Attitudes and Perspectives on Public Participation in Archaeology: The Case of the Southwest Archaeology Team
In the early 1980s, the Southwest Archaeology Team was formed under what is now the Arizona Museum of Natural History. Reacting to a need for an
emergency response team to preserve information from archaeological sites, not protected by state or federal regulations, but being destroyed by
development. While initially considered as outsiders and non-professionals, the acceptance of the public working on archaeological excavations quickly
changed. This paper focuses on the changing attitudes and perspectives on public archaeology by both the professional community and avocational
archaeologists themselves. After over three decades of work, both the strengths and weaknesses of this experiment in public archaeology are examined.
Howe, David
[200]            Projectile Dysfunction
There is an undeniable trend of a gradual decrease in projectile point size over time. About 1,000 years ago, these points significantly change in size. Most
archaeologists today posit that this sudden change has to do with the invention or adoption of the bow and arrow; however, without a large sample of
preserved wooden bows, arrows, or darts, there is no way to say for certain that this notion is correct. Via a controlled archery experiment, projectile point
performance and function will be tested in order to determine if there is a variable threshold at which large projectile points are no longer functional when
fired from a bow, or small projectile points are no longer functional when thrown from an atlatl. Or simply: is there a specific point size or weight that can tell
us the difference between these point types? Through use of a crossbow, arrows, high-speed cameras, and ballistics gel targets, these performance
characteristics were tested.
Howey, Meghan (University of New Hampshire)
[174]            GIS Let Me See It: Building More Robust Models of Past Movement with Geospatial Modeling
Geospatial technologies allow archaeologists to study past social processes at a spatial scale previously unimaginable. Here, I ask how we may realize
more fully the potential created by this fact, namely that these tools let us ask questions we have never asked, nor could think of asking, before we had
access to them. I explore this by focusing on one area of study with a notable amount of untapped potential: movement. Archaeologists recover material
items which show people moved themselves, their goods, and even other people, constantly and over tremendous distances in the past. Archaeologists
have well-developed methodological and theoretical approaches for examining the static material phenomena resulting from movement. However,
geospatial technologies present us new opportunities to model movement not just based on its static remains but in its dynamic context. I propose a
combination of circuit-based modeling and least cost path analysis as a means of creating a broadly adaptable analytic framework that allows for more
robust modeling of movement by accounting for its duality, for both its intension and extension, within past landscapes. I illustrate this analytic approach
using one case study, Late Precontact (ca. A.D. 1200–1600) earthen enclosures in the Great Lakes.
[174]            Chair
Howie, Linda [90] see Striker, Sarah
Howie, Linda (The University of Western Ontario), Sheldon Skaggs (Bronx Community College), Terry Powis (Kennesaw State University) and
Sherman Horn III (Tulane University)
[237]            Greenstone from Where? Petrographic and Microprobe Analyses of Greenstone Triangulates from Middle Preclassic Pacbitun, Belize
Artifacts made from green-colored rocks, including but not limited to jadeites, circulated widely in Mesoamerica during the Middle Preclassic (c. 900–350)
and were imbued with cosmological significance and social value from early times. “Greenstone triangulates” form a distinct subset of these artifacts that
have only been recovered from Middle Preclassic settlements in the Belize Valley. These roughly triangular objects are typically made from green-colored
rocks that are visibly differentiable from jadeites and are thought to originate outside the Belize Valley. Jadeite sourcing studies have identified geologic
deposits of green-colored stones in the Motagua Valley of Guatemala, and non-jadeite green-stone artifacts from the Maya Lowlands are often presumed
to derive from this area, although few studies have focused on accurately characterizing these materials through microscopic and/or geochemical analysis.
This poster presents preliminary results from a study of eight greenstone triangulates from Pacbitun, Belize, which combined petrographic and electron
microprobe analyses to characterize the rocks they were made from. Accurate identification of rock types was used to investigate potential sources for the
triangulate materials through comparison with published geological studies. The results of this study suggest that green-colored stones circulated widely
across Mesoamerica through complex networks of interaction and exchange.
Hranicky, Jack [274] see Hranicky, William
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              202
Hranicky, William and Jack Hranicky (Virginia Rockart Survey)
[274]             Portable Rockart in Late Pleistocene Virginia
This illustrated paper presents an overview of moveable artforms from the late Pleistocene era of Virginia. While fixed rockart is the major form in analytical
archaeology, portable rockart is also found. This paper includes stone and clay objects that represent effigies and abstract forms. These artifacts are a
survey of the several hundred recorded specimens, such as an ivory vulture head, camel image, numerous other animal forms, as well as geometric forms,
and engraved and incised pieces. Several illustrated objects have excavated contexts. These artfacts can be classified as monochromatic, single object or
focus, realistic/abstract forms, and portraying animalistic forms. Several illustrated specimens have ochre or bitumen coating on them. The most impressive
specimen discussed is what is called the Baby Mammoth of Clarke County, Virginia.
Hristova, Lidia [63] see Hamilton-Brehm, Scott
Hruby, Zachary (Northern Kentucky University)
[212]             When the Cat’s Away: Obsidian at Rio Amarillo Before and After the Collapse of Copan, Honduras
The architecturally diminutive, but economically robust, Classic Maya polity of Copan must have had an integral role in the production and exchange of
Ixtepeque goods; perhaps even control of portions of the source itself. Indeed, after the collapse of the Copan state, Ixtepeque becomes one of the most
heavily traded obsidians in the Maya world. This proverbial opening of the floodgates suggests that Copan used Ixtepeque materials primarily for local and
regional exchanges, increasing its value interregionally by fixing supply. Recent obsidian analysis at Rio Amarillo, a major subsidiary site of Copan, reveals
how smaller local players continued to use Ixtepeque obsidian after the collapse and integrate themselves in the burgeoning international coastal trade in
the Terminal and likely the Early Postclassic periods.
Hrynick, M. Gabriel [85] see Holyoke, Kenneth
Hsieh, Ellen (Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, UCLA)
[106]             The Chinese Trade Diasporas in Spanish Manila
The Chinese has conducted trading activities with people who live in the Manila area before the Spanish arrived in 1571. However, the establishment of the
Spanish Manila changed the regional networks and attracted much more Chinese merchants and immigrants. The Spanish colonists assigned them to live
in a separated area called “Parián,” which became the oldest Chinatown in world history. In this paper, the author will use the concept of trade diaspora to
examine the early history of Parián. The paper will discuss how Parián and the overseas Chinese in the Philippines have been discussed by different
agents and how archaeological evidences can shed light on these discussions. The author argues that although Chinese trade diasporas in southeast Asia
are usually considered as the same category in relating discussions, it is necessary to contextualize each case study.
Huang, Yongsong (Brown University), James Dillon (Brown University), Samantha Lash (Brown University) and Kevin Smith (Brown University)
[217]             Taking the Temperature of the Arctic Past: Extracting Temperature and Precipitation Information from Bacterial Lipids Deposited in Faunal
                  Remains from Cape Krusenstern, Alaska
Throughout his career, J. Louis Giddings explored the roles of climate on maritime and terrestrial resources and human ingenuity in adapting technologies
and social strategies to exploit those resources under changing conditions. At Cape Krusenstern, Alaska, Giddings’ teams identified sequential occupations
based on changing maritime adaptations but had no analytical tools for directly inferring key climatic parameters during periods of the Cape's occupation.
Recently, our research group discovered that a widely used class of climate-sensitive bacterial lipid compounds—glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers
(GDGTs)—is well preserved in ancient bones. Research has demonstrated that these bacteria-derived GDGTs faithfully record mean annual air
temperature (MAAT), soil pH, and, in relatively dry regions, precipitation. Direct reconstruction of climate conditions from archaeological materials, in this
case non-human biological samples, with age control provided by archaeological contexts, has the potential to allow direct inference of key climatic and
environmental parameters at the time individual sites were occupied, conditions to which those sites' occupants were adapting, and changes through time.
This paper examines current research on bone-derived GDGTs using archived faunal collections from Giddings' excavations of Ipiutak through late
prehistoric Inupiat settlements at Cape Krusenstern to reconstruct changing climate conditions at the time of those occupations.
Hubbard, Eric (College of Wooster), Olivia Navarro-Farr (College of Wooster) and Aaron Burke (University of California, Los Angeles )
[184]             Empire and Rebellion: Egyptian Imperialism and Insurgency in the Late Bronze Age Levant
The wide-ranging research focused on the turbulence of the Late Bronze Age in the Mediterranean and the Levant has not yet yielded a unified narrative of
how this period was experienced across the region. While some sites exhibit no sign of the infamous collapse or ‘crisis,’ many others exhibit rapid
abandonment or destruction layers. The narrative surrounding these destructions tends to be viewed as relating to either the imperial Egyptian invasion,
Israel’s rising kingdom, or all manner of so-named ‘Sea Peoples.’ This macro-causal approach leaves fewer considerations of micro-scale incidents of local
resistance/agency. Recent evidence from a New Kingdom outpost in Jaffa (Tel Yafo), excavated by the Jaffa Cultural Heritage Project (JCHP), sheds light
on just such a possibility. Specifically, evidence suggests a local Canaanite resistance against Egyptian domination. In this poster, I reconsider a number of
Late Bronze Age New Kingdom outposts (e.g., Beit She’an) to better gauge the intensity of Egyptian influence in the Levant and to posit the probability of
local efforts to collectively resist.
Hubbe, Mark [207] see Kuzminsky, Susan
Hubert, Erell, Patrick R. Williams (The Field Museum), Lauren Monz (Northwestern University) and M. Elizabeth Grávalos (University of Illinois at
Chicago)
[219]             Ritual Practices and the Negotiation of Wari-Tiwanaku Relations at Cerro Baúl
The presence of both Wari and Tiwanaku colonies in the Moquegua Valley (southern Peru) offers a unique opportunity to study the colonial strategies of
these empires and their interactions during the first millennium A.D. Here, we more specifically explore the role of ritual practices in mediating relations
between the Wari and Tiwanaku empires. We focus on a Titicaca basin inspired platform and court complex located outside of the main Wari administrative
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             203
sector of the site of Cerro Baúl, denominated Temple of Arundane. This sector, most likely devoted to religious activities, appears to be the only purely
Tiwanaku context within the site. We argue that the presence of this Tiwanaku ritual complex within such an important Wari colony contributed to
establishing social ties among Wari and Tiwanaku representatives and may have helped negotiate relations among various socio-political groups in this
frontier area. Wari colonial strategies therefore appear to have included the incorporation of elite diversity through the coexistence of various ritual
practices in particular places in the landscape.
Hubert, Erell [219] see Grávalos, M. Elizabeth
Huckell, Bruce (University of New Mexico), Timothy Rowe (Dept. of Geological Sciences, University of Texas-), Leslie McFadden (Dept. of Earth
and Planetary Sciences, University ), Grant Meyer (Dept. of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University ) and Christopher Merriman (Dept. of
Anthropology, University of New Mexico)
[65]              The Hartley Mammoth, North-Central New Mexico
A scatter of large mammal bone scrap along a shallow rill led to discovery of the Hartley Mammoth site in north-central New Mexico. Informal testing
revealed a shallowly buried partial skull and a group of three rib fragments some 2 m apart. On the surface 9 m away was a small, impact-damaged Clovis
point, suggesting the possibility that the mammoth had been the victim of Clovis predation. Excavations in 2015 revealed the remains of a juvenile
mammoth, consisting of rib fragments, portions of the skull (including both tusks), part of the pelvis, vertebral fragments, and abundant bone scrap. The
remains are contained within a remnant of a buried ephemeral stream channel, perched on an elongated slump block of Triassic sedimentary rock, 20 m
below the broad Piedra Lumbre basin surface and 60 m above the Rio Puerco, a tributary of the Rio Chama. The matrix is fine sediment and at least one
debris-flow deposit. Although no stone artifacts were found, more than a dozen mammoth bone “flakes” were recovered. The “flakes” are generally large
and most appear to have been detached from limb bones. Studies of these specimens, the mammoth remains, plus taphonomic, chronometric, and
paleoenvironmental analyses, are on-going.
Huckert, Chantal (Universidad Veracruzana)
[241]             Representaciones de la Muerte y del Sacrificio en las Figurillas del Centro de Veracruz
Con base a la cerámica que resguarda el Museo de Antropología de Xalapa, correspondiente a las culturas del Golfo en el Clásico Tardío, se propone una
lectura iconográfica sobre la representación de la muerte asociada al sacrificio.
La muestra de piezas se caracteriza por estar constituida por cuerpos completos y fragmentados, además de cabezas que son una unidad en sí, y
tuvieron probablemente la función de cabeza trofeo.
Se reconocen dos complejos iconográficos que configuran una narrativa visual en torno a la muerte y las maneras sacrificiales que caracterizan
manifestaciones divinas.
El primer complejo es identificado por tener los ojos cerrados, sean piezas en bulto, o representaciones en bajo relieve en la vestimenta; ilustan la muerte
y la sangre preciosa. El segundo da cuenta de piezas con rasgos diagnósticos que denotan el desollamiento, entre éstos los párpados caidos y la boca
abierta, propios del culto a un ¨dios desollado”, antecedente de Xipe Tótec del Posclásico.
La presentación constituye un avance del estudio iconográfico de las figurillas cerámicas del Golfo, en el MAX. Con ello se comprobará la continuidad
temática
que impera en su imaginería, apreciando e identificando la singularidad y la generalidad de sus expresiones, en un marco mesoamericano.
Huddelstan, Stephanie [124] see Marshall, Amanda
Hudson, Kathryn (University at Buffalo) and John Henderson (Cornell University)
[47]              Gesture, Identity, and Meaning in Southeastern Mesoamerica
Hand imagery carried conventionalized meanings across ancient Mesoamerica and represented an embodied semantics that was central to ancient
constructions of meaning. Precolumbian ceramic imagery from northwestern Honduras reflects of this generalization and features a set of highly stylized
compositions that conveyed an array of specific meanings. Figures and, by extension, the gestures made by them feature prominently in this corpus, but
little attention has been paid to how these motifs function vis-à-vis broader constructions of meaning. This paper considers the place of hand forms and
gestures within the imagery of the region’s cultural traditions and examines the range of contexts—both corporeal and extra-corporeal—in which they
occurred. Particular attention will be given to the range of gestures attested within ceramic compositions from within and around the Ulúa Valley, and to
how these forms function as independent constituents that contribute to the construction and extraction of compositional meaning. Similarities with the
ways that hands were treated in other Mesoamerican traditions of graphic representation, both local and foreign, will also be considered in terms of their
implications for cultural interaction.
Hudson, Jean (U Wisconsin- Milwaukee)
[244]             Impacts of Behavioral Contexts on Intrasite Zooarchaeological Sampling
Intrasite spatial analysis is nothing new, however, its application to zooarchaeological remains continues to be relatively rare. A critical aspect of any
archaeological analysis is an understanding of where our samples come from in terms of human behavioral contexts. Animal remains end up in many
places—where daily meals are prepared and eaten, where trash is dumped, where tools and ornaments are made and used, where special events bring
people together, where sacrifices and offerings are placed. How often, when the site is the desired analytic unit, are various constituent behavioral
contexts collapsed? How does this merging of contexts impact interpretation? Two case studies are evaluated. In the process some of the common
assumptions about critical variables of “trash rules” are reviewed.
[244]             Chair
Huertas Sánchez, Geraldine
[151]             ¿Quiénes son los Huarco? Análisis de la cerámica tardía del valle de Cañete
Según los relatos etnohistóricos, los incas tras una ardua lucha de 4 años aproximadamente, dominaron al fuerte señorío Huarco, consolidando su poder
con la construcción de una fortaleza. Otras fuentes hablan de Huarco como un señorío menos independiente, que integraba una confederación política
conformada por los diversos grupos de la costa central que fueron conquistados.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              204
En el presente trabajo, analizaremos la cerámica recuperada por el Proyecto Qhapaq Ñan, en el sitio conocido como “El Huarco,” ubicado en el valle de
Cañete, Lima. Caracterizaremos la sociedad local ocupante, antes y durante la conquista Inca, con el fin de evaluar hasta qué punto la cultura material
nos muestra una sociedad fuertemente centralizada o un grupo de limitada independencia y relaciones fuertes con sus vecinos.
Nuestro estudio morfofuncional inicial, así como la revisión del material publicado, nos permiten plantear de manera inicial una ocupación tardía de dos
estilos foráneos, característicos de las sociedades próximas al sur y al norte, Chincha e Ychsma, respectivamente, y pocos tiestos que podríamos
caracterizar como locales. Estos estilos aparecen interactuando en los mismos contextos, sugiriendo una imagen de fuertes interacciones regionales, más
que el de una sociedad cerrada.
Huff, Jenn [252] see Lape, Peter
Huff Mikiten, Alita [7] see Harding, Gregg
Huffer, Donelle
[65]              An Assessment of Archaeological Bison Remains in the American Southwest and the Wildlife Management Implications for the Grand
                  Canyon National Park Bison Herd
The historically introduced House Rock Valley bison herd in northern Arizona has, in recent years, migrated from the eastern Arizona Strip onto the Kaibab
Plateau within Grand Canyon National Park. Bison are considered a nonnative species to the southern Colorado Plateau, and the animals adversely
impact sensitive ecosystems prompting National Park Service wildlife managers to pursue their removal. Archaeofaunal evidence of bison in the Grand
Canyon and neighboring regions, however, raises concern that bison may in fact be a native species. Yet this evidence had never been assessed within a
zooarchaeological interpretive framework, which is critical since mere presence/absence lists of bison remains do not address the potentially complex
cultural processes involved in the formation of archaeofaunal assemblages. When evaluated through inter-assemblage comparisons, a dramatic decline in
relative abundance and skeletal completeness correlated to distance from traditionally understood historical bison distribution is apparent. Although the
archaeofaunal evidence does not rule out the possibility that bison were present in the southwest, it does suggest that the species likely entered the region
only rarely as small, dispersed herds, which is corroborated in historic manuscripts and ethnohistoric accounts.
Huffman, Thomas (University of the Witwatersrand) and Frank Lee Earley (University of the Witwatersrand)
[123]             Upper Republican and Apishapa Interaction on the High Plains
On the High Plains of North America, geographical separation and cultural isolation were not the same phenomena. Upper Republican and Apishapa
archaeological units, for example, represented separate ethno-linguistic groups, but they were not isolated. Apishapa pottery at the Wallace site (Upper
Republican) and Upper Republican pottery at Cramer (Apishapa) demonstrate reciprocal interaction. We argue that the calumet ceremony facilitated this
interaction, rather than residential mobility. Furthermore, the calumet network provided a foundation for multicultural residences in settlements such as
Cramer that served both defensive and economic purposes. Among other things, multi-colored lithics, Black Forest silicified wood, and Upper Republican-
derived Barnes pottery mark summer (Barnes) and winter (Buick) hunting camps attached to semi-permanent residences in the Arkansas River Valley.
Huggins, Kathleen (University of California, Berkeley), Paul Goldstein (University of California, San Diego) and Matthew Sitek (University of
California, San Diego)
[255]             Looking for Invisible Makers Marks: The Distribution of Formative Period Sherds in Adobes at the Omo M10A Tiwanaku Temple
This paper expands on previous work which concluded that the Omo M10A Tiwanaku temple in Moquegua, Peru, was constructed using, in some amount,
adobes containing cultural materials from antecedent Huaracane populations. Exploring this data further may reveal social and ecological conditions during
construction of the Tiwanaku temple at Omo M10A. Analyses will include spatial distribution of Huaracane sherds within architectural collapse, and
associating these architectural collapse areas with discrete architectural features and areas. Using this evidence, we now test two working hypotheses:
whether sherd inclusions indicate a preference in raw material source, possibly indicative of differential labor groups at the temple structure, or whether
sherd inclusions are merely an inadvertent inclusion during adobe processing.
Hughes, Daniel
[253]             Circulating Ceramics in the Eighteenth Century
The purpose of this paper is to examine our ability to model trade connections through the use of ceramics and quantitative methods. Ceramic collections
from various eighteenth Caribbean sites will be examined through a statistical model for inter-island trade. I shall argue that consumptive patterns are
knowable and testable through the archaeological record. Finally, the connections developed from the importation of various goods, such as ceramics,
provide opportunities to test ideas about contested peripheries which can be seen by a means of historical data and statistical inference to understand the
past relationship between global events and local acts of consumption within the Caribbean.
Hull, Kerry (Brigham Young University)
[86]              The Smoking of Bones: An Ethnographic Examination of the Maya’s Use of Tobacco and Tobacco Substitutes
Epigraphic studies have confirmed what Classic Period iconography has long shown—the Ancient Maya cultivated and smoked tobacco. Ethnographic
studies among various Maya groups have brought to light a wide range of uses for tobacco, from pleasure, to healing, to witchcraft. In this paper, I will
address several lesser discussed topics related to tobacco. First, I will discuss ethnographic data relating to the use of other plants that are mixed with
tobacco to alter its effects or tastes. Second, I investigate tobacco substitute plants that were or are smoked by different Maya groups in place of tobacco
and trace the ritual or practical motivations for each. In addition, drawing upon my own fieldwork with the Ch’orti’ Maya, I detail the ritual smoking of a
peculiar non-plant substance: human bones. I described this rare ritual and contextualize the practice by offering evidence for a Classic Period antecedent
to this rite. Thus, I argue that while the importance of Nicotiana tabacum is clear among the ancient Maya, substitute materials may also have been used
on specific occasions.
Hulme-Beaman, Ardern [176] see Linderholm, Anna
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               205
Hulse, Eva (Archaeological Investigations Northwest), John L. Fagan (Archaeological Investigations Northwest) and Jason Cowan
(Archaeological Investigations Northwest)
[155]             Settlement and the Environment in the Northwestern Great Basin
The Holocene in the northwest Great Basin is characterized by episodes of severe drought punctuated by abundant rainfall. Prehistoric people settled
widely across the area against this variable ecological backdrop. Excavations for the Ruby Pipeline project have produced a wealth of data on prehistoric
settlement patterns and chronologies in the northwestern Great Basin. In this paper, multiple lines of evidence are used to reconstruct chronologies of
occupation that have been obscured by post-depositional erosion and bioturbation.
Hulse, Eva [243] see Norton, Holly
Hulsey, Brannon [111] see West, Frankie
Hundman, Brittany (Georgia State), Nicola Sharratt (Georgia State University) and Beth Turner (Georgia State University)
[204]             Eating in Transition: Diet at Cerro Del Oro
Subsistence practices during the transition from Early Intermediate Period (200 B.C.–A.D. 600) to the Middle Horizon Period (A.D. 600–A.D.1000) are
crucial to understanding prehispanic life on the southern coast of Peru. As the Nasca polity waned and the Wari state began to expand, life in the coastal
valleys was changing. Through bioarchaeological reconstruction of diet and health at the site of Cerro Del Oro, in the Canete Valley, the effects of
demographic and subsistence changes can be examined. This poster presents osteological and isotopic data from a cemetery sample (N=58) from the
site. Excavated in 1926 by Alfred Kroeber, the Cerro Del Oro material has been unstudied at the Field Museum for almost 90 years. Carbon and oxygen
isotopic values from tooth enamel are compared to bone carbonate values to reconstruct diet through the lifetime of each individual. This, in combination
with carbon and nitrogen from bone collagen, provide data on dietary variability. Preliminary results indicate variation in dietary composition; possibly linked
to the transition between political influences.
Hundman, Brittany [219] see Gadison, Davette
Hung, Ling-yu (Indiana University)
[106]             A GIS-Investigation of the Yangshan Cemetery, Qinghai, NW China
This paper focuses on the use of GIS (geographic information systems) to examine mortuary practice in the Yangshan cemetery (ca. 4300–4000 B.P.),
Qinghai Province, northwestern China. The abundant graves unearthed in the Yangshan cemetery are valuable sources for investigating local social and
economic organization. However, mortuary practice at Yangshan appears to be complicated, including graves containing single or multiple individuals,
individuals deposited in extended or flexed position, burials furnished with different types of grave goods, and etc. GIS provides a powerful tool to
investigate spatial and statistic relationships between graves with these different variables. This study reveals new knowledge of late Neolithic
communities in northwestern China.
Hunt, Ryan (Rhodes College), Jon Russ (Rhodes College) and Stephen Carmody
[6]               Residue Analysis of Archaeological Smoking Pipes from the Southeastern US
Chemical analyses of organic residues from smoking pipes excavated from archaeological sites in the southeastern United States provide insight into
ritualistic smoking traditions of indigenous peoples. This study examined residues scraped from pipes and pipe sherds in collections at the Fernbank
Museum of Natural History in Atlanta, Georgia, and the McClung Museum of Natural History and Culture in Knoxville, Tennessee. One of the primary goals
was to determine whether nicotine was present in the residue, thereby expanding our knowledge of when and where tobacco was first used in the
southeast. For the analyses, residues were extracted by ultrasonicating the samples in methanol/chloroform. An aliquot of the extracts were analyzed
directly using GC-MS and GC-FID; another aliquot was derivatized using BSFTA with 1 percent TMCS and also analyzed using GC-MS and GC-FID. While
nicotine was present in only two of the residues studied, the results suggest a complex and diverse tradition in which smoking pipes were used to smoke a
wide array of natural materials.
Hunt, Alice (University of Georgia)
[14]              Ceramic Classification and Social Process
Sir Flinders Petrie revolutionized archaeological ceramic analysis in 1904 by developing ‘sequence dating’ —the relative dating of strata, buildings, or
tombs based on changes in formal and stylistic attributes of vessels overtime as determined by seriation. Since the efficacy of sequence dating is directly
related to the quality of the typology upon which it is based, stylistic typologies and classification of ceramic have been the norm for the last century,
despite their manifold limitations. In an age of readily available, high-resolution direct dating methods, there is no need for seriation dating or stylistic
ceramic classification. Instead, ceramic analysis can begin to look at deeper social processes and behaviors, such as resource management, social
values, and technological innovation. In this paper, we propose a morphometric, formal classification of ceramic vessels from the recent excavations at
Tierras Nuevas (Manatí, Puerto Rico) to revise previous stylistic classifications and reveal human motivations and social processes at work during the Late
Ostionoid/Taíno Period.
Hunt, Terry [296] see DiNapoli, Robert
Hunter, Raymond and Steve Kosiba (University of Alabama )
[174]             Politics of Property: A GIS Analysis of the Shifting Value of Agricultural Land in Colonial Cusco
Recent GIS studies of colonialism combine archival and archaeological data to understand and map changes in political economy, such as settlement
patterns, land use, and population aggregations. Such studies often overlook how colonial politics centered on the transformation of value—the social
significance of the things and resources that constituted social life. This paper develops a GIS method to document shifts in land value in the Inca imperial
capital (Cusco, Peru), during the long process of Spanish colonization (ca. 1533–1650). The paper develops a range of GIS methods to analyze the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 206
historical ecology of Colonial Cusco, by analyzing where the Incas developed agricultural lands, then identifying the lands that were subjects of early
Colonial litigation between indigenous people, Incas, and Spaniards. The paper builds on this foundation to consider how shifts from maize to wheat
production corresponded to changes in the social value of land, and discusses how changes in field types, soils, labor requirements, and agricultural-ritual
institutions structured how Andean people experienced and contested Spanish Colonialism. The paper adds to our anthropological understanding of
colonialism, focusing less on political domination and more on how different social actors negotiated the regimes of value of a colonial project.
Huntington, Yumi (Jackson State University)
[31]              Lost in Translation in the Formative Period: The Iconography of a Bear from the Formative Period Ceramics
Throughout ancient Andean culture, animals and their attributes have been depicted in objects of material culture associated with religious ceremonies,
political authority, and social status. So far, scholars have focused on only a few types of animals, including felines, serpents, caimans, and eagles, for their
significant roles in Andean cosmology and society. One important animal has largely been neglected: the bear, which is actually a major species in the
Andean habitat, and which also appears as the main protagonist of the ukuku (bear-man) story.
Despite such importance, the identification and interpretation of bear iconography in early Andean objects has been overlooked. In this article, I identify two
ceramic vessels from the Cupisnique and Viru regions as portraying bear iconography and interpret their symbolism. Contextualizing these objects in
history, I argue that the role of the bear, understood as ukuku, was important during the formative period but diminished with the onset of the Moche period.
Huntley, Deborah [267] see Koons, Michele
Hunt-Watts, Holly (University of Leeds)
[25]              Children of the Revolution: The Rise of Rickets in Urban Societies in 19th-Century England
In the late eighteenth- to early nineteenth-century England, the impact of the Industrial Revolution on health was experienced by both manufacturers and
workers alike, as it both changed the roles played by workers and the environment of urban living. Many of these workers would have been children, often
as young as 9 years old, who found employment in factories to supplement the family income. The impact of industrialisation on the nutritional health of
adults has been found in evidence such as shrinking physical statures and increases in obesity. This paper aims to explore the impact of industrialisation
on the nutritional health of children during this period.
Using collections from urban sites across England, this paper will focus on skeletal indicators of nutritional health to identify the prevalence of rickets and
other nutrient deficiencies during this industrial transition. It will explore the impact of various factors on childhood health, such as socio-economic status
and geographical location, to create a picture of life for the nineteenth-century child.
Hurcombe, Linda (University of Exeter, UK)
[254]             Experimental Archaeology and Perishable Material Culture: Using Traditional Museums and Open Air Museums to Investigate the Missing
                  Majority
In living contexts, the majority of material culture is formed from organic materials, but on most archaeological sites only the inorganic elements are
preserved. The perishable material culture thus forms the 'missing majority'. The fragmentary records and fragmentary remains of perishable material
culture stored in museums can offer new ways of understanding artefacts made from organic materials. A mosaic approach has been used to offer new
interpretations of artefacts using original museum records, published accounts and drawings from the 1800s onwards for artefacts which have not survived,
augmented by rare extant fragments of types of cordage, containers, and fabrics from prehistory and informed by ethnographic data. The research has
explored the use of crafted replicas and digital 3D prints to better understand and present the ancient museum objects, but it has also looked at the
processes and contexts involved in manufacture and use. Experimental archaeology projects within 10 open air museums have been undertaken as part of
the Openarch European Union project. The results show how an integrated approach can benefit both the archaeological interpretations of rare perishable
artefacts, and the public appreciation of perishable materials.
[214]             Discussant
Hurst, Heather (Skidmore College)
[230]             Sketching in the Shadows: Re-illustration of the Olmec Paintings of Oxtotitlán, Mexico
Re-illustration of the well-known cave paintings at Oxtotitlán, Guerrero, Mexico has revealed important new iconographic details. The use of multispectral
imaging, as well as direct observation following recent conservation work, contributed to re-visioning the artworks with increased clarity and accuracy to the
originals. This paper will present new renderings of the Olmec-Period paintings and summarize observations on artistic practice and iconographic
significance that resulted from this project.
[15]              Discussant
Hurst, Stance (Museum of Texas Tech University)
[16]              Hunter-Gatherer Occupations at San Jon Site, Eastern New Mexico
One of the hallmarks of Eileen Johnson's career was the establishment of long-term field research projects. Outcomes of this work include high quality
datasets, and the development and fermentation of research ideas that can only occur from returning to the same localities year after year. The Lubbock
Lake Landmark's regional research at the San Jon site (LA 6437) is an example of one of these projects. The San Jon site is located along the
northwestern margin of the Southern High Plains of eastern New Mexico and associated with an extinct playa. San Jon is principally known as a
Paleoindian site based on Frank C. Hibben and Frank H.H. Roberts, Jr.’s excavations in the 1940s. San Jon was a persistent place, however, occupied for
most of prehistory. Over a decade of fieldwork, led by Dr. Johnson, has produced a sequence of lithic assemblages that span the prehistoric period. A lithic
technological analysis from a landscape perspective examines the changing role of San Jon within hunter-gatherer landscape-use strategies across the
southern High Plains. Results of this work demonstrate the importance of datasets and research produced from long-term projects.
Hurtubise, Jenna (University of Alabama), Haagen Klaus (George Mason University), José Pinilla (Museo Nacional Sicán, Peru) and Carlos Elera
(Museo Nacional Sicán, Peru)
[207]             Social Identity and Mass Sacrifice: An Investigation at Matrix 101, a Late Middle Sicán Funerary Context
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                207
We examine the social identity of the individuals buried at a Late Middle Sicán (A.D. 1050–1120) mass grave designated Matrix 101, located in the Sicán
Religious-Funerary Precinct in the La Leche Valley, north coast of Peru. Our objectives are threefold: (1) to understand the social identities of the
individuals, (2) to examine the complex mortuary practices that took place during the construction of the burial, and (3) to infer sociopolitical reasons for the
construction of Matrix 101 and to see how they might relate to the Sicán political-religious collapse.
Body positions, grave goods, and present frequencies of biological stress allow for social identity of the deceased to be assessed. Due to the large scale of
the mortuary context and apparent deliberate skeletal manipulation, preliminary research points to the special nature of Matrix 101. We hypothesize that
Matrix 101 represents a mass grave that was constructed in three closely timed events surrounding an El Niño ca. A.D. 1050. We argue that the presence
of burial manipulation, specific body positions, and evidence of sharp force trauma provide evidence of ritual killing. We suggest that these individuals
represent Sicán elite whose identities were transformed into sacred objects during a crisis ritual.
Huson, Daniel H. [223] see Bos, Kirsten
Hussey, R (University of Florida)
[224]              Dungeons and Virtual Tours: Preserving the Mazmorras of Tetouan, Morocco
New and economical methods of digital preservation have enabled archaeologists to both protect and increase public access to threatened heritage sites.
Recent plans to rehabilitate a long sealed but structurally threatened subterranean dungeon associated with Christian slavery, The Mazmorras of Tetouan,
Morocco, provided an ideal location to integrate cost-effective methods of digital preservation with municipal restoration proposals. The creation of an
online virtual tour with moderately priced photographic hardware and open-source software was crucial in the creation of trust-building collaborative
heritage planning for an extremely restricted historical site. The creation of an online and easily accessible virtual tour digitally preserved the dungeon’s
appearance preceding any restorative work. These online virtual tours were essential in transcending difficult language barriers to create a collaborative
heritage management plan to work with Moroccan restoration proposals.
Huster, Angela (Arizona State University)
[237]              By Themselves They Celebrated His Feast Day: Regional Variation in Postclassic Central Mexican Domestic Ritual
This poster examines the variation in domestic ritual practices in Postclassic central Mexico, using data from the Basin of Mexico, the Toluca Valley, and
Morelos. I use cluster analysis to identify patterning in censer and figurine use, based on the functional attributes of these artifact classes (use mechanics
for censers, subject matter for figurines). These clusters are then compared spatially and temporally to identify patterns based on ethnicity and the
expansion of the Aztec Empire. The results show a potential division in ritual practices between primarily Nahua and primarily Oto-Pamean subregions, as
well as an expansion of the Nahua pattern during the Late Postclassic.
Hutchinson, Dale [286] see Magoon, Dane
Hutson, Scott (University of Kentucky)
[26]               Understanding Variability in Distribution and Consumption in Low-Wealth Households from the Classic period
This paper explores data on consumption of durable goods in Classic Period domestic contexts both in cities (Chunchucmil, Tikal) and rural areas (Ceren,
hinterlands of Izamal and Copan). The goal is to document variation in distribution systems across the lowlands. Though some of this variation may be due
to the intensity of market systems, other variation may be due to the wealth and resourcefulness of individual households and some due to long-term
trends in economic prosperity throughout the Maya area.
[135]              Discussant
Huxhold, Wayne [266] see Sievert, April
Hyde, David M. [93] see Kelley, Krystle
Hyde, David M. (Western State Colorado University) and Nadine Gray (GWR Heritage Consulting Ltd)
[93]               Form and Function of a Dual-Chambered Chultun at the Medicinal Trail Community, Northwestern Belize
The chultun from Group H at the Medicinal Trail Community in northwestern Belize was an unsealed, dual chambered feature filled with lithic debitage and
sparse ceramic evidence. The chultun was located on the southern side of the dual level Structure H-1. The chambers had doomed roofs and walls with a
sill leading into the largest chamber, the western chamber. The eastern chamber was small and was more of a niche than a chamber to be entered.
Although storage is suggested by the small size of this chamber and the ability to seal the entrance, no storage vessels were recovered. This poster will
compare the Medicinal Trail chultun to others in the Three Rivers Region as well to morphologically similar chultuns outside the region in order to elucidate
its possible function.
Hyde, David (UC Berkeley)
[251]              Stories Past and Present: Archaeology, Lore, and Community at von Pfister’s General Store, Benicia, California
The story of the start of the California Gold Rush by the announcement of the discovery at von Pfister’s General Store in Benicia, California, lives large in
the contemporary community’s collective memory. Archaeological excavations and historical research at von Pfister’s has shed light on daily life at the
general store and has served to historically and socially contextualize the popular story. This paper explores the origins of the story and the ways the
narrative has shaped a larger community identity based heavily in its historical relevance to local and state development. Also explored are the ways in
which local historic preservation efforts at the von Pfister site have been mobilized to draw attention to local traditions and challenge rapid Bay Area
development.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                    208
Hyziak, Alyssa (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[90]              Life on the Conemaugh: Spatial Analysis of Artifact Densities of the Monongahela Tradition at the Johnston Site (36In2) in Southwestern
                  Pennsylvania
The Johnston site (36In2) is associated with the Johnston Phase of the Monongahela tradition during the Late Prehistoric Period in southwestern
Pennsylvania. Located on the Conemaugh River floodplain in Blairsville, Pennsylvania, this large village site was excavated both in the 1950s by the
Carnegie Museum and more recently by Indiana University of Pennsylvania, and is one of the largest known Monongahela sites. This project aimed to
describe the artifact densities for this site to interpret the different types of activities that were conducted at various parts of site. Initial indicators suggested
that differences existed among the three areas of this circular village: the plaza, stockade, and the domestic areas. However, the analysis of spatial
                                                             ©
distributions at the site is just beginning, I used Surfer9 - Golden Software to generate distribution maps for lithic and faunal materials coupled with graphs
to suggest the contrasts in the activities that took place at these three areas of the village. Having personally worked at the Johnston site, it is exciting to
see a more complete picture of the site developing that can be useful to further archaeological spatial analyses of this important site.
Hyziak, Alyssa [90] see Napoleon, Taylor
Iannone, Gyles (Trent University)
[262]             The Socio-Ecological Entanglement in Tropical Societies (SETS) Project
Although comparative studies have been criticized in recent years, especially within the more post-modern corners of anthropology, cross-cultural studies
continue to have value for exploring the sometimes congruent, and at other times unique, manner that different communities choose to confront analogous
socio-ecological issues. The Socio-Ecological Entanglement in Tropical Societies (SETS) project is a long-term endeavor aimed at promoting the cross-
cultural, transdisciplinary examination of the tropical experience, past and present, as a means to explore resilience and vulnerability to changing socio-
ecological circumstances. The theoretical and methodological basis of this project will be summarized, and some preliminary insights relating to our on-the-
ground research in various parts of south and southeast Asia will be presented.
Idrogo, Henry (Henry A. Idrogo)
[102]             Shared Motifs and Figures in the Archaic of the Cajamarca Highlands: New Data from the site of Callacpuma
The northern Andes, and in particular the Cajamarca region, has for years seen a dearth of archaeological investigation into the lithic, or archaic period.
This is surprising given early investigation in the region by Augusto Cardich whose excavations at caves like Cumbe yielded archaic period occupations
dated to 8,500 B.C. More recent work at Conga and Maqui Maqui north of the Cajamarca Basin have documented hunter-gatherer occupations including
projectile points dating to approximately 12,000 B.P. Here, I synthesize some of this work and present preliminary impressions related to rock art motifs
and figures shared between the sites of Callacpuma in the Cajamarca Basin and the sites of Maqui Maqui and Conga to the north.
Iizuka, Fumie (University of California, Merced) and Diana Carvajal Contreras (Universidad Externado de Colombia)
[14]              Subsistence, Environment, and Ceramic Technological Variability at Puerto Hormiga and Monsú, Early Pottery Sites of the Caribbean
                  Colombia
Archaic to Formative transitions in the Intermediate Area of Latin America have been discussed in terms of the timing of agriculture, population growth,
sedentism and mobility, use of coastal resources, and the appearance of pottery. The Caribbean Colombia has among the earliest dates for pottery in the
New World. Sites such as Puerto Chacho and Puerto Hormiga, shell middens near the coast, were occupied by ca. 5,000 B.P. during the wet period.
Monsú, a mound in the riverine environment, was in use by ca. 4250 B.P. during the dry period. Faunal-based subsistence practices differed at these sites.
Technologically, whereas pottery from Puerto Hormiga has fiber temper and sand inclusions, that of Monsú has shell temper and sand inclusions. Degrees
of residential mobility and reliance on cultigens have been debated. In this presentation, we focus on Puerto Hormiga and Monsú that were recently re-
excavated, evaluating the inter-site and intra-site diachronic relations of subsistence practice, environment, and ceramic technology. We investigated the
variability of their pottery technology and their faunal assemblages, and compared them with results from existing lithic and paleoethnobotanical studies.
This research provides new insights on the behavior and change at the early ceramic sites of the Caribbean coast of Colombia.
Ikehara, Hugo (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú)
[56]              How Did the End of the Cupisnique-Chavín Religious Complex Affect Local Leadership?
In this paper, I assess the impact of the end of the Cupisnique-Chavín Religious Complex (CCRC) in local leadership. Using the case of the Nepeña Middle
Valley, I evaluate how authority was built during the Late Formative and how the disintegration of the CCRC around 500 B.C. had profound impacts in the
way power was constituted and negotiated during the next centuries.
[56]              Chair
Iliff, Jeremy [64] see Slaughter, Mark
Illingworth, J. S. [69] see Adovasio, J. M.
Imfeld, Sarah [129] see Hirth, Kenneth
Immich, Jennifer (Metropolitan State University of Denver)
[70]              Castles and Colonialism: Exploring Meaning in Historic Irish Archaeology
Castles, architecture embedded with colonial power, can be understood as communicating display, power, prestige, corruption, oppression in the periods in
which they were constructed and used, only to see the meanings shifted, reemphasized, manipulated, and recreated in the modern period. This paper
examines the multiple temporal and conceptual values of medieval castles in north County Tipperary, Ireland, as objects of material culture whose meaning
has shifted in significance from the period in which they were constructed to the present. With timber castles, change is embedded in the shape of the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 209
object—the fortification of the structure itself (the timber) has disappeared with time, leaving only a mound of earth to represent a castle. Therefore,
studying meaning (colonial or other) of timber castles is complicated in the necessity for modern classification of earthen mounds to timber castle type—a
task undertaken by the author in her research. As meaning shifts occur in the present, the materiality of timber castles maintain a role as an active agent
(colonial or other), continuing to shape activities and identities of those engaging with it. This paper aims to examine the impact of colonialism in the
midlands of medieval Ireland, through the lens of timber castles.
Ingalls, Victoria (The University of Texas at San Antonio)
[273]             Social Memory in Maya Hinterland Communities: Recent Excavations at San Lorenzo, Belize
During the Preclassic Period in the Maya Lowlands, public structures became the materializations of ideology and memory, functioning to add permanence
and significance to the growing ritual landscape. Most Preclassic public ritual structures, however, are documented within formal ceremonial centers. Little
is known about Preclassic public spaces within hinterland communities. Recent excavations at the Xunantunich hinterland site of San Lorenzo have
uncovered a Preclassic round platform buried beneath a Late-to-Terminal Classic settlement cluster. This platform sits on an expansive tamped marl
surface and based on preliminary ceramic analysis dates to the Terminal Preclassic Period. Comparative data suggests that this platform may have served
a ritual or public function due to its size and form. The reuse and rebuilding on this location during the Late Classic has further implications for the
maintenance of meaning and social remembrance of sacred places on the landscape outside formal ceremonial centers.
Ingram, Scott (University of Texas at Arlington)
[168]             Collapse in the North American Southwest: A Comparative Study
This presentation reports the results of a preliminary cross-cultural comparative study of collapse (depopulation) in the late precontact southwest. Key
descriptive characteristics and trends in possible contributing factors to collapse (e.g., population levels, social conflict, natural disasters, environmental
impacts, etc.) within eight archaeological cultures will be considered. Generalizable and systematic description rather than explanation is the emphasis.
The purpose of this trial study is to investigate the value of the comparative approach for advancing our understanding of collapse in the southwest. Such
an approach, fully implemented, may reveal generalizable insights that inform the study of the sustainability and vulnerability of contemporary societies.
[168]             Chair
Inomata, Takeshi [53] see MacLellan, Jessica
Inomata, Takeshi (University of Arizona)
[178]             The Development of Sedentary Communities in the Maya Lowlands in a Comparative Perspective
It has long been known in the Andean region that the communal projects of temple constructions and public rituals played an important role in social
formation during the preceramic period. Recent archaeological investigations in Mesoamerica are revealing comparable processes. Various ceremonial
centers in Mesoamerica appear to have developed before the establishment of maize agriculture and fully sedentary communities. At the lowland Maya
center of Ceibal, Guatemala, a formal ceremonial complex was constructed at the onset of the ceramic-use period when a substantial portion of the
population still retained some level of mobility. At this center, collective construction activities and communal rituals were central mechanisms that brought
together diverse social groups and stimulated social changes.
[109]             Discussant
Inserra, Fernanda [125] see Pecci, Alessandra
Ireland, Rosie (University of Bristol)
[280]             Discoveries in Hatteras: A Zooarchaeological Study of Native American Consumption Patterns
The Cape Creek site has been an area of continuous archaeological focus since the inception of the Croatoan Archaeological Project in 2009. This paper
will discuss the zooarchaeological methodologies implemented to study Native American use of their immediate landscape and the natural resources of the
area during the period before European contact and subsequent consumption adaptations. This will focus on the exploration and analysis of faunal data
recovered during the 2012–2015 excavation seasons. Zooarchaeological analysis has cultivated our interpretation by untangling foodway patterns both as
part of cultural interaction and symbiosis with the regional ecosystem. This in turn has highlighted patterns of seasonal occupation on Hatteras Island,
which together with material culture excavated from the Cape Creek Site has further developed our understanding of Native American behavior and
consumption models in this unique landscape.
Iriarte, Eneko [49] see Duarte, Carlos
Iriarte, Jose, Denise Schaan Pahl (Universidade Federal do Para, Brazil), Shira Maezumi (University of Exeter), Salman Khan (University of
Exeter) and Daiana Travassos (University of Exeter)
[263]             A Multiproxy Approach to Study Past Human Impact on the Lower Amazon, Santarem
This presentation summarises the preliminary results of the interdisciplinary research carried out in the context of the ‘Precolumbian Amazon-Scale
Transformation’ project that investigate the nature and scale of past human impact across the Amazon integrating archaeology, archaeobotany,
palaeoecology, soil science, botany, and remote sensing. We present initial results from the unique region around Santarém city at the confluence of the
Tapajós and the Amazon rivers, home to the Tapajós chiefdom (1000–1600 A.D.) that exhibits some of the highest densities of ADE sites in Amazonia,
including Terras Pretas and Terras mulatas, and which are located in diverse settings including both floodplain and terra firme locales. These results are
compared with other regions of Amazonia and their implications for the current debate on the nature and scale of past human impact in Amazonia are
discussed.
Irish, Joel D. [103] see Lillios, Katina
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                210
Isaakidou, Valasia [171] see Bogaard, Amy
Isbell, William [91] see Williams, Patrick Ryan
Isenbarger, Nicole (Archaeological Research Collective, Inc.)
[293]             Colonoware as Cottage Industry: Household Production and the Internal Economy at Dean Hall Plantation, South Carolina
Research into the slave settlement at Dean Hall Plantation uncovered substantial evidence for the on-site production of Colonoware. Archaeology of
household production and the anthropology of households provide us with frameworks for investigating the individual strategies of different homes as they
engaged in the internal economy. Each household was a productive unit and their ability to produce their own wares affected their needs, access, and
exchange within local markets. Identifying the different economic strategies employed in these enslaved African households allows me to ask questions
concerning how the family units spent their profits. Unlike typical Colonoware studies that focus on core West African elements of the pottery itself (i.e.,
religion, medicine, African foodways), I focus on how it was made, who was involved, and how Colonoware fits in with the site’s entire material
assemblage; Colonoware is not studied in isolation. A better incorporation of Colonowares within household assemblages highlights similarities and
differences between households at Dean Hall providing a richer interpretation of how the enslaved worked to both support themselves and maintain a
strong community.
Isendahl, Christian (University of Gothenburg) and Elizabeth Graham (University College London)
[262]             A Model for Urbanism from the Neotropics?
Drawing from our own research on food, water, and waste management, we describe the development and characteristics of settled life in the humid
neotropics with a view to isolating features or patterns that reflect sustainable trajectories. Because mainstream concepts of “the city” tend to be structured
by urban experiences that lie outside the tropics and are recentist in outlook, we suggest that there are urban (and peri-urban) phenomena in the deep past
of the neotropics that tend to be ignored as criteria for urbanism, such as the nature of greenspace, or the way “density” is conceptualized and measured.
Bringing archaeological data on neotropical cities to light broaden the comparative frame of reference on the constitution of cities as a global phenomenon.
Isendahl, Christian [263] see Söderström, Mats
Isnardis, Andrei [139] see Bueno, Lucas
Isnardis, Andrei (Federal University of Minas Gerais, Brazil)
[167]             Interaction through Time: Diachronical Composition of Rockart Panels in Central Brazil
The central Brazil has a large number of rock art sites, with remarkable stylistic variability. Trying to understand such variability, the Brazilian
archaeologists proposed chrono-stylistic units to analyse the stylistic changes in diferent regions. In some specific areas, the studies of stylistic changes
led us to perceveing another dimension of that variability: the diachronical interactions. This presentation tries to highlight specific behavior of new
paintings, when they reoccupy rock walls that are already occupied by earlier paintings, in two areas where Federal University of Minas Gerais has been
conducted archaeological research, in Minas Gerais, Brazil.
Iverson, Shannon (University of Texas)
[130]             Breaching Spiritual Borders: How Indigenous Religious Ontologies Colonized Christianity
In 1524, only three years after the military conquest of central Mexico was complete, 12 Franciscan friars arrived in New Spain to begin an ambitious
religious conversion program. The friars arrived in a territory where landscapes, buildings, and everyday objects (such as foodstuffs and ceramic objects)
were already “mythologized”—deeply imbued with supernatural connotations. For the Spanish priests, Indigenous worlds were always potential minefields
of spiritual pollution. Therefore, though they often worked very closely with and advocated on behalf of Indigenous peoples, they also attempted to maintain
a boundary between their traditions and those of the “pagans.” Using Tula, Hidalgo as a case study, I investigate those attempts at boundary maintenance
by comparing material culture from two very early colonial sites, a Franciscan chapel constructed in 1530 and a cathedral built in 1550. This study revealed
two important points: first, creativity and innovation happened within material culture of the Indigenous tradition, rather than through imitation or importation
of European goods. Second, the comparative contexts showed that Spanish friars were forced to adapt to an overwhelming tide of Indigenous religious
traditions, which would permanently impact the shape of Mexican Catholicism.
Ives, John [190] see Lints, Andrew
Izuho, Masami [21] see Gillam, Christopher
Jackson, Kendal (University of South Florida) and Thomas Pluckhahn (University of South Florida)
[55]              Preliminary Results from Pollen Analysis of Soil Cores at Crystal River (8CI1), Florida
Environmental changes have been frequently cited as causal factors in the growth and collapse of complex societies in the American south. Gulf Coast
archaeologists, in particular, have turned to generalized global paleoclimate curves in attempts to understand how ancient coastal villagers responded to
environmental shifts. Archaeological palynology, a notably under-utilized resource in the region, offers fine-grained resolution and the ability to investigate
local, as well as regional landscape transformations. We report preliminary results of palynological analysis on soil core samples taken from mound,
midden, and marsh contexts at Crystal River (8CI1), a Woodland period (ca. 1000 B.C. to A.D. 1000) ceremonial and population center on Florida’s west
central-coast. Previously reported carbon dating of mound and midden strata, along with new dates from nearby marsh deposits, provides tight
chronological control for reconstructing socioecological responses to major changes in climate and sea level. Our study aims to exhibit the untapped
potential of stratigraphic microbotanical analysis for improving the understanding of social and ecological dynamics of fisher-hunter-gatherer societies.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  211
Jackson, Alexis (Brown University)
[119]              Building Charlieu: Chronology and Asset Flow over Time at Saint Fortunatus Monastery, 872–1120 C.E.
The monastery of Saint Fortunatus in Charlieu, France, was built and rebuilt several times from the ninth to the twelfth centuries. In the twentieth century,
the monastery was excavated by American archaeologist and art historian Elizabeth Sunderland, who relied heavily on its relationship to mega-monastery
Cluny to reconstruct the smaller abbey’s chronology. However, re-examining Charlieu’s timing and phasing with attention to material and labor costs over
time exposes an alternative chronology for the site. Close attention to energy costs suggests that certain construction campaigns overlapped in time and
exposed opportunities for the medieval builders to use cost-saving measures (such as stockpiling, reuse, and limited demolition). Additionally, the use of
architectural energetics as a research method for Charlieu allows one to examine the abbey’s chronology separately from the Abbey of Cluny, whose
history and historiography exert a strong force on the smaller monastery.
Jackson, Brittany [178] see Lesure, Richard
Jackson, Brittany (Department of Anthropology, UCLA), Jacob Bongers (Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, UCLA), Susanna Seidensticker
(Department of Anthropology, UCLA) and Terrah Jones (Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, UCLA)
[206]              Picking up the Pieces: Bioarchaeological Analysis of a Looted Cist Tomb in the Mid-Chincha Valley, Peru
This poster presents a bioarchaeological analysis of a cist tomb in the mid-Chincha Valley, Peru dating to the Late Intermediate Period (c. A.D. 1100–
1450). Though the tomb was partially looted prior to excavation, we successfully reconstructed associations between elements from multiple individuals to
gain important data regarding health status and the life course during this dynamic period in late prehistory. The analysis revealed the presence of at least
7 individuals buried in the single cist tomb. These include one adult male, one adult female placed above the male, and at least 5 sub-adults scattered
throughout the tomb. Through a macroscopic analysis of health status and other indicators for all the individuals in the tomb, we outline the most probable
relationship among individuals as well as information about the life histories and health status of individuals in this population. In doing so, we demonstrate
the depth of data available through careful collection and reconstruction of looted contexts. Additionally, we provide important insights relevant to the study
of mortuary practice during the LIP in the Chincha Valley.
Jackson, Sarah E. [27] see Wright, Joshua
Jacob, Robert W. [148] see Chisholm, Linda
Jacobs, Jordan
[30]               Patriation: NAGPRA’s Regulations on Culturally Unidentifiable Human Remains, Applied
In 2010, the promulgation of new regulations under 1990s Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) threatened to upset the
hard-won balance that had developed between the legitimate interests of descendant communities and the scientific and museum communities over the
previous 20 years. Because the 10.11 rule broadly mandates the disposition of culturally unidentifiable human remains, many parties—including the
Society for American Archaeology—reacted negatively, stating that the proposed and final versions of the regulations were unworkable and subverted
NAGPRA’s original intent. This paper will use real-world examples to explore the degree to which those initial concerns have been realized in the 10.11
rule’s five first years. It will discuss how ambiguities in the regulation’s text, differing interpretations, inconsistencies in messaging by the National NAGPRA
Program, and the contradictory objectives of the Act and regulations have affected NAGPRA implementation as a whole.
Jaffe, Yitzchak [106] see Flad, Rowan
Jaffe, Yitzchak (Harvard University)
[106]              Culture and Its Varations—A Community Focused Study of Siwa and Western Zhou Cemeteries in Gansu
For his last SAA paper, Professor Chen Pochan talked about the Dian Yangfutou cemetery in Yunnan. He presented the results of an analysis that
provided new meaning on its social structure. The Dian culture was an important entity on the periphery of the Warring States and early Han world, but
apart from several references in Chinese historical documents little is known, but much is assumed, about them. Chen's study complemented previous
Dian mortuary research with site-specific practices in order to present the unique social structure of the Yangfutou community.
Like the Dian, the Siwa were a peripheral culture who were contemporaries of the Shang and Zhou polities. As the Siwa are often identified with the lesser
barbarian tribes mentioned in historical texts, their sites and artifacts are lumped together as a single cultural complex and contacts between them and the
Chinese core are assumed to be violent. In this paper, I present the variability of Siwa cemeteries and the results of analyses performed on two proximal
graveyards, one believed to be Siwa and the other Zhou. My research finds great variably among Siwa community specific burial customs and uneven
relationships with their Zhou neighbors.
James, Patrick [211] see Burke, Ariane
James, Vivian (University at Albany)
[247]              Archaeological Epistemology and Praxis: Multidimensional Context
This paper builds on ideas expressed by Taylor (1948) and Schiffer (1988) to argue that there is a foundational theory in archaeology that is pervasive,
definitive, and underlies all archaeological epistemology and praxis. It is so basic an idea that it is thought of as an assumption rather than a theory, yet it is
a major contribution from archaeology to scientific knowledge and practice. This theory is "context," which goes far beyond the three dimensions of object-
space-time advocated by Willey and Phillips (1953) or the four dimensions of provenience and association as defined by Lyman (2012). This paper
explores the multidimensionality of context as theory to recognize the unique and relevant contributions of archaeological epistemology and praxis to
science.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              212
James, Steven (California State University at Fullerton)
[258]             Dr. Fay-Cooper Cole and His Father, Rev. Dr. George L. Cole: A Forgotten Chapter of Early Archaeological Explorations in the American
                  Southwest
In the history of American archaeology, Fay-Cooper Cole (1881–1961) at the University of Chicago was instrumental in implementing standardized
archaeological field methods and training a generation of archaeologists through his Illinois field schools in the 1930s and 1940s. In recent years, there has
been some debate about the origins of the “Chicago Method” of excavation, for it has been stated that “Cole had no previous training in archaeology”
(Browman 2002). Yet before he began his significant anthropological career, Cole accompanied his father on archaeological expeditions to the American
southwest at the turn of the twentieth century and published early photos of archaeological ruins. The exploits of Rev. Cole and his son were described in
major newspapers across the country at the time, and Rev. Cole gave public lectures in southern California about the archaeological finds. Their
excavations in northern New Mexico at the site of Puyé brought them into conflict in the early 1900s with Edgar Lee Hewett and Charles Lummis who were
promoting archaeological tourism in New Mexico and the founding of the Southwest Museum in Los Angeles. The linkage between Fay-Cooper Cole and
his father’s southwestern expeditions has not been known until now, as discussed in this presentation.
Jamieson, Bruce [144] see Engelbrecht, William
Jamison, Thomas R. [125] see LeCount, Lisa
Jamsranjav, Bayarsaikhan [180] see Morgan, Christopher
Jankauskas, Rimantas [134] see Dupras, Tosha
Jansen, William
[10]              Chiefs’ Regalia and Recognition: An Unusual Example of Heritage Values and Political Agendas in Zimbabwe
Various regalia and practices for recognizing traditional chiefs were used to support political agendas for maintaining colonial rule in Zimbabwe (formerly
Rhodesia and, earlier, Southern Rhodesia) for over 120 years, becoming part of the country’s cultural heritage. After independence (1980), different
political agendas of the new regime resulted in many of these practices no longer being utilized or emphasized. By 1999, with political opposition growing,
the long-ruling regime adopted new political agendas to retain power. One result was the re-invigoration of old colonial practices for recognizing traditional
leaders and the use of these aspects of the country’s heritage as current tools to maintain a regime.
Janusek, John [25] see Blom, Deborah
Janusek, John (Vanderbilt University)
[178]             Formative Urbanism in the Andean Lake Titicaca Basin
Archaeologists tend to apply the term ‘formative’ to phases of emergent complexity in a given world region. I critically engage the concept by honing in on
what I term incipient urbanism as a core dimension of formative complexity. I draw on comparative data from across the Americas to situate formative
complexity and incipient urbanism in the Andean Lake Titicaca Basin. Archaeologists working in the region have known for years that by at least 800 B.C.,
the region was home to multiple influential, in some cases competing ritual-political centers. We tend to agree that Tiwanaku emerged as the region’s first
city later than A.D. 500, with ensuing generations of intensifying urbanism and political centralization referred to as the ‘Middle Horizon.’ I explore the urban
dynamics of the ‘pre-city’ Titicaca formative. I focus on a few cases to argue that fields of highly mobile communities identified with multiple incipient
centers at any given time, and that the ritual practices and political gatherings they periodically housed were the generative focus of emerging, dynamic
urban processes that ultimately produced Tiwanaku.
Jaquez, Celso
[44]              Chalcatzingo Monument 5: A Middle Formative Mesoamerican Expression of the Celestial Paradise
In 2004, Dr. Karl Taube outlined the ancient Mesoamerican concept of a celestial floral paradise where souls were transported after death. This
presentation will focus on what I believe to be the earliest representation of sacred transport of souls to the celestial realm. Serpent representation, often
depicted with floral adornments or exhaling flower blossoms, were often depicted as either vehicles for the transport of souls to the afterlife, or as was the
case of the cosmological murals at the late Preclassic site of San Bartolo, as the ground line for events related to creation. The origins of the Flower World
complex, however, are rooted much deeper in Mesoamerican history. Floral motifs intended to reflect the afterlife can be traced to the Olmec as early as
700 B.C.E. It is during this period of time that a monument at the site of Chalcatzingo was carved, intending to depict what would be the earliest
representation of the concept of sky serpent transport of the soul to the celestial paradise. Evidence will be presented that will reassess the interpretation of
Monument 5 at the Middle Formative Olmec site of Chalcatzingo reinterpreting and reframing it within the Flower World religious complex.
Jarriel, Katherine (Cornell University)
[257]             Modeling Small World Networks in the Cyclades (Greece)
This paper explores how community interaction can be modeled on a local scale using the Early Bronze Age Cyclades (Greece) as a case study. Small
worlds—the local, intensive networks of interaction among communities in the Aegean islands—sustained essential ties among small communities that had
limited subsistence and few labor resources (Tartaron 2008: 109). By combining material evidence for exchange and ritual deposition, environmental data,
and cost-surface analyses of travel time and distance into GIS, this paper defines one small world in the central Cyclades and seeks to explain the reasons
behind its development and cohesion. As opposed to most network analyses which describe centralization, a small world’s model of community interaction
recognizes that often the most marginal areas of human habitation require the most intense and long-lived community ties to ensure their survival (Horden
and Purcell 2000). Understanding which communities may have been incorporated into these small worlds and the degree of connectivity between them
leads to better archaeological understanding of issues surrounding inter-community interdependence (e.g., agricultural subsistence, surplus production),
social interaction (e.g., extended family ties, exogamy, rituals, and social gatherings), and material exchange.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              213
[33]              Discussant
[257]             Chair
Jarvis, Jonathan [265] see Tomka, Marybeth
Jastremski, Nicole (Florida Atlantic University) and Valentina L Martinez (Florida Atlantic University)
[204]             Bioarchaeology in Coastal Ecuador
Bioarcheology is slowly being integrated into research programs in Ecuador. Ubelaker’s 1981 groundbreaking excavation and analysis of the Ayalán
Cemetery, along the southern coast, was the first attempt at incorporating bioarchaeology in this region; however, since then, relatively little work has been
done. We seek to investigate human skeletal remains found at different archaeological sites in the Manabí province. The sample comprises diverse burial
type, age, and contextual information. Some remains were previously excavated by professionals in the 1980s, others have been recently excavated by
our team, and some are the result of community efforts to salvage archaeological materials from modern constructions. Our project is two-fold: 1) to
understand the paleodemography and burial practices as they relate to social belief systems; and 2) to continue to strengthen a decades old program of
cooperation and education with local communities. In this poster, we present some preliminary bioarchaeological findings and our work with descendant
peoples in coastal Ecuador.
Jazwa, Christopher [55] see Braje, Todd
Jazwa, Christopher (Pennsylvania State University), Michael Price (Pennsylvania State University) and Douglas Bird (Pennsylvania State
University)
[182]             Archaeological Implications for an Agent-Based Model of Subsistence Intensification in the Western Desert of Australia
Agent-based models are useful tools for modeling decision making and its system level effects when the system being modeled is too complex to be
accurately described by a simple mathematical model. This is important archaeologically because site distributions and material assemblages represent
the aggregate results of many individual subsistence decisions that take place in a complex ecological and social landscape. In this poster, we present an
agent-based model for subsistence intensification and landscape modification in the western desert of Australia. This model includes variables common in
human behavioral ecology regarding foraging decisions, including processing time, return rate, and probability of capture, as well as cultural variables such
as kinship patterns and property ownership. We demonstrate the predictive capacity of this model for interpreting the archaeological record using data for
site distribution and faunal assemblages. Of particular importance is the role of strategic landscape modification to support immediate foraging goals,
particularly with respect to anthropogenic fires. This is supported by ethnographic observations of Martu hunting and foraging patterns. The agent-based
model discussed here has broad implications for interpreting individual and group decision-making from the archaeological record.
Jazwa, Kyle (Florida State University)
[257]             Constructing Collapse: A Technological Analysis of Early-Middle Bronze Age Domestic Architecture in Mainland Greece and its Social
                  Implications
In this paper, I present a technological analysis of stone-built, domestic architecture from the transition of the Early Bronze Age to Middle Bronze Age (ca.
2200–1800 B.C.E.) in mainland Greece. Specifically, I analyze the degree of correspondence of 180 unique aspects of architectural construction and
spatial organization between contemporary structures. Because domestic architecture was most likely built by the local inhabitants and used for their daily
activities, the network of correspondence can help to suggest patterns of interaction and integration based on daily practice and the chaîne opératoire of
construction.
 This case study helps to determine more precisely the social networks of interaction during a period of great collapse in social complexity in mainland
Greece. At this time, many settlement sites are destroyed or abandoned and a new building form, apsidal structures, coexists with the earlier, rectilinear
architecture. Although the precise source of this change and destruction is still under debate, my analysis reveals that the disparity between the two
structure types is more than superficial; there are essential differences in the construction techniques related to each building form. This suggests the
presence of two or more social groups cohabitating many sites during this crisis.
Jenkins, Dennis [113] see McDonough, Katelyn
Jenkins, Jessica (University of Florida)
[133]             Oyster Mariculture on Florida’s Northern Gulf Coast: The Intensification of a Ritual Economy
Subsistence intensification among small-scale societies results from myriad circumstances, some of which involve demands that go beyond the scale of
household production and consumption. The creation and use of ritual facilities, for instance, often entail large gatherings of persons that require
provisioning. On the northern Gulf Coast of Florida, civic-ceremonial centers with elaborate mortuary facilities were established at about A.D. 200. A well-
established subsistence economy of fish, turtle, deer, and shellfish—notably oyster—may have been stressed by both the greater demand of larger
residential populations, as well as changes in sea level documented at this time. Oyster shells from one such center, Shell Mound (8LV42), register
changes in the location and intensity of harvesting over a two-century period. Comparable to clam gardening of the northwest coast, Shell Mound residents
appear to have manipulated oyster beds to enhance the production and sustainability of oysters. Evidence for oyster mariculture at Shell Mound is
evaluated in light of a ritual economy that gathered participants from the greater region and thus intensified demand for not only communal provisioning but
also the raw material (oyster shell) for constructing ritual facilities.
Jenkins, Dennis (Museum of Nat. & Cult. Hist., University of Oregon) and Joshua Ziegler (Department of Anthropology, University of Oregon)
[274]             Reevaluation of Site Chronology, Subsistence, and Unifacial Lithic Technology at the Connley Caves (35LK50), Lake County, Oregon
The Connley Caves are a series of rockshelters and caves eroded into a south-facing ridge of Miocene welded tuff, rhyolite, and fine-grained basalt in the
Fort Rock Basin of Oregon. Initially excavated by Stephen Bedwell in 1967–68, their deeply stratified late Pleistocene-early Holocene deposits produced
rich lithic and faunal assemblages potentially associated with earliest radiocarbon ages of 10,600±190 and 11,200±200. The Connley Caves data played a
major role in the development of Bedwell’s proposed ‘Western Pluvial Lakes Tradition,’ a concept emphasizing the central place of lacustrine settings to
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 214
early Holocene occupants of the Great Basin which has been replaced by the ‘Western Stemmed Tradition’ (WST). The University of Oregon field school
revisited the site in 2000, 2001, 2014, and 2015. These excavations recovered extensive unifacial WST lithic assemblages associated with Haskett style
projectile points and tiny bone needles. Protein residue analysis (Cross-over Immuno-Electrophoresis) of a substantial number of scrapers and edge
modified flakes investigates potential differential use of these tools. Distributional analysis indicates concentrations of artifacts along the east side of the
cave and deposits dipping to the west. Charcoal from primary deposits to bottom of the profile has been radiocarbon dated, providing chronologic control
for these studies.
Jennings, Richard [22] see Scerri, Eleanor
Jennings, Justin (Royal Ontario Museum)
[105]             Moving Places: The Creation of Quilcapama
During the Middle Horizon (A.D. 650–1050), the site of Quilcapampa la Antiqua in the Sihuas Valley of southern Peru grew from a small village into a major
political center. This chapter considers how the growth of Quilcapampa was linked in part to the experiences of people passing through this location.
Drawing on Alfred Gell’s idea of “technologies of enchantment,” we examine how the site’s associated geoglyphs, petroglyphs, and pathways marked and
gave meaning to a place already ritually charged because of its unique geologic properties. Movement through the site–whether by travelers, traders, or
religious supplicants–was reshaped by these technologies, the paths and glyphs serving as aggregative material citations that elevated the site’s
importance by relating the circulation of people to the circulation of cosmic forces. Quilcapampa’s political power was based at least in part on its
inhabitant’s ability to connect the coastal and highland economies. The ritual landscape created in and around the site celebrated this vertical integration,
adding a sacred justification that would help sustain Quilcapampa’s preeminent position in the valley for the next 300 years.
[186]             Discussant
[105]             Chair
Jennings, Thomas (University of West Georgia), Ashley Smallwood (University of West Georgia) and Charlotte Pevny (R. Christopher Goodwin
& Associates, Inc.)
[218]             Paleoenvironments and Paleoindians in the Lower Mississippi River Valley
Throughout much of the last Ice Age, the Mississippi River, along with its tributaries, served as a key outflow conduit for glacial meltwater, funneling and
depositing vast amounts of sediments south towards and into the Gulf of Mexico. During and after the Younger Dryas, this geomorphic system underwent
significant changes caused by meltwater drainage fluctuations and sea level oscillations. In this paper, we review how paleoenvironmental changes
associated with the Younger Dryas affected the Lower Mississippi River Valley. We then review the regional Paleoindian record, from Clovis/Gainey
through the Dalton fluorescence, and discuss whether significant changes in human technological organization or settlement coincide with specific
environmental shifts.
Jensen, Anne (Bryn Mawr College)
[210]             Report from the Ragged Edge: Vanishing Heritage on Alaska’s North Slope
The North Slope of Alaska is home to many coastal sites with spectacular preservation, due to frozen conditions. Long considered relatively stable, these
sites are now vanishing. Erosion rates have increased exponentially, due to warming permafrost, sea ice retreat and longer ice-free seasons. Coastal
erosion reveals structures and features, but they are often destroyed by storms before anything significant can be done. A single recent storm removed
over 30 meters of one site.
North Slope archaeological work is extraordinarily expensive, due to remote locations and the huge volumes of organic materials recovered. Many of the
sites are on private land, so no agency has responsibility for the heritage resources. Current funding mechanisms do not suit such situations, as the
process is such that funds cannot be available during the next field season, even if a successful proposal is prepared on very short notice.
North Slope residents are very concerned at the loss of their cultural heritage. The municipal government agency that has heritage responsibilities cannot
handle the issue alone. A variety of avenues for community participation are being developed to provide opportunities for members of the public to assist in
protecting their heritage.
[210]             Chair
Jeremiah, Kristen (Public Archaeology Laboratory, Inc. (PAL)) and Dianna Doucette (Public Archaeology Laboratory, Inc. (PAL))
[42]              Procuring and Processing Resources Down by the Brook: Archaeological Investigations at The Susquetonscut Brook Site 11 in Eastern
                  Connecticut
In July of 2015, The Public Archaeology Laboratory (PAL) completed data recovery investigations at the Susquetonscut Brook Site 11 (SB 11), in Lebanon,
Connecticut. Investigations resulted in the recovery of over 7,000 artifacts, including diagnostic projectile points, a variety of stone tools and debitage,
calcine bone, and Native pottery sherds. Cultural features exposed during investigations include post molds, pit features, fire hearths, and a roasting
platform. The overall lithic tool assemblage, fire-related cultural features, and presence of calcine bone, suggest that SB 11 was intensively utilized for
resource procurement and processing, as well as for tool manufacturing and maintenance. The data recovery investigations revealed that the site was
occupied during the Middle and Late Archaic periods, and again (although briefly) in the Woodland Period. Overall, SB 11 significantly contributes to the
precontact archaeological record of eastern Connecticut as a whole, and specifically of the Yantic River drainage. This poster will present the results of
archaeological investigations of SB 11, addressing the range of activities represented at the site, precontact land use patterns of the Yantic River drainage
in eastern Connecticut, seasonality of occupation and site use, and how activities varied from the Archaic to Woodland periods.
Jerrems, William
[155]             The Rise and Fall of the Great Basin Pleistocene Lakes and the Possible Influence on Early Paleoindian Inhabitants
Few topics have been more profound than the subject of climate change at the end of the Pleistocene and early Holocene in the Great Basin of North
America and the influence that such change may have had on the earliest human inhabitants. Rapidly shifting climate is exemplified by the filling and
waning of internally drained pluvial lake basins. Two very large lakes intermittently occupied a huge part of the northern Great Basin throughout the
                                                                         2
Pleistocene. Lake Lahontan and Lake Bonneville covered 79,000 km along with many smaller basins stretching from southeastern California to central
Oregon and east to the Rockies. Archaeological evidence is suggesting an early Paleoindian entry into the Great Basin to take advantage of what may
have been a paleoecological refugium for wildlife in a mild and moister climatic regime.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            215
[5]               Discussant
Jeske, Robert [232] see Sterner-Miller, Katherine
Jessamy, Michael [183] see Hanna, Jonathan
Jew, Nicholas [55] see Braje, Todd
Jiang, Leping [173] see Kwan, Daniel
Jimenez, Jose Concepcion [20] see Casar, Isabel
Jiménez, Gerardo [44] see Murtha, Timothy
Jodry, Margaret
[159]             Learning From Ancestors: A New Interpretation of an 11,100-year-old San Patrice Double Burial From Horn Shelter No. 2, Central Texas,
                  U.S.A.
Belongings placed with a 40-year-old man and an 11-year-old girl suggest that the adult may have been a healer. A bundle placed beneath his head
includes turtle shell bowls, antler pestles, red ochre, a deer bone stylus, sandstone abraders, and an Edward’s chert biface. Perforated shell beads, coyote
teeth including a scarifier, non-perforated badger claws, and Swainson’s hawk talons, and other items accompanied this Elder. His participation in body
painting, scarification, and incision is considered, as are well-developed features of his forearms that may suggest that he was a drummer. This Elder
appears to be the earliest healer currently recognized in the archaeological record of Turtle Island. An eyed bone needle was found with the girl, about
whom less is currently known.
[62]              Discussant
Johannesson, Erik
[60]              The Way the Wind Blows on the Steppe: The Historical Ecology of Mortuary Monuments in Mongolia (1500 B.C.–1400 A.D.)
Subject to continuous change, landscapes represent palimpsests of successive alterations over time. As such, landscapes have history. Following Carole
Crumley’s major contributions to historical ecology, this paper charts diachronic change in mortuary landscapes in Mongolia against the backdrop of three
major nomadic polities: the Xiongnu (200 B.C.–200 A.D.), The Turk Empire (550–850 A.D.), and the Mongol Empire (1200–1400 A.D.). The construction of
impressive funerary stone monuments has been a consistent feature of Mongolian prehistory since the middle of the second millennium B.C. Steppe
politics frequently involved manipulating these monuments and associated mortuary practices, making funerary contexts some of the most visible
components of nomadic polities’ political economy. Here, I will discuss how the political economies of the empires mentioned above used funerary
monuments respectively to subvert, integrate, or appropriate preceding architectural narratives and symbols present in the landscape. In doing so, they
each contributed distinctive elements to an evolving and dynamic landscape of stone monuments that now form an integral part of Mongolian cultural
heritage.
Johansson, Lindsay (University of Colorado, Boulder)
[104]             Caught Between Two Regions: A Historical Perspective on How Archaeologists Understand the Fremont Regional System
Like every archaeological region, current views concerning Fremont are influenced as much by the history of archaeologists as it is by the archaeology
itself. This paper presents a (very brief) history of Fremont archaeology and archaeological thought, focusing on how particular developments and
individuals influenced how Fremont was understood. Our aim is not to be comprehensive, and we will undoubtedly omit important events and information,
including contributions of many in attendance. Our goal instead is to contextualize the symposium and illustrate the influential nature of the present work in
general archaeological conceptualizations of Fremont.
[104]             Chair
Johansson, Lindsay [104] see Stauffer, Sara
John Jr. , Edwell [266] see Hollinger, Eric
Johns, Mischa (City of St. Augustine) and Carl Halbirt (City of St. Augustine)
[213]             Well, Well, Well: A Look into the Varieties and Distribution of Wells in Colonial St. Augustine, FL
Since the City of St. Augustine's Archaeological Preservation Ordinance was enacted in 1986, more than 200 wells have been excavated. This
presentation takes a look at some of the styles and circumstances of their construction and examines the the distribution of these various styles across the
city's archaeological zones during the city's centuries of development. Through the varieties of well construction used over the centuries we hope to glean
insight into the path that the city has taken as it has grown.
Johnson, Peri (University of Illinois at Chicago) and Müge Durusu Tanriöver (Brown University)
[79]              Hittite and Achaemenid Imperialisms in West Central Turkey
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             216
The Yalburt Yaylası Project studies a series of depressions bounded by scarps forming a corridor frequented by merchants and armies traveling between
the Anatolian plateau and western Aegean valleys of Turkey. With a settlement structure dominated by fortresses controlling access along this corridor, the
landscape could be interpreted as an imperial possession, but then archaeology would become an apology for imperial power. To contrast, we focus on
how imperialism is built from the ground up through agricultural practices and consumption. First, we present our study of ceramics of settlements that
were imperial foundations located on the corridor—Bozhöyük (Bronze Age, Hittite) and Codurun Höyük (Iron Age, Achaemenid)—to study practices of
consumption and how inhabitants participated in, or rejected, imperial cultural practices. Changes that happen between the Hittite and Achaemenid periods
are further examined to reveal how practices reflect local preferences and production techniques. Bozhöyük, for instance, reveals hybrid strategies in
consumption vessels, demonstrating the unique character this settlement crafted between regional and imperial centers. Second, we turn our attention to a
northern branch of the depressions, the Kurugöl, to discuss how places are continually rooted again in their landscapes as each new empire appears on
the horizon.
Johnson, Amber [94] see Zeanah, David
Johnson, Amber (Truman State University)
[94]               Chair
Johnson, Rachel (University of Pittsburgh), Patrick Mullins (University of Pittsburgh) and Brian Billman (University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill)
[207]              Households and Empire: A pXRF Study of Metal Artifacts from Cerro la Virgen
The Chimú Empire controlled much of the Peruvian north coast during the Late Intermediate Period (1000–1476 A.D.), including the hinterland site of Cerro
la Virgen (CLV). Previous research suggests that CLV could be viewed as a facet of the Chimú plan for the organization of rural areas, a plan that included
controlled access to water, the restriction of rural settlement, and agricultural management through rural administrative centers. This model for local rule
ultimately suggests that resources in this empire were under tight control, a control that would likely extend to items of considerable exchange value, such
as metals. This project aims to examine the composition of metal artifacts from CLV to investigate how these social factors may have influenced Chimú
metallurgy. Artifacts excavated from CLV were separated into several categories, by both type and overarching function (ornamental, utilitarian, etc.). The
artifacts were then compared based on compositional analysis performed via portable x-ray fluorescence (pXRF). Trends in the composition of these
differing artifact types suggest the manner in which certain metal objects were smelted or procured. Ultimately, these compositional trends may be able to
improve our understanding of Chimú metallurgy, thereby illuminating some of the larger elements of Chimú socio-economic structure.
Johnson, Erlend (Tulane)
[212]              The Making of a Hinterland: Evaluating Classic Period Copan’s Political Organization and Territorial Limits with Data from the Cucuyagua
                   and Sensenti Valleys
The ability of Maya Ajaws to project political power outside of their capitals is a widely debated topic: some investigators sustain centralized territorial
models for Maya political organization, and others defend segmentary models. The location of Copan on the southern fringe of the Maya world gives a
unique opportunity to study this phenomenon because political boundaries in this multicultural environment are more visible than in other Maya kingdoms.
We will explore the tempo and degree of political changes in the Cucuyagua and Sensenti valleys southeast of Copán. We will present arguments that
suggest that the expansion of Copán during the Classic Period transformed the two valleys: integrating the first valley into the Copán polity and
transforming the political geography of the second valley. This suggests that the rulers of Copan had the ability to instigate major, structural changes
outside of their seats of power and that a centralized model of political organization may be more apt for Copán.
Johnson, Nadia (Penn State)
[237]              Wild Resource use in Early Colonial New Spain
In 1570, 50 years after the conquest of Mexico, King Philip II of Spain sent one of his court physicians, Francisco Hernández de Toledo, to the new colony.
The goal of this venture was to compile a detailed account of the natural history of New Spain, emphasizing indigenous medicine and the uses of local
plant, animal, and mineral resources. The result of his efforts was a series of volumes, describing in detail the virtues of local Mexican resources, and his
own observations of Mexico. This work was subsequently distilled into the Quatro libros de la naturaleza y virtudes de las plantas y animals, which remains
one of the most comprehensive studies of indigenous natural resource use, and which will provide the basis for this project. This study will collate and
quantify each of Hernández’ references to the use of natural resources, and to then classify them in three broad categories on the basis of use: food,
medicine, and craft production. These will be further divided, where relevant, to consider additional variables, such as the availability, status, etc. for
specific resources. The resulting information will be presented in concert with observations regarding wild resource use made by other sixteenth-century
chroniclers.
Johnston, Cheryl (Western Carolina University), Paul Martin (University of Memphis), John Schweikart (ASC Group, Inc.), Lucas Rolleri
(Southern Illinois University) and Jane Brown (Western Carolina University)
[37]               Forensic Archaeological Field Training: Pedagogy and Practice
In the discipline of archaeology, the field school experience is considered the fundamental training that all archaeologists will experience along their
educational pathway. These trainings are designed to teach the basic methods and critical thinking skills that are needed to conduct archaeological
investigations. Within the realm of forensic anthropology and forensic archaeology an additional set of field school experiences have been developed to
address the recovery of human remains and associated items in a forensic setting. As searches for human remains require a multi-disciplinary approach so
should the field school education of future forensic anthropologists and forensic archaeologists. We propose a model for forensic archaeology field training,
suggest best practices, and discuss pedagogical considerations and a multidisciplinary approach to forensic archaeological field training.
Johnston, Philip
[41]               Fragments of Identity: Systematic Ceramic Analysis, Technology, and Colonial Process
This poster reports the results of a systematic examination of composition for 188 ceramic samples from the Bay of Cádiz (Spain), and discusses the
socio-economic ramifications of the findings. Petrographic, NAA, and portable X-Ray Fluorescence (pXRF) analysis focused on 166 Phoenician and
Iberian sherds dating to c. 800–550 B.C.E. An additional 12 geological and ceramic samples were included as controls for the provenance determination.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              217
The findings reveal unexpected relationships between chemical and microscopic traits in ceramics from the Bay of Cádiz, underscoring the importance of
both archaeometric approaches to pottery composition. Because samples were selected from several successive occupational phases, and from vessels of
both Phoenician and Indigenous style, the compositional data provide a window into the development of pottery production in the colonial context. The
poster highlights a few of these, namely, traditionally Phoenician vs. indigenous practices of raw material acquisition; the effects of the colonial context on
knowledge transmission between generations of potters; and the appearance of mixed Phoenician-Iberian technological style.
Jolie, Edward (Mercyhurst University), Verónica Lema (Universidad Nacional de La Plata-CONICET) and Sara López Campeny (Universidad
Nacional de Tucumán-CONICET)
[62]             Terminal Pleistocene/Early Holocene Perishable Technologies and the Peopling of the Andes
Accumulating evidence from Terminal Pleistocene and Early Holocene sites in the Americas attests to the antiquity and sophistication of perishable
technologies such as cordage, netting, basketry, and textiles. Although the record of perishable industries is limited principally by factors of preservation,
reevaluation of the available data for plant fiber-based technologies, and direct radiocarbon dates, continue to provide insights into the importance of these
earliest perishable artifacts and their implications for the peopling of the Americas. This paper reviews the existing database relevant to understanding the
earliest perishable artifacts from South America with particular reference to their role in the colonization of high altitude landscapes. Comparison with data
from broadly contemporaneous sites at lower elevations provides important spatiotemporal context.
Jolie, Edward [63] see Weeks, William
Jones, Katherine (University of Georgia)
[7]              Geospatial Analysis of Ogeechee River Valley Settlement Patterns
The Ogeechee River Valley lies between the Oconee and Savannah River valleys in central Georgia. It is a slow moving blackwater river, unlike the faster-
flowing Oconee and Savannah Rivers. More than 7,000 sites have been recorded in the Ogeechee Basin, compared to 20,200 sites within the Savannah
drainage and 9,800 sites within the Oconee drainage. Using existing site data ranging from the Paleoindian through Historic periods, I test whether the
number of sites recorded for each basin is indicative of past settlement behaviors or disparities in survey coverage. This analysis systematically evaluates
how currently known settlement patterns relate to physiographic and geomorphic conditions within the Ogeechee Basin. I compare results with analogous
data from the Savannah and Oconee basins, and show that Ogeechee Basin occupational history may not mirror either adjacent basin. I argue that long-
term settlement pattern changes on the Ogeechee deviate from the Savannah and Oconee due to the formation and reformation of social territories and
subsistence systems associated with settlement along a blackwater swamp compared to faster-flowing river systems to the east and west.
Jones, Douglas [28] see Quitmyer, Irvy
Jones, Brian (University of Connecticut)
[61]             The Thirty-Three Year History of Cultural Resource Management at the Mashantucket Pequot Reservation
The Mashantucket Pequot Reservation is today one of the best-researched heritage landscapes in New England. Cooperation between the Mashantucket
Pequot Tribe and UConn archaeologists has been positive and ongoing since the early 1980s. Initial heritage management work on the Reservation
focused on ethnohistorical research and the documentation of Pequot homesteads as well as important off-reservation historical sites such as Mystic Fort.
Archaeological work was largely limited to extensive reconnaissance surveys aimed at identifying undocumented sites. With the success of Foxwoods
Casino and the expansion of the tribal land base in the 1990s, Reservation development increased at a rapid pace and tribal archaeology shifted to
contract-based Cultural Resource Management efforts. Development resulted in a notable increase in data recovery excavations of threatened sites. With
the establishment of the Mashantucket Pequot Museum and Research Center, and a Tribal Historic Preservation Office, research and mitigation efforts
continue under a more formalized in-house organization that includes full-time staff and relies on cooperation and communication between many Tribal
departments.
Jones, Jennifer (University of Cantabria), Ana B. Marin Arroyo (University of Cantabria) and Michael Richards (University of British Columbia)
[134]            Isotopes and Environments: Exploring Palaeoenvironmental Change during the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic in the Cantabrian Region,
                 Northern Spain
The Cantabrian region northern Spain was an archaeologically important region throughout the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic, and was home to some of
the last surviving Neanderthals in Europe, and during the Last Glacial Maximum the region acted as a refugium for plants, animals, and humans. Changes
in the environment are thought to have been driving factors behind the extinction of the Neanderthals, the rise of Anatomically Modern Humans (AMHs),
and later the development of the rich cave art assemblages. Carbon and nitrogen stable isotope analysis of hunted animal bone collagen from Palaeolithic
levels of archaeological sites can be used to understand past environments at this time. Changes in the environment including factors such as
temperature, aridity produce different isotopic signatures within plants, and the animals that consume them, and analysis of these specimens on a large
scale. This research uses large scale isotopic analysis of analysis of animal bones, before making comparisons to existing zooarchaeological
assemblages, to characterise how the environment changed, and human responses to these environmental changes throughout the Middle and Upper
Palaeolithic in this archaeologically important region, at this crucial time in human evolution.
Jones, Travis (The University of Georgia), Todd Kristensen (The University of Alberta) and Jeff Speakman (The University of Georgia)
[148]            Western Canadian pXRF Obsidian Sourcing
In January of 2015, researchers from the Royal Alberta Museum, Canada, and the University of Georgia Center for Applied Isotope Studies collaborated
on one of the largest geochemical analyses of archaeological obsidian via portable X-Ray Fluorescence (pXRF) to date in western Canada, a region
previously lacking large scale obsidian XRF analysis. This study is part of a larger project to synthesize obsidian use in the eastern Rocky Mountains. The
Canadian sample consists of approximately 750 artifacts from throughout the province, representing much of Alberta’s prehistory. The pXRF methodology
used here has been successfully implemented in a wide range of geographic contexts to source meta-volcanic artifacts. Comparing trace elemental
concentrations to known geologic sources, we seek to gain insight into prehistoric obsidian procurement and use in the region. Preliminary analysis
demonstrates the majority of the samples’ geologic origins are from known sources in the northwestern United States (primarily Idaho), British Columbia,
and Alaska. This study is a first step toward expanding our understanding of obsidian resource procurement and transportation throughout the eastern
Rocky Mountains. This information can be incorporated into other data sets in order to establish postulates for possible community home range
dimensions, differential access to goods, and trade patterns.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                218
Jones, Eric (Wake Forest University)
[174]             GIS as Method or Theory: The Settlement Ecology of Middle-Range Societies in Southeastern North America, A.D. 1000–1600
In this paper, I explore the relationship between method and theory in spatial archaeology that employs Geographic Information Systems (GIS). I do this
through an examination of the settlement ecology of societies of varying sociopolitical complexity in the southeastern United States. I use GIS to estimate
past environments and landscapes and record attributes of settlement sites, their catchments, and surrounding areas, which I then analyze using spatial
statistical methods. Comparisons of different sets of sites and different landscapes around them show hierarchical Mississippian and egalitarian Piedmont
Village Tradition (PVT) communities had different settlement strategies and occupied different environments. These patterns suggest certain environments
were more conducive to the appearance and persistence of sociopolitical complexity. This interpretation has a cultural ecological ring to it. However, a
complete explanation requires a combination of cultural, behavioral, and historical ecological theory, especially when we account for the appearance of
Mississippian traits on a small number of later PVT sites. This case study offers an opportunity to examine the role of GIS in the entire research process.
Additionally, it provides a basis for a discussion of the role of GIS in the past, present, and future development of archaeological methods and theory.
Jones, Ashley (Raba Kistner Environmental)
[186]             Moderator
Jones, Terrah (UCLA Cotsen Institute of Archaeology), Jennifer Larios, Rudi Vanzin, Brittany Jackson (UCLA Department of Anthropology) and
Jacob Bongers (UCLA Cotsen Institute of Archaeology)
[205]             Houses on the Hill: Preliminary Results of the Excavations at Casa Grande (PV57-42) in Chincha, Per
This poster presents the results of the preliminary excavation work done at sector A of the site Casa Grande (PV57-42) in the Chincha Valley, Peru. Initial
field work focused on determining both the construction technique used to build these extensive terraces and identifying how these spaces were used by
the mid-valley Chincha inhabitants. Excavation and preliminary laboratory processing focused on the ceramics and botanical remains recovered during the
active field season, with further analysis pending exportation. These initial results yield promising information about the use of space within a sub-set of the
terraces, as well as a glimpse into the different types of industry that were practiced within the mid-Chincha Valley during the Late Intermediate Period and
Late Horizon.
Jones, Emily Lena (University of New Mexico)
[218]             North-South as Well as East-West: Moroccan and Iberian Pleistocene-Holocene Archaeofaunas in an Atlantic Context
While Pleistocene-Holocene archaeofaunas from the Iberian peninsula are relatively well-documented, these data are often considered in isolation from the
larger Atlantic context. In this paper, I consider archaeofaunas from Eastern Iberia—Portugal and the Galicia region of Spain—in comparison with what we
know about animal exploitation in Atlantic Morocco and the east coast of North America. I assess the nature and completeness of the archaeofaunal record
in these regions and explore proposed differences in exploitation patterns.
Jones, John [238] see McKillop, Heather
Jordan, Alissa (University of Florida)
[3]               Contemporary Archaeology of Haitian Vodou Caching
Kneeling on bare earth, the Priestess takes a handful of store-bought confections from their glinting metallic bag and tosses them into a living cache.
Candles and carved stones protrude at the sides of this hole, marking intrusions made and remade so many times they have now been lost to memory
(even as their matter persists). Following Victor Buchli and Gavin Lucas’ call to study contemporary material culture archaeologically, this paper uses and
presents ethnographic data collected from observing a series of contemporary Hatian Vodou caching rituals over 4 years. It presents an event-based
analysis which considers the creation and maintenance of caching practices as expressive and material networks which are a co-mingling of past, present,
and future.
Jordan, Stacey (AECOM)
[51]              Colonizing the Colonial: Viewing Influence through the Lens of Coarse Earthenware at the Dutch East India Company Cape of Good Hope,
                  South Africa
Archaeological collections are more than a record of form and function. Historiographic analyses can assist in placing material remnants in their broader
social context. Investigations of the production, producers, use, and users of locally produced coarse earthenware at the seventeenth- and eighteenth-
century Dutch East India Company Cape of Good Hope illustrate the complex fractals of cultural influence in this particular multi-cultural context. Here, like
in many colonial situations, power was exerted not only over the colonized—itself not a single homogenous group—but over and between various
populations of the colonizers. Moreover, cultural identity was simultaneously curated and conflicted through the use of material culture. The materially
necessary adjustments in daily experience in colonial contexts create an environment ripe for the development of new syncretic identities. Without denying
the inherent imbalance in power dynamics in colonial situations, analyses of material cultural can help reveal its role in the subtle shifts of culture and
identity that occur in the forgotten moments of everyday experience.
Jordan, Keith (California State University, Fresno)
[117]             Human Sacrifice at Tula: Reputation, Representation, and Actuality
Since the mid-twentieth century, it has been a staple of the archaeological and art historical literature on Tula, echoed in popular coverage of the site, that
its art is dominated by themes of human sacrifice, and that Toltec involvement in this practice exceeded that of prior Mesoamerican cultures in scope and
intensity. In fact, there are no direct representations of human sacrifice in Tula’s art. Although the eclectic Tula art tradition drew on many sources, it
rejected the graphic portrayals of sacrifice and bloodletting characteristic of Classic Maya and Veracruz styles in favor of the more indirect sacrificial
imagery derived from Teotihuacan art. My paper examines both the archaeological and the iconographic evidence of human sacrifice at Tula to present a
more nuanced and current assessment of the role of ritual violence in the city’s religion and politics.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              219
Jordan, James [217] see Mason, Owen
Jorgensen, Mads [46] see Cheong, Kong
Jorissen, Philippa (Leiden University)
[3]               You Are What You Eat?—Did Food Consumption Reflect Status, Ethnical or Cultural Differentiation on the Island Of Saba Between the
                  Late 18th to the Early 20th Century?
Social position, ethical origin, cultural background and diet are found to be strongly intertwined, therefore faunal remains provide a unique opportunity to
explore differences in diet between different ethnical groups and/or social classes. Hence we studied the zoological remains from the pre- and post-
emancipation of three archaeological sites on Saba (late eighteenth to the early twentieth century), which were inhabited by different groups of people,
such as impoverished people of European descent, freed people of African descent, and enslaved people of African descent. We found that the major
components of their diets were fish, molluscs, and domesticated animals. However, the diet on the site that was inhabited by people from all backgrounds
was mostly comprised of marine resources which resembled closely the dietary pattern of precolonial times. This site also displayed the least indications
for socially high valued foods compared to the other sites. The other two sites, which were inhabited by people from similar backgrounds, sustained a
terrestrial based diet. These results further illustrate how zooarchaeological remains used together with ecological concepts can contribute to a better
understanding of past life ways and this especially for groups who were barely visible from historical accounts.
Joseph, J (New South Associates)
[243]             Section 106 @ Fifty—A Look Back and a Glimpse Ahead
My first job in cultural resource management was in 1976, the American bicentennial. While I thus missed the first decade of the National Historic
Preservation Act and Section 106, I have been actively engaged since. The first 50 years of Section 106 resulted in profound changes to the field of
archaeology. From the growth of the cultural resource industry and private sector cultural resource management firms; to NAGPRA and the treatment of
human remains; to the creation of Tribal Historic Preservation Offices; to a profusion of archaeology positions in agencies and institutions; to the creation of
a cultural resource trade association (ACRA); to the advent of new technologies ranging from the desktop computer and fax to the GPR, GPS, GIS, and
LiDAR; to the proliferation of guidelines and regulations; to the recognition that descendant communities deserve a seat at the table; and to the realization
that Section 106 has neglected the public; Section 106 has been significantly transformed. My presentation will look at the changes the first 50 years have
witnessed while also suggesting some of the trends that may influence the next 50 years.
[293]             Discussant
Joy, Brandy [293] see Smith, Karen
Joyce, Arthur [53] see Barber, Sarah
Joyce, Arthur (University of Colorado at Boulder), Sarah Barber (University of Central Florida) and Jeffrey Brzezinski (University of Colorado at
Boulder)
[117]             Earth Offerings as Sacrifice in Formative Period Coastal Oaxaca
This paper considers the relationship between sacrifice and the people, practices, and objects assembled on later Formative Period public buildings in the
lower Río Verde Valley, Oaxaca. Excavations in public buildings at numerous sites in the region have found evidence for ceremonial practices including
the emplacement of earth offerings, the interment of human bodies in cemeteries, and ritual feasting. The objects emplaced in public buildings as offerings
included ceramic vessels, greenstone, crystal, and animals. Using ethnohistoric and comparative archaeological evidence, we argue that the
emplacement of objects and human bodies were simultaneously acts that ensouled and fed animate buildings as well as forms of sacrifice through which
people negotiated their relationships with divinities and other universal forces. In feasting people shared in the sustenance provided by deities in return for
acts of feeding/sacrifice. The entities assembled on public buildings therefore suggest that transactions between humans and divinities were alimentary in
form, defining a Formative-Period version of the sacred covenant documented in late prehispanic and early colonial texts and inferred from
representational art found in the lower Verde and elsewhere in Formative Mesoamerica. These sacrificial acts were also cosmogenic in that they reenacted
the cosmic creation and renewed the world.
[169]             Discussant
Joyce, Rosemary (University California Berkeley)
[163]             Rethinking Ceramics as Evidence of Regional Interaction
In Central America, recent research crosses national boundaries that once divided archaeological analyses, including by identifying historically related
ceramics with regionalized names. This paper argues for using contemporary concepts that do not tie us to the culture historical approach, with its
equivalences of a people, a material culture, a language, and an identity, to fully understand emerging data. Culture history worked as a preliminary step to
clarify relations in areas like Mesoamerica where political centralization and markets led to regional integration of material culture. Central America is
different, with an astonishing diversity of things made within much smaller territories. In this paper, I use my work on Honduras' Ulua Polychrome and Las
Vegas Polychrome traditions, and related Salua Polychrome of El Salvador and Galo Polychrome of the Nicoya area, to demonstrate a practice-based
framework employing the concepts of technological style, communities of practice, and constellations of practice. I argue that the level of action for pottery
production and use was the town or local community of practice, not an abstract regional culture or language-based ethnic group. Using models at these
scales that take people as active agents will allow the greatest benefit from the newly enriched research landscape.
Juarez, Santiago [128] see De Lucia, Kristin
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                220
Juarez, Santiago (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[128]             The Social Archaeology of Politics
In this paper, we consider how social archaeology can inform the study of political organization and power, and provide insight into the tumultuous events
taking place today. Social archaeology has long made significant contribution towards understanding the conflicts that occur between different classes,
ethnicities, and factions. However, social archaeology is equally capable of making important insights into top down processes and address broader
topics of state organization and politics. Continuing the tradition, we consider how political systems in the Aztec Empire and the Preclassic Maya region
can help unpack and deconstruct the highly polarizing events taking place right now. For example, how can a Preclassic Maya city provide new
perspectives in understanding urbanization and inequality? Such approaches are not only routed within a history of social theory, but also stem from the
perspective of a feminist, and a Latino scholar. Our ultimate goal is not just to argue for why social archaeology matters, but also how the diversity of
perspectives and research agendas is vital to the survival of our field.
[128]             Chair
Juday, Glenn P. [217] see Alix, Claire
Judy, Barbara [210] see Adler, Rachel
Junge, Justin (Portland State University) and Shelby Anderson (Portland State University)
[185]             Using GIS to Evaluate Models of Late Holocene Settlement Patterns in Northwest Alaska
Changing Arctic coastal settlement patterns are often linked to late Holocene environmental change. In northwest Alaska, archaeologists hypothesize that
environmental variability was a major factor in both growing coastal population density between 1000 and 500 ya, and subsequent decreasing population
density between 500 ya and the contact era. After 500 ya, people dispersed to smaller settlements in coastal areas, and perhaps, upriver. This
hypothesized pattern is based on older research that has not been evaluated with new archaeological data; the proposed geographic distribution of sites
has not been examined. We use GIS to evaluate the evidence for a geographic redistribution of Arctic peoples during the Late Holocene. We draw on site
location data and site attribute data including site type, number of houses, and average size of houses. These data are incorporated into a GIS database
and then global and local Moran’s I and Getis-Ord Gi* spatial analyses are used to test whether redistribution occurred and if key settlement locations
shifted after 500 ya. The results of this work build our understanding of regional settlement patterns during the late Holocene, and point to a GIS method
that is applicable to other regions and temporal scales.
Just, Bryan
[15]              Painted Media among the Late Classic Maya
Although no physical examples of paper books are known from the Late Classic Period Maya, scholarly considerations of Maya art have consistently
considered this form of painting primary: as the inspiration of—if not the direct source for—representations in other media such as murals, finely slipped
pottery, or relief-carved stelae. Due to fundamental differences in scale, form, and content, however, these media more likely played rather distinct social
roles. Indeed, existing materials indicate that subject matter could rarely appear in any medium, and artists approached the task of social communication in
quite different ways depending on their medium. Through a comparative consideration of the various modes of Late Classic Maya visual expression, this
paper will question the presumed primacy of the paper book in Late Classic Maya visual culture and seek to outline how we might deepen our
understanding of an object class that is now absent.
Kageyama, Masa [211] see Burke, Ariane
Kahn, Jennifer (The College of William and Mary)
[75]               Smallholders, Social Practices, and the Advent of Inequality: A Case Study from the Society Island Chiefdoms (East Polynesia)
I discuss comparative analyses of Society Island residential complexes to understand the role of smallholders in the advent of social complexity. In
particular, I investigate the role of commoner production and its relationship to the elaboration of social inequality in late prehistory. Integrated spatial
analysis of activity areas, artifacts, and sub-surface features provides data for understanding variation in production and consumption activities (tool
production, subsistence production, surplus storage, tribute) at Ma’ohi residential complexes. Analyzed through the lens of the House Society perspective,
chronometric trends in the establishment and growth of houses highlight notable differences between Principal and Affiliated houses in terms of access to
raw materials, specialized labor, and surplus production. The net results of these actions translated to social and financial strength which would have
served to elevate and perpetuate the status of particular houses and their social networks within neighborhoods and communities. Analysis of variation in
household activities within the context of community layout allows for an understanding that production and consumption activities are not merely a
reflection of household economy, but are a form of interaction and negotiation that structure social relations among smallholders and are linked to inter-
community displays of wealth, status, and power.
Kaiser, Bruce (Bruker), Jennifer DeGraffenried (U.S. Army Dugway Proving Ground) and Nathan Nelson (Logan Simpson)
[200]             A Novel Method to Accurately Source Obsidian and Basalt Artifacts
Development of a Unique Sourcing and Artifact Analysis Technique and Database for Dugway Proving Grounds in Utah, U.S.A.
Using the Tracer III SD xrf laboratory system as a key component, a very precise and detailed methodology was developed for the elemental
measurement, material type identification, and geological source location of artifacts found on Dugway Proving Grounds.Following eight steps led to a very
precise and accurate elemental analysis of the Dugway basalt and obsidian artifacts and sources in this study. The study involved the source of over 3,000
artifacts both basalt and obsidian, and resulted in ground breaking knowledge concerning the peoples of that time in Utah and surrounding States.
Kaiser, Luke (University of Arizona)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                    221
[257]              The Role of Intercommunity Feasting in the Development of Social and Economic Complexity at Early Bronze Age Mochlos
 Feasting is a ritualistic social activity that also serves to strengthen the solidarity of a group or reinforce its hierarchical structure. Most frequently found as
an intragroup activity, it also occurs at the intergroup level. In this paper, I discuss intercommunity feasting as a social, political, and economic motivator
that generated interactions that flourished during the Protopalatial Period. Several deposits from the Minoan site of Mochlos in Eastern Crete bridge the
entire Prepalatial Period at Mochlos (3200–1900 B.C.E.). They are capable of tracing communal eating and drinking from its inception at Mochlos through
the final stages of the Prepalatial Period after which a proto-state civilization appears on Crete. I finally compare the evidence from Mochlos with two case
studies in Anatolia and Peru. Both of these case studies are of a similar level of complexity to Mochlos and also used feasting to promote and maintain
cooperation between interregional allies and rivals. Upon synthesis, I propose that the societies that emerged at the end of the Prepalatial Era were
products of not only of cooperative but also competitive interactions between paramount individuals that took place during both large and small scale
intercommunity feasts.
Kalawe, Keonelehua [227] see Rossen, Jack
Kaldahl, Eric (Amerind Foundation, Inc.)
[265]              Amerind Foundation Collection and Archives
The Amerind Foundation of Dragoon, Arizona, is a private anthropological research center with an 80 year history. The Amerind conducted foundational
studies in southeastern Arizona, but is best known for the Joint Casas Grandes Project (JCCP) conducted in Chihuahua between 1958 and 1961. The
Arizona collections consist of southeast Arizona sites dating from the Hohokam Colonial Period to the Spanish Presidio Santa Cruz de Terrenate. The New
Mexico collection includes material recovered at the Mimbres site of Wind Mountain. Although the collections generated by the JCCP were returned to
INAH Chihuahua, the Amerind holds all of the project’s photographs, field notebooks, and other archival documentation. For the Arizona and New Mexico
projects, the Amerind also maintains extensive archives. Unpublished manuscripts detail surveys in the U.S.-Mexico borderlands from sites in Arizona,
Chihuahua, New Mexico, and Sonora. Amerind's longest serving research director Dr. Charles Di Peso, who worked at Amerind from 1948 to 1982,
maintained extensive correspondence with colleagues in the U.S. and Mexico: documents that shed light on the history of our discipline. The Amerind
encourages researchers to apply to become visiting scholars. Anyone with interests in the Amerind's collections may discuss those interests with Amerind's
Chief Curator at this session.
Kamenov, George (University of Florida), Michelle LeFebvre (University of Florida), Susan deFrance (University of Florida), Geoff DuChemin
(SEARCH Inc., Gainesville, Florida) and John Krigbaum (University of Florida)
[222]              Zooarchaeological Records and Isotopic Systematics of Bahamian Hutia (Geocapromys ingrahami): Are the Bahamas a Distinct Isotopic
                   Province?
Although the Bahamas are not geologically part of the Caribbean, they are culturally associated with the rest of the Caribbean Islands. Due to their unique
geology the Bahamas can potentially be a distinct Pb and Sr isotopic province when compared to the rest of the Caribbean Iislands. Here, we present the
results of isotopic analysis of archaeological Bahamian hutia specimens from two precolumbian sites on Crooked Island (Crooked Island 8 and Crooked
Island 14) located in the Bahamas, and one site on Providenciales (Palmetto Junction), located in the Turks & Caicos. The data confirm the capability of
the Sr isotope system to identify local origin. In contrast, preliminary Pb isotope ratios suggest that Pb in the hutia enamel is contaminated by modern
anthropogenic Pb. Sr isotopes, in combination with C, N, and O light isotope ratios help to clarify the nature of Bahamian hutia exploitation during later pre-
columbian history (post A.D. 800) and shed light on the role of the animal in human subsistence and economy. Finally, the results are presented within
broader biogeochemical context through comparison with geological and late twentieth century Bahamian hutia isotopic signatures that help to establish a
robust isotopic baseline for the Bahamas.
Kamenov, George [295] see Krigbaum, John
Kamp, Kathryn (Grinnell College) and John Whittaker (Grinnell College)
[107]              The Night is Different: Sensescapes and Affordances
Archaeology has paid scant attention to the differences between diurnal and nocturnal landscapes, and the differences in meaning and use implied and
constrained by the change from day to night. We also neglect the multi-sensoral nature of the landscape. Vision is emphasized almost to the exclusion of
hearing, smell, and touch. Humans are diurnal animals emphasizing vision, and modern archaeologists are further biased by our brightly lit world of
electricity, neon, and LED screens in which a nighttime without artificial light and cultural clutter is optional. We need to examine biology, psychology, and
cross-cultural behavior to understand both the limitations imposed by the relative and variable darkness of night, and the potential offered by nocturnal
landscapes when analyzed as sensescapes, rather than as viewscapes. We discuss the prehistoric world of the southwest, where considering the
difference between night and day, may inform us about the lived experience of occupants of the Flagstaff region.
Kamp-Whittaker, April (Arizona State University), Andrea Barker (Whitman Elementary School, Mesa, Arizona) and Margaret Nelson (Arizona
State University)
[40]               Hohokam Communities: Taking Risks and Making Trade-offs
Hohokam Risks and Trade-offs is the product of research funded by an NSF Coupled Human and Natural Systems grant that focused on the role of social
and ecological diversity in reducing risk of food shortfall or supporting food security. Several teaching tools were developed to demonstrate to students the
risks undertaken and trade-offs made by prehistoric southwestern groups in the selection of residential locations. The curriculum, based on a platform
designed by NASA, engages students in the analytical thought processes undertaken in archaeological research and requires them to synthesize the
results of their findings to share in a classroom setting.
Kaner, Simon [152] see Nixon, Sam
Kangas, Rachael [260] see Gidusko, Kevin
Kangas, Rachael (Florida Public Archaeology Network)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            222
[260]              It’s a Bird, It’s a Plane, It’s Public Engagement! One Summer Library Program as an Effective Outreach Platform
Summer library programming is a crucial element of the Florida Public Archaeology Network’s (FPAN) outreach efforts. Library programs are a common
and important part of FPAN's work as they allow us to explore multiple approaches to engagement and education. The program "Superheroes of
Stewardship" was developed by FPAN for the Orange County Public Library System's summer programming in 2015, and serves as an example of the
efficacy of queer archaeology in engaging and educating young audiences. This program is designed to teach children about archaeological methods and
stewardship while maintaining some core concepts of queer archaeology, such as non-gendered interpretation of data. This program is similar to the
majority of FPAN's programming, however, it was developed as an application of queer archaeology in this type of outreach setting.
Kansa, Eric (Open Context / UC Berkeley)
[261]              Toward Slow Data in Archaeology
Digital data play increasingly prominent roles in archaeological research. However, data tend to be considered “raw materials” that fuel scholarship and not
as intellectual contributions in their own right. Most attention on “research data management” focuses on “management” where data are considered mainly
through the lens of Taylorism (bureaucratic compliance, standards, incentives, and metrics). Research data management largely aims for “Big Data”
research opportunities achieved through centralization, economies of scale, and the efficient production of measurable research outcomes. To provoke
debate, this paper suggests an alternative model of “Slow Data” that emphasizes thoughtful consideration of data throughout the research process. Our
experience with Open Context shows that to be usable by a wider community, data require substantive intellectual investment in modeling and validation.
Ideally, researchers should plan for reuse outcomes well before they start data collection. Thus, the intellectual investment underlying data curation must
become more integral to the whole practice of archaeology. Rather than simply rewarding high throughput and impact for easily-measured research
outputs (papers or even archived datasets), greater recognition for the research process will promote better contextualization of data, leading to meaningful
research outcomes from data integration, greater reproducibility, and better ethical practice.
[4]                Chair
Kansa, Eric C. [176] see Kansa, Sarah Whitcher
Kansa, Sarah Whitcher (AAI / Open Context) and Eric C. Kansa (Open Context & UC Berkeley)
[176]              Questioning Data Standards in Zooarchaeology
The scholarly community is giving data increasing attention in recent years, and solutions for data management are emerging. However, seeing data
management primarily as a matter of compliance means that we face continued data loss, as many datasets enter repositories without adequate
description to enable their reuse. Furthermore, because many researchers have little experience reuse of public data, they lack understanding and
incentives to consider changes in their own research practices to facilitate future reuse. Improving data reuse raises the issue of data standards. While
many researchers employ standards for simplifying comparisons across datasets, they are constrained by the fact that standards reflect research goals
and agendas that are not necessarily universally shared. This paper discusses Linked Open Data (LOD) as an approach to improving data description,
intelligibility, and discoverability to facilitate reuse. I present examples of how annotating zooarchaeology datasets with LOD can facilitate data integration
without forcing standardization. I conclude by recognizing that data sharing is not without its challenges. However, the research community’s careful
attention and recognition of datasets as valuable scholarly outputs will go a long way to ensuring that the products of our work are much more widely
useful.
Kantner, John (University of North Florida)
[17]               Discussant
Kaplan, Jessica
[255]              Tracing the Movement of Quispisisa Obsidian during the Middle Horizon, Peru
This paper explores variability in the consumption and distribution of obsidian within imperial and local Middle Horizon (A.D. 600–1000) contexts in order to
address regional manifestations of imperial control and the role of resource extraction and regulation within the Wari Empire in Peru. During the Middle
Horizon, the Wari Empire expanded and maintained control over the Peruvian Andes, often going to great lengths to import and export critical resources
obtained from distant regions throughout the empire. This paper addresses the role of obsidian in the Middle Horizon, specifically obsidian from the
Quispisisa obsidian quarry located in the Department of Ayacucho, roughly 100 km from the Wari capital. As part of ongoing dissertation research, portable
x-ray fluorescence was used to examine and source obsidian assemblages from Middle Horizon contexts and sites throughout Peru and to relate patterns
of obsidian consumption and distribution to political, economic, and social historiographies.
Kappelman, John (University of Texas at Austin), Lawrence Todd (University of Texas at Austin), Neil Tabor (Southern Methodist University),
Mulugeta Feseha (Addis Ababa University) and Marvin Kay (University of Arkansas)
[22]               The Tip Of The Horn: Extractive Foraging Strategies and Stone Tool Technologies in Northwestern Ethiopia during the Middle Stone Age
We present data from open-air MSA sites situated along the trunk tributaries of the Blue Nile River in the lowlands of NW Ethiopia that provide information
about the behaviors of anatomically modern Homo sapiens in the Horn near the time of its movement out of Africa. The diverse fauna includes mammals,
reptiles, birds, and fish from a wide range of body sizes. Stone raw materials include cryptocrystalline quartz and basalt cobbles, both found on the local
gravel bars and in exposed basalt flows. Bifacial and Levallois core reduction were used to produce flakes and points, prismatic blades, and extractive
tools were recycled. Together, these data suggest that MSA humans were adapted to a riverine-based foraging lifestyle that exploited abundant food
resources seasonally concentrated around isolated waterholes and used raw materials found on river point bars exposed during the dry season. Once local
foods were depleted, longer distance foraging along the channel to new waterholes functioned as a dry season “pump” to siphon MSA populations up and
down along the river systems. These “blue highways” provided highly predictable food, raw materials, and water during an otherwise challenging dry
season; movements from one waterhole to another would have effected population movements northward.
Kardulias, P. Nick [112] see Redmond, Brian
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 223
Kardulias, Paul (College of Wooster)
[145]               The Examination of Changing Landscapes through Archaeological Survey in Central Cyprus
Since 1991, the Malloura Valley Survey, part of the Athienou Archaeological Project, has studied the shifting patterns of land use in central Cyprus. The
survey work identified 30 loci of human activity in a rural setting midway between Nikosia and Larnaka, major population centers from antiquity to the
modern period. The sporadic scatter of artifacts on the surface indicated a low-level but persistent pattern of land use through most periods. As a project
that incorporates material from all periods, including the late twentieth century, the research has identified certain consistent land use practices over time.
In the past 150 years, the valley has become an agricultural extraction zone that has witnessed two phases of use: (1) In the nineteenth century up to ca.
1970, vineyards and orchards (primarily almond and carob trees) were interspersed among fields of barley and wheat, (2) Over the last 45 years, barley
has become the dominant crop, and pastoral stations for sheep, goats, and cattle have become more common. To accommodate these changes, farmers
have more land under cultivation, creating fields and terraces with modern equipment. These actions have dramatically transformed the landscape, and in
the process had a major impact on archaeological sites.
Karkanas, Panagiotis (The Malcolm H. Weiner Laboratory for Archaeological Science, ASCSA)
[166]               Microstratigraphic Study of the Neolithic Alepotrypa Cave, Mani, Greece
Alepotrypa cave is one of the few examples of deep caves being intensively occupied throughout its extension during the Neolithic of Greece. The study of
the microstructure and the microstratigraphy of the sediment revealed that the front entrance chambers consist of occupational deposits characterized by
constructed clay surfaces and occupational debris. In addition to the several burials, frequent reorganization of the space in the form or fillings, leveling,
and resurfacing has resulted to intensive reworking of the deposits. The deposits of the interior chambers of the cave are quite different. They are mainly
characterized by extensive and relatively thick smoldered dung-rich deposits often interbedded with thin clay constructed surfaces. The burnt dung
deposits are rather transported by the occupants stabling deposits that consequently were burnt in situ in the back chambers. Their association with large
amounts of fine pottery and probably burial remains might have to do with some kind of ritual or other not yet identified cultural practices. The final
abandonment of the cave is probably associated with the partial collapse of the entrance of the cave and is associated with the capping of the sequence
with widespread speleothem formations on the ground.
Karkanas, Panagiotis [189] see Vaiglova, Petra
Karsten, Jordan [111] see Oemig, Alexandria
Karsten, Jordan (University of Wisconsin Oshkosh), Ryan Schmidt (Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara), Takashi Gakuhari
(Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara), Hiromi Matsumae (Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo,) and Hiroki Oota
(Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara)
[147]               Paleogenetic Analysis of the Eneolithic (4900–2750 cal B.C.) Trypillian Culture from Verteba Cave, Ukraine
In this presentation, we make use of high-resolution paleogenetic data to better understand the peoples of the agropastoral Tripolye Culture. Verteba Cave
is the only known site with associated Trypillian human remains. Here, we explore population origins and the Tripolye people’s relationship with local
populations from the greater Carpathian and Dnieper regions, as well as possible connections to peoples from the Near East. Our motivation for this study
derives from several unknowns. Specifically, archaeological evidence suggests Tripolye origins stem from the interaction of several Neolithic cultures, while
a small number of individuals analyzed using morphometric traits suggest a possible Near Eastern origin. We performed Sanger sequencing of the mtDNA
control region and high-throughput sequencing (HTS) for several individuals that allowed us to obtain nuclear genetic data. Our preliminary results indicate
maternal lineages that are common to modern Eurasian peoples and our HTS results display variants that are common to peoples of the Near East.
Analyses are ongoing with plans to obtain whole mitogenome data through the use of in-solution target capture methods, higher resolution genome-wide
SNP variation to detect subtle changes in population size, as well as searching for alleles associated with strong natural selection, such as lactase
persistence.
Kasper, Kimberly (Rhodes College) and Katharine Reinhart (Mashantucket Pequot Museum and Research Center)
[61]                The Power of Plants: Recentering Traditional Ecological Knowledge in New England
Often plants recovered from archaeological sites are not seen as keys to interpreting the agency associated with social contexts and cultural identities. Yet,
the physical remains of plants left behind by individuals and communities, like other aspects of material culture, are the result of the choices made,
completed actions, knowledge availability, and goals/strategies. This paper highlights and recenters traditional ecological knowledge of the Mashantucket
Pequot Tribe from 1000 to 1800 A.D. Additional plant-based data sets from Narragansett, Pocumtuck, and Sokoki archaeological sites will be discussed to
situate those plant-based interactions across time and space. Through an investigation of the domesticated and wild plants along with oral histories and
historical documents, we gain an understanding of the choices involved in Indigenous foodways and subsistence strategies during one of the most
tumultuous times in New England’s history. We demonstrate how Indigenous households and communities favored decisions about plants that provided
flexibility in their social organization, while also allowing for maintenance of personal identities within and beyond colonized spaces. The materialities
analyzed reflect the power of plants and the critical continuities and transformations of “traditional” subsistence strategies of Indigenous communities on an
ever-changing landscape.
Katz, Jared (University of California, Riverside)
[35]                Printing Ancient Music: The Maya Music Project’s use of 3D printing and Modeling for Public Outreach
3D models have the potential to bring archaeological data to life for the public in ways that were previously impossible. My research on ancient Maya
musical practices is demonstrative of the various ways in which 3D technologies can create a tactile experience for the public as they learn about
archaeology. This paper will highlight some of the ways in which the Maya Music Project will be using 3D models to increase public engagement with the
subject. My preliminary experimental foray into public archaeology will begin this fall, when I will present 3D printed replicas of ancient Maya musical
instruments to second-generation bands in the LA area who are attempting to incorporate more traditional Mesoamerican musical instruments into the
compositions. Each model will be presented with the contextual information of where the instrument was excavated, thus helping the musicians understand
the life history of the replicated artifact they are playing. I am also in the process of working with several institutions to create an online collection of 3D
scans of musical instruments, allowing people to interact with artifacts and learn about the subject in a new way remotely, from the classroom or home.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             224
Katzenberg, M. Anne [275] see McConnan Borstad, Courtney
Kaulicke, Peter (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú)
[56]               The Paracas Phenomenon as an Interaction Sphere during the First Millenium B.C.
During the first millenium B.C., the southern coast experiments deep changes in social processes form small household formations to complex societies
with central places within interaction networks of short, small, and long distance. Thus, Paracas suggests a non-existent homogeneity. Since the Middle
Formative, contacts with the north coast lead to a fusion of local and regional features. During Late Paracas regional traditions, dominate spheres
characterized by larger sites linked to smaller ones whose products are interchanged in long distance networks.
Kay, Marvin [22] see Kappelman, John
Kaya, Deniz (University of Notre Dame), Deniz Enverova (University of Notre Dame ), Mark Schurr (University of Notre Dame) and Meredith
Chesson (University of Notre Dame)
[199]              Searching for Complexity: Initial Statistical Analysis of Mortuary Material in Shaft Tombs from the Early Bronze Age I (c. 3500–3000 B.C.)
                   Bab adh-Dhra`, Jordan
The southern Leventine Early Bronze Age (EB) I-III is characterized by the development of fortification systems, intensification of agricultural and pastoral
production, innovative water management, irrigation technology, population aggregation, and increasing regionalized expression of EB material culture.
Due to these characteristics, various researchers have interpreted this society as the region's earliest urban culture, a chiefdom, a city state, or a
secondary state. Recent scholars have begun to question these interpretations, and our work will address the issue by examining burials from the EBIA
period that span the pre-settlement through the beginning of the EBIB village at Bab adh-Dhra`, Jordan. The cemetery includes hundreds of shaft tombs,
each with one to five chambers. The scope of this study is to inventory, organize, and statistically analyze the various artifacts and skeletal material from
the tombs in order to gain insights about the social complexity of these people. We hope to acquire a wider understanding about status differentiation
between and within shaft tombs, the development of social complexity, and how to quantify social differentiation statistically.
Keegan, William (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[296]              Marginality is the Mother of Invention: A New Institutional Economics Perspective
It has long been assumed that the original inhabitants of the Bahama archipelago practiced lifeways that were essentially identical to those practiced on
their larger neighbors. Recent research suggests that there actually were substantial differences, including a much higher degree of mobility and a focus on
maize instead of manioc cultivation. Some of these differences may be attributed to their origins in Cuba, versus Hispaniola; and the possibility that their
ancestry can be traced to what are called Archaic Age communities. This paper explores the economic foundations of the Lucayan inhabitants of the
Bahamas from the perspective of New Institutional Economics. NIE, which came to prominence in the 1970s, seeks to bridge the gap between Price
Theory and Institutional Theory. In this regard it is comparable to bridging the gap between individual and population-level behaviors. NIE emphasizes the
relationship between transaction costs and property rights in a modified neoclassical model. The objective in this paper is to expose the relevant variables
and cost accounting that are not covered in the neoclassical economic models or in traditional behavioral ecology. By incorporating these variables the
margin shifts in ways that better explain the economic foundations of indigenous Bahamian communities.
Keene, Joshua (CSFA, Texas A&M University) and Ted Goebel (CSFA, Texas A&M University)
[69]               The Bonneville Basin and Snake River Plain Connection: Early Archaic Lithic Technology, Geochronology, and Obsidian Procurement at
                   Bonneville Estates and Veratic Rockshelters
Though often considered parts of two different culture areas, the upper Snake River Plain of southeastern Idaho and the Bonneville Basin of the eastern
Great Basin may have more similarities in land use and lithic technology than usually thought. In fact, commonalities can be easily documented in projectile
point chronologies, subsistence patterns, and even the use of some of the same obsidian sources. In this paper, we consider the early Archaic Period,
when comparable ecological changes affected both regions. Did humans in the two neighboring regions respond with similar adaptive solutions? A unique
opportunity to assess the affinity between these two regions is provided by the recent analyses of two deeply stratified rockshelter sites: Bonneville Estates
Rockshelter (Nevada) and Veratic Rockshelter (Idaho), both of which have large, well-dated and well-preserved early Archaic assemblages. Here, we
focus on raw-material procurement and selection, projectile point forms and technologies, and aspects of technological organization preserved in the lithic
assemblages. The new analyses provide a basis for a large-scale examination of human response to climate change and inter-regional cultural
interactions.
Keeney, Joseph (University of Alaska Fairbanks)
[124]              An Analysis of a Middle Holocene Faunal Assemblage from the Matcharak Peninsula Site in Alaska’s Brooks Range
The Matcharak Peninsula Site (AMR-196), located in the central Brooks Range of Arctic Alaska, contains a mid-Holocene archaeological assemblage
dating between 4,000 and 7,500 cal B.P. and assigned to the northern Archaic tradition. Excavations between 2010 and 2014 yielded hundreds of
identifiable faunal specimens preserved in permafrost, making it one of the largest and most well-preserved faunal assemblages found in a northern
Archaic context. The assemblage has great potential for elucidating high latitude hunter gatherer land use and subsistence strategies during the mid-
Holocene. Northern Archaic technology persisted throughout Alaska and Yukon, Canada from approximately 6,000–2,000 years ago and is thought to
reflect logistically-mobile people using multiple weapon systems to exploit a wide range of seasonally-available fauna. This is supported by the presence of
multiple taxa, including caribou, Dall sheep, and fish along with bifacial and microcore technology in the Matcharak Peninsula assemblage.
Kehoe, Alice (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee)
[258]              Thrown to the Fringe:Challenging the Myth of Columbus
European imperialism, in league with the Vatican, retained the Church’s political support by accepting its moral imperative to Christianize everyone not in
its communion. Thus, Columbus was a Crusader, and European international law gave heathen lands to the first Christian nation claiming discovery––the
Doctrine of Discovery. Two centuries later, the Earl of Shaftesbury’s employee John Locke wrote treatises justifying his employer’s landlord class enclosing
common lands in Britain, extending to justify Shaftesbury’s Carolina Colony takeover of American Indian lands: title to land depends on claimant
“improving” the land and holding written title exchangeable for money. Nations north of central Mexico therefore had only usufruct privilege. Archaeologists
label all those nations’ histories “prehistory.” The Doctrine of Discovery paradigm incorporating Locke’s dicta marginalized scientists outside mainstream
archaeology (including Alexander von Humboldt, Carl O. Sauer, Joseph Needham, Baron Nordenskiöld, David Kelley, Gordon Ekholm, Paul Tolstoy,
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 225
Robert Heine-Geldern, and, outside of Oceania, Roger Green) as well as many avocational researchers. Challenging America’s Malinowskian social
charter myth, that Columbus discovered a wilderness New World, these researchers and their data constitute anomalies outside normal science––in
Kuhn’s terms––in American archaeology.
Keller, Hannah [181] see Peart, Daniel
Kelley, Alice [90] see St. Amand, Ani
Kelley, Krystle (Texas Tech University) and David M. Hyde (Western State Colorado University)
[93]             A Contextual Analysis of Special Finds from the Medicinal Trail site in Northwestern Belize
This poster details the findings from a contextual analysis of “special finds” artifacts collected at Medicinal Trail from 2004–2014. Medicinal Trail is a
hinterland community in the Maya lowlands of northwestern Belize, 5 km east of the large urban center of La Milpa. The special finds collected at Medicinal
Trail include an assemblage of artifacts from a variety of non-perishable raw materials including clay, shell, and stone that do not belong to standard
categories of ceramic, lithic, and faunal artifacts. Brief descriptions of each artifact are put forward, along with their theorized function and contextual
location. A detailed look at these artifacts provides a glimpse into the activities that were taking place at the Medicinal Trail site.
Kelley, Alice, Ana Cecilia Mauricio (Climate Change Institute, University of Maine, Oro), Daniel Sandweiss (Department of Anthropology and
Climate Change Inst), Joseph Kelley (School of Earth and Climate Science and Climate Ch) and Daniel Belknap (School of Earth and Climate
Science and Climate Ch)
[118]            Combining GPR and Archeological Excavations at Los Morteros: Looking “Inside” a Complex Preceramic Coastal Peruvian Site
The Los Morteros archaeological site is located on the desert north coast of Peru. This large, elliptical mound (ca. 225 x 200 m, with relief of 14.5 m) is
situated on a 3 m high Mid-Holocene shoreline. Limited excavations in the 1970s identified preceramic midden deposits. Subsequent ground-penetrating
radar (GPR) survey at the site revealed interior stratigraphy inconsistent with a sand dune or bedrock-cored sand deposit, suggesting human agency in the
construction of the mound, rather than occupation of a pre-existing feature. New, more extensive excavations at the site have provided ground truth for the
GPR data, allowing a more nuanced interpretation of the construction of the mound. Rather than being constructed of large, vertical walls, as originally
thought, the mound is a composite of buildings, stone-floored patios, and midden deposits separated by wind-blown sand layers. By comparing the GPR
data in excavated areas with known stratigraphy and identified archaeological remains, a more detailed and accurate analysis of the mound interior can be
completed. These results will be useful in planning future excavations of the site and making inferences about site formation and chronology.
Kelly, Robert L. [55] see Robinson, Erick
Kelly, John (The Public Archaeology Laboratory, Inc.)
[61]             The Mill Site at Ohomowauke: An Eighteenth-Century Euro-American Domestic and Industrial Occupation on the Periphery of the
                 Mashantucket Pequot Reservation
The Ohomowauke site (72-137), located on the Mashantucket Pequot reservation in southeastern Connecticut, contains a mid eighteenth-century Euro-
American sawmill and associated domestic structures that would have been situated on the historic border of the reservation. While little remains of the
sawmill, the cultural material recovered within and around the domestic structures, including the house of the mill operator’s family, provide an opportunity
to examine the lifeways of a working class Connecticut family involved with one of New England’s first industries. Data from the site has allowed for
interpretations on the social behaviors and daily practices of the people living by the mill, as well as their relationships with their Native American and Euro-
American neighbors in the area. These interpretations were formed based on analysis of the entire post-contact artifact assemblage from the site, including
European manufactured ceramics, items of personal adornment, the architecture of the house and its associated outbuildings, and botanical food remains.
[61]             Chair
Kelly, John (Washington University)
[74]             Contextualing Cahokia's Collapse
The wide scale abandonment of Mississippian towns in the lower midwest by the beginning of the fifteenth century has been the focus of interest for the
last four decades beginning with the work of Stephen Williams. The largest urban center, Cahokia, is one of the earliest to be abandoned before the end of
the fourteenth century. Recent evidence has been presented on a massive flood in the twelfth century as perhaps an important factor in this process, which
occurs over a century later. This presentation focuses on the historical trajectory of the Cahokian polity and the role and interplay of a variety of other
environmental, social, and geopolitical factors have played in its “collapse,” and Cahokian society’s eventual reversion to a tribal level society.
Kelly, Kenneth (University of South Carolina)
[126]            Slave Village Architecture in the French West Indies
Archaeological work in Guadeloupe and Martinique conducted since 2001 has revealed considerable evidence of the housing used by enslaved laborers in
plantation villages, both before and after emancipation. Enslaved housing is remarkably diverse in its construction, diverging from the attenuated range of
styles described in historic accounts, and generally follows several trends, whether on sugar plantations, industrial sites, or elsewhere. In addition to
variations in construction, the placement of villages, documented on historic maps and recovered archaeologically, has also been seen to follow certain
rules, although there are exceptions. This paper discusses the archaeological evidence for the range of architectural styles and emplacements of villages
employed in the French West Indies.
[126]            Discussant
Kelly, Harold (National Archaeological Museum Aruba) and Raymundo Dijkhoff (National Archaeological Museum Aruba)
[220]            Archaic Age Migration and Settlement on Aruba
The Archaic Period of Aruba falls between 2500 B.C. to 900/1000 A.D. and is characterized by nomadic ‘fisher-hunter-gatherers’ with a predominantly
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              226
marine, coastal orientation, occupying different areas of the island. Their diet consisted mostly out of marine food and to a lesser extent hunting of small
game and foraging. The majority of the so-called preceramic sites are coastal shell-middens predominantly located on limestone. The sites of Canashito
and Malmok served as formal cemeteries. Both sites have burial characteristics similar to the archaic Tequendama site in Bogotá, Colombia, that is
suggestive of a possible migration route towards Aruba. Recently, three sites characterized as temporary campments along the banks of a large rooi
system yielded the oldest age within the Archaic Period. These campment sites provide the unique opportunity for beyond shell midden research that will
not only provide insights about Archaic Age settlement patterns but also their stone tool kit. Furthermore, new data related to paleo-tsunamis, radiocarbon
datings, mtDNA results, pollen analysis, and human dental calculus in combination with site data and fossil bone collagen shed more light on traditional
views of the Aruban Archaic age.
Kemp, Kassie (Florida Public Archaeology Network (FPAN))
[260]            Exploring Strategies for Talking to the Public: Learning from 10 Years of the Florida Public Archaeology Network
The last 10 years of outreach and education has allowed staff from the Florida Public Archaeology Network (FPAN) to experiment with many different
strategies for discussing archaeology with the public. Through this experience, we have become better aware of the ways to effectively communicate
archaeological concepts and garner an appreciation for our archaeological and historic heritage. This presentation will provide some basic strategies and
outline specific programming that we have found successful. Some of the most useful strategies combine numerous approaches to simultaneously engage
visual, auditory, and kinesthetic learners.
Kemp, Kassie [260] see Gidusko, Kevin
Kennedy, Sarah (University of Pittsburgh), Parker VanValkenburgh (Brown University) and Katherine L. Chiou (University of California,
Berkeley)
[122]            Diet, Status, and Identity in Colonial Peru: Investigations at Carrizales (Zaña Valley, Peru)
Late sixteenth century Peru was a dynamic period associated with emerging Spanish colonial polices—forced resettlement and tribute extraction—coupled
with general demographic decline. Spanish officials and indigenous communities alike had to make difficult choices on how they provided for their
households and put food on the table. We examine the effects of this tumultuous period on Spanish and indigenous foodways at the reducción site of
Carrizales, located in the lower Zaña Valley on the north coast of Peru. Comparisons of households and middens associated with both ecclesiastical space
and indigenous domesticate space demonstrate marked differences in local foodways within the reducción. Zooarchaeological and archaeobotanical
remains reveal how new foods were incorporated into the diets of both indigenous residents and Spanish officials, and how the status and identity of both
parties was maintained through access to specific foods and meat cuts, as well as preparation and cooking techniques. These results highlight the
dynamism of colonial life for both indigenous and Spanish peoples, while emphasizing the important role of food as a symbol of status and social identity.
Kennedy, Titus [131] see Langenwalter, Paul
Kennedy, W.
[253]            Discussant
Kennedy Richardson, Karimah (Autry - Historic Southwest Museum - UCR)
[202]            Discussant
Kennett, Doug [129] see Hernandez Sarinana, Daniela
Kerchusky, Sarah (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[151]            Nasca-Wari Interaction and Imperial Expansion during the Middle Horizon: Excavations at Zorropata, Nasca, Peru
The Middle Horizon (A.D. 750–1000) was a tumultuous time in the Nasca region, located on the south coast of Peru. The highland-centered Wari Empire
established at least three colonies (Pacheco, Pataraya, and Inkawasi) in the Nasca Valley and its tributaries (Edwards 2010). Local settlement patterns
changed drastically in response (Edwards 2010, Schreiber 1999). The number and size of habitation sites in the Nasca and Taruga Valleys decreased but
increased in the Las Trancas Valley, away from and perhaps in contention with the Wari. Sites in these valleys were established in more defensible
locations. In addition, sites in Las Trancas formed a site hierarchy with Huaca del Loro as an administrative and ceremonial center, a second-tier center
(Zorropata), and smaller settlements (Schreiber 2005). Archaeological fieldwork conducted at Zorropata in 2014 aimed to investigate the relationship
between Nasca and Wari peoples. In particular, research aimed to elucidate the potential impact of Wari encroachment on various Nasca economic, social,
political, and quotidian practices. This paper presents new data, the results of AMS assays from carbon samples, and some preliminary interpretations
stemming from excavations at Zorropata.
[151]            Chair
Kerr, R. Stanley (Marron and Associates), Hannah Mattson (University of New Mexico), Christina Chavez (Marron and Associates) and Toni Goar
(Marron and Associates)
[66]             New Evidence for Early Ceramic Use in the Middle Rio Grande Valley
Recent archaeological excavation of an early Developmental Period village within the Albuquerque city limits has revealed the earliest evidence for
ceramics in the Middle and Northern Rio Grande Valley to date. A roasting pit at LA 138927, located immediately adjacent to Montaño Pueblo, contained
Alma Plain jar sherds associated with charcoal dated to the early A.D. 400s. The identification of pottery in fifth century deposits in the Albuquerque area is
significant, as pottery first appeared in the southwest around A.D. 200 and didn’t become widespread until A.D. 500. This early Alma vessel may be part of
an expedient phase of early pottery production occurring on the Colorado Plateau from A.D. 150 to 500. The feature also includes the remains of Zea
mays, which is typically not found in pre-A.D. 600 contexts in the Middle Rio Grande Valley proper.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              227
Kershaw, Peter [295] see Haberle, Simon
Ketcheson, Kathi A. [35] see Catto, Lisa
Keute, Jennifer (University of Wisconsin-La Crosse)
[181]            Chemical Analysis of Fatty Acid Residues on Archaeological Pottery of Pastoralist Communities in Northern Tanzania
In the semi-arid climate of eastern Africa, mobile cattle pastoralism has been an essential way of life for at least the past 5,000 years (Prendergast et al.
2013). On the Mbulu Plateau of northern Tanzania, Dr. Grillo of UW-La Crosse has discovered the largest “Pastoral Neolithic” site in the country, which
dates to about 3,000 years ago. Based on the animal bones and ceramics found at the site, archaeologists believe the site was occupied by groups of
mobile people who herded cows, goats, and sheep. The goal of this project is to carefully select pottery samples to be tested for fatty acid residues left
through the storing or cooking of materials. With the assistance of a Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer (GC/MS), different types of plants or animals
were processed in these pottery vessels can be identified. This research will aid in understanding prehistoric modes of pastoral subsistence, cooking
practices, and the importance of pottery to mobile herding populations.
Khalidi, Lamya [22] see Ménard, Clément
Khan, Salman [263] see Iriarte, Jose
Kiahtipes, Christopher (Southern Methodist University, Department of Anthropology)
[69]             Complexes, Colonizations, and Climates: Paleoenvironmental Perspectives on Human Biogeography
From the Desert West of the U.S. to Asia’s Tibetan Plateau, David B. Madsen’s work focuses on better understanding the perennial anthropological and
ecological problems of migration and human biogeography through robust paleoenvironmental and archaeological collaborations. An essential aspect of
this body of work is challenging assumptions of homogeneity in cultural and ecological associations in order to consider how they co-evolved through
space and time. Current research from the Great Basin and Congo Basin show the continuing value of combined paleoenvironmental-archaeological
research for developing a more realistic, robust, and intellectually rewarding picture of human biogeography and its ecological consequences. These two
regions are of particular interest because they show surprising similarities despite radical differences in climate and vegetation cover, which argues for
similar causal mechanisms at play in both regions. By emphasizing the iterative, processual, and ecological dimensions of human colonization events,
archaeologists may gain an important foothold in discussions about conservation, anthropogenic climate change, and the ecological fallout of globalization.
Kidder, Tristram [120] see Storozum, Michael
Kidder, Tristram (Washington University), Edward Henry (Washington University in St. Louis) and Anthony Ortmann (Murray State University)
[132]            Jaketown, Pilgrimage, and Poverty Point Era Sacred Monumental Landscapes in the Lower Mississippi Valley
Monumental earthworks are a well-attested element of hunter-gather-fisher societies in the Lower Mississippi Valley (LMV) from ca. 7000–3000 cal B.P.
Most famous among these earthworks is the Poverty Point site, ca. 3600–3200 cal B.P. However, earthen monuments in the LMV contemporary with
Poverty Point remain enigmatic because their roles in the broader political economy of the region are not well understood. We present information from the
Jaketown site in west-central Mississippi to illustrate regional variation in monument building and to explore the hypothesis that Jaketown, Poverty Point,
and other contemporary mound sites are part of a complex socio-political landscape shaped by myriad forces, principle among them ritual-religious ones
that encourage pilgrimage as a mechanism for social integration in the face of increasing demographic, economic, and environmental challenges.
Kidwell, Jasmine (Eastern New Mexico University) and David Kilby (Eastern New Mexico University)
[120]             Modeling Landscape Evolution Across the Pleistocene-Holocene Transition at Blackwater Locality No. 1
Blackwater Locality No. 1 (the Clovis-type site) served as a catchment for spring-fed streams during the late Last Glacial Maximum, providing a water
source for the Paleoindian occupants of the Southern High Plains. During episodes of high effective moisture, water flowed out of the basin via an outlet
channel into Blackwater Draw proper. Coinciding with the changing climate of the early Younger Dryas, the flowing waters of the outlet channel were
obstructed, impounding the waters of a shallow lake. This study uses the distribution of well-defined stratigraphic boundaries to create a series of surface
models corresponding to the Clovis, Folsom, and Late Paleoindian occupations at the site. Stratigraphic data and sediment samples were collected from
systematic hand augering of the outlet channel. Where the surface models indicate pronounced changes in the channel, sediment samples were more
intensively analyzed to identify their origin and depositional environment. The models, coupled with sedimentary data, shed light on the processes
responsible for ponding of the lake and provide snapshots of the changing morphology of the outlet channel, ultimately contributing to a richer
understanding of the changing landscape during this critical time in prehistory.
Kieffer, C. L. (Museum of Indian Arts and Culture, University of New Mexico)
[170]            The Impact of Lawrence Straus on Mesoamerican Cave Studies
 Lawrence Straus’ life work has focused primarily upon European cave archaeology, with most of his time spent in Spain. However, his research within
cave archaeology has in many ways aided the field of cave archaeology in Central America. Straus has both passively and actively helped in the
advancement of Maya cave studies from his many roles in academia. As editor in chief for the Journal of Anthropological Research, he aided in the
publication of numerous seminal works that contributed to the solidification of the field. As a researcher and mentor, Straus has inspired and encouraged
research on topics that has previously been underexplored among earlier generations of Mayanists. None of this would have been possible without Straus’
dedication to cave research and deep understanding of early man’s utilization of dark zones within caves.
[265]            Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               228
Kieffer, C. L. [234] see Killeen, Denise
Kielhofer, Jennifer [242] see Reuther, Joshua
Kilby, David [120] see Kidwell, Jasmine
Kilby, David (Eastern New Mexico University)
[170]             Le Volgu: A North American Perspective on a Biface Cache from the French Upper Paleolithic
Le Volgu consists of at least 15 exquisitely manufactured bifacial stone tools (17 were originally reported in 1874) found in Saône-et-Loire near the
confluence of the Arroux and Loire Rivers, about 60 km (37 miles) west of Le Solutre, the type site for the Solutrean culture. The assemblage is interpreted
as an artifact cache or ritual deposit and the artifacts themselves are considered exemplary of Solutrean bifacial technology. This paper reports the results
of applying methods developed for the comparative analysis of the relatively more abundant caches of Clovis materials in North America, to this apparently
singular Solutrean cache. In addition to providing a window into Solutrean technology and perhaps into Upper Paleolithic ritual behavior, this comparison of
Clovis and Solutrean assemblages serves to test one of the tangible archaeological implications of the “Solutrean Hypothesis” for the origins of some North
American populations by evaluating the technological and behavioral equivalence of Solutrean and Clovis artifact caching.
Kilikoglou, Vassilis [257] see Gilstrap, William
Killeen, Denise and C. L. Kieffer (University of New Mexico and The Museum of Indian )
[234]             Exploring the Sacred Significance of Cave 2 at Chawak But'o'ob, Belize
The site of Chawak But'o'ob in the Rio Bravo Conservation and Management Area of northwestern Belize is being investigated by the Rio Bravo
Archaeological Survey. The site, located just 2 kilometers southwest of the minor Preclassic- and Classic-Period city of Dos Hombres, is unusual in that it
is a modestly sized commoner residential site with a ballcourt. Very unusually, the paired ballcourt buildings are the largest at the site and perhaps along
with the adjacent sweat house, are the only ritual structures identified in this ancient community. Chawak But'o'ob's ballcourt complex is further
differentiated from others in the Maya area with its close proximity to two caves. Cave 2 is located approximately 10 meters south and west of the ballcourt.
This poster aims to explore that cave's connection to rain rituals and the underworld based upon landscape modification near the cave and the artifact
assemblage found within the cave. This poster will also explore the temporal relationship of Cave 2's utilization in relation to the temporal occupation of the
site, and discuss how this may help explain the construction of a ballcourt within a primarily residential site.
Killick, David [289] see Santarelli, Brunella
Killion, Thomas (Wayne State University)
[264]             Discussant
Kim, Patricia (University of Pennsylvania, History of Art)
[221]             Trigger Material Culture of the Greco-Roman World
A recent opinion editorial published in the Columbia Spectator by three undergraduates protested the university’s core curriculum as consisting of
“triggering and offensive material that marginalizes student identities in the classroom.” The article was written in response to the assignment of Ovid’s
“Metamorphoses,” which contains scenes of rape and sexual assault. The art historical and archaeological record of the Greco-Roman world similarly
includes visual and material evidence that we would translate as disturbingly misogynistic or violent in today’s context. From Macedonian palatial mosaics
and monumental wall paintings that depict scenes of rape, to issues of gendered roles and spaces, the material record either offends or frustratingly limits
what scholars may say about the construction of gendered subjectivities in the Greco-Roman world. My contribution addresses different ways that the
material record may be considered in approaching a more nuanced understanding of the production of gender and the stakes of “histories and narratives of
exclusion and oppression.” I also consider ways to go beyond the pedagogical morass that the Columbia students signal, and explore strategies for
teaching ancient “trigger material” in arguing the critical importance of its examination and analysis in the classroom.
Kincaid, Meaghan (University of Alaska Anchorage), Ryan Harrod (University of Alaska Anchorage) and Aaron Woods (University of Nevada Las
Vegas)
[215]             Ritual for the Ancestors or Acts of Violence: Biocultural Assessment of Culturally Modified Human Remains
A number of culturally modified human remains from three sites in Utah were reanalyzed with a biocultural approach that considered the poetics of violence
and the role bodies play in cultural memory. The remains analyzed consisted of 22 individuals affiliated with the Fremont and Northern San Juan Puebloan
cultures. The focus of this study was to transcend the surficial evidence of dismemberment and mutilation, and to view these bodies as cultural artifacts
that could provide deeper insight into how these cultures viewed their dead in the context of culturally modified human remains. We also examined these
cultures’ depictions of bodies in rock art and figurines to better inform the interpretation of the bodies themselves and the motivations behind body
processing. While anthropophagy has often been cited as the explanation for human remain processing in this region, other explanations have been
suggested (warfare, witchcraft killing, or ancestor veneration) which may not be inherently violent within the culture. Trauma distribution, cut mark analysis,
ethnographic accounts, and site context indicate that there is variation across sites and cultures that highlight the possibility for multiple functions of
processed human remains in the prehistoric Great Basin and southwest.
King, Eleanor (Howard University)
[26]              Modeling Maya Markets
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              229
A profusion of data now supports the existence—long doubted—of markets in the Maya area prior to the Postclassic (C.E. 900–1500). Using a range of
approaches from examining the effects of market exchange on artifact distributions to identifying marketplaces within sites, researchers have established
that markets were important building blocks for Classic Maya (C.E. 250–900) economies. To date, however, models of prehispanic Maya markets remain
nebulous. Scholars continue to rely on frameworks drawn from other areas and on often distinctly western concepts to explain Maya market organization
and function. While cross-cultural concepts and comparisons can be useful, they need to supplement rather than substitute for the Maya cultural evidence.
Using ethnohistorical and ethnographic information, this paper seeks to model how Maya markets may have worked and articulated with other modes of
exchange at different geographical scales. The results will be evaluated against archaeological evidence from sites where markets are either identified or
suspected to exist. The intent is not to create a single, overarching model, but rather to infuse more of Maya perspective into our current views and to
stimulate the development of models that conform more comfortably to how the Maya organized their economic, social, and political lives.
King, Amy [36] see Lennon, Mary
King, Stacie (Indiana University)
[128]             Global Indigeneity in Southern Mexico and the Value of Social Archaeology
This paper explores the long-term history of the Nejapa region of southeastern Oaxaca, Mexico, and the many groups of people and famous individuals
that have called it home. Based on data derived from a variety of archaeological research methods, including archival documents, excavation, survey, oral
history interviews, and collaborative research with contemporary residents, I argue that what might be viewed by some as a loss of indigenous identity in
the present is rather a multiethnic positionality that was embraced and purposefully crafted over the course of at least 1,200 years. Archaeological research
in Nejapa documents the long-standing movement of peoples to and through the region for trade and economic opportunities, frequent social and political
repositioning within and between valley-floor towns, rural villages, and high elevation fortified centers, as well as ongoing encounters between various local
indigenous peoples, enslaved Africans, Catholic clergy, and Spanish colonial authorities that were not always—and perhaps not often—peaceful. In the
end, what emerges is complex story that is difficult to trace and challenging to reconstruct, but which forces us to expand our definition of local indigeneity
to one that is at once, and effectively always had been, plural and global.
King, Adam (SC Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology)
[137]             Households, Communities, and the History of Etowah
Etowah was the home of Mississippian period communities for 550 years. During that time, three distinct communities were created: an initial founding
followed by two reoccupations after periods of abandonment. Because abandonment creates points in the life of a community where local traditions can be
questioned and modified, they can lead to novel ways of casting identity, social relations, and history. With each new community created at Etowah,
households and the larger built environment were organized in different ways. These differences reveal the process of community creation and also the
means through which households were integrated into the larger community.
King, Megan
[140]             The Functional Analysis of an Expedient Flake Tool Industry:Preliminary Results
Expedient technology, which may appear to be indiscriminant from non-utilized flakes and flaking debris, likely constitutes larger components of most lithic
assemblages. Both retouched and minimally modified flakes were examined using different methods of lithic analysis. The preliminary results of both a low
and high power microwear analysis of the expedient flake artifacts from the Mussel Beach site are reported in this study. The microscopic examination of
these artifacts may offer an opportunity to investigate further the exploitation of the environmental and the use of various natural resources for the
production of plant and fiber-based technologies.
King, Daniel, Michael Searcy (Brigham Young University) and Kyle Waller (University of Missouri)
[275]             Dietary Patterns of Paquime: New Evidence from Dental Calculus and Microfossils
As part of a larger multinational project, we gathered and analyzed 112 samples of dental calculus (fossilized plaque) from human remains discovered at
Paquimé and other sites in the Casas Grandes river valley to identify various microfossils still present in the silica matrix. Once identified, we used the
prehistoric plant remains to reconstruct human/plant relationships present during the Viejo and Medio periods in and around Paquimé. Our data suggest
that maize was used throughout both time periods, which supports current theories regarding Paquimean diet. Various types of grasses were also found,
as were unspecified types of algae. Using our data, together with what is already known regarding prehistoric plant use in northwestern Mexico, we
suggest that the ancient inhabitants of Paquimé and its surrounding environs had a varied plant diet. Further, we claim that other plants were vital to
sustaining life outside of dietary needs, as grasses, shrubs, and trees all likely provided necessary resources for the production of prehistoric Paquimean
material culture.
Kintigh, Keith [30] see Steponaitis, Vincas
Kirakosian, Katie (Kaplan University)
[258]             Disciplining a Discipline: On In-Groups and Out-Groups and Archaeological Identity Politics Through Time
Who has claimed and who can claim to hold knowledge about the ancient past has shifted greatly over time in the United States. Throughout the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, groups like the Archaeological Institute of America and smaller state-level archaeological societies were founded
throughout the United States, which largely formed from local and growing interest in the ancient past. In just the past century, associations, societies, and
other groups like the American Anthropological Association, the Society for American Archaeology, and The Register of Professional Archaeology, have
also formed, essentially creating a complex array of “in-groups” and “out-groups” among professional and avocational archaeologists. Forging, maintaining,
and expanding ones connections to these groups, especially with professional archaeologists, is directly tied to ones ability to produce and circulate
knowledge about the past.
[202]             Moderator
[202]             Discussant
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                230
Kirk, Scott, Amy Thompson (University of New Mexico) and Christopher Lippitt
[64]              Predictive Modeling for Site Detection in Central New Mexico using Remotely Sensed Data on Phenology
The potential for remotely sensed metrics of phenology and a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) neural network to accurately model potential archaeological
sites in central New Mexico is high. Focusing on two different environments, the Galisteo Basin and the Sandia-Manzano Mountain range, this study
attempts to distinguish between archaeological sites and their surroundings based on differential growth in vegetation. Using multi-spectral satellite data, a
time series of Normalized Difference Vegetation Indices (NDVI) were created to characterize patterns of vegetation growth in the study areas. Through the
use of a neural network, these patterns were analyzed to distinguish archaeological sites from their surroundings. By training the network using a series of
known archaeological sites, the results of an output activation layer indicate possible locations of previously unknown sites according to similarities in
phenology. Treated as a site suitability model, the output activation layer can then be validated using a Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) under the
curve. The results of this analysis show promise for detecting new archaeological sites in large, open areas such as the Galisteo Basin. However, this
technique needs refining in more heterogeneous environments such as the Sandia-Manzano Mountains.
Kisielinski, Caroline [160] see Stone, Jessica
Kiss, Viktória [149] see Szigeti, Anna
Kitchel, Nathaniel (University of Wyoming), Bryan Shuman (University of Wyoming), Joseph Gingerich (Smithsonian Institution/ NC State
University) and Erick Robinson (University of Wyoming )
[218]             A Bayesian Approach to the Paleoindian Colonization of the Northeastern U.S.
Research on the Paleoindian colonization of the northeastern U.S. suffers from numerous chronological problems. These problems are exacerbated by the
use of summed probability distributions, which do not take into account the unique sampling issues and specific probability distributions of individual dates
and their particular relationships to archaeological contexts. This paper introduces a Bayesian statistical approach to clarify some of these problems and
raise new questions about early population dynamics. Bayesian approaches facilitate the critical appraisal of individual dates with other prior knowledge
such as stratigraphy, typology/technology, etc. Using these approaches, combined with prior knowledge of lithic raw material procurement, we propose that
the first archaeological visible populations in the northeast do not represent a colonization pulse, but a population already embedded on the landscape.
Bayesian modeling of early radiocarbon dates suggest the most probable period of entry occurred during the late Allerød, with population expansion during
the Younger Dryas leading these populations to become archaeologically visible for the first time. We also propose that various early fluted point types in
the region overlap in time and represent similar adaptive strategies suited to the exploitation of Caribou. Paleoenvironmental data from the region will be
assessed to explore this hypothesis.
Kitchell, Lindsey [176] see Burtt, Amanda
Kjellmark , Erik [222] see Berman, Mary Jane
Kjellström, Anna (Osteoarchaeological Research Laboratory, Stockholm University)
[192]             Slavery and the Subaltern: Bioarchaeological Analyses of Viking Age Swedish Populations
The definition of slavery during the long Scandinavian Viking Age (A.D. c.750–1100) is far from simple. In recent years, scholars have pointed out that the
terminology for slaves, and the attitudes towards unfree labourers, found in Icelandic Sagas, on rune stones or in law codes, actually reflect a significant
variation in social rank. Even though slaves and the slave trade constituted an important and determining element in the Scandinavian economy during this
time, a material culture clearly associated with slavery is scarce or difficult to identify. In the Mälar Valley of east-central Sweden, human skeletal remains
from several hundred graves have been analysed in a holistic study. A range of biological data has been gathered in the form of morphological traits of the
skeletons, stable isotope values, and aDNA, and is here combined with sociocultural interpretations to distinguish slaves in the Viking Age milieu.
Intersecting identity constructions at the margins of slavery are discussed, and an attempt made to trace subaltern groups in a reconstruction of Viking Age
social inequality.
Klarich, Elizabeth (Smith College)
[56]              Breaking with Tradition: Late Formative Pukara in the Northern Lake Titicaca Basin, Peru
The Formative Period in the Lake Titicaca Basin (1500 B.C.–A.D. 400) is often characterized as a time when diverse groups were linked through their
participation in the Yaya-Mama Religious Tradition (YMRT). Small temple centers—characterized by sunken court temple complexes, stone sculpture,
ritual paraphernalia, and shared iconography—dotted the Middle Formative landscape across the Basin (800–200 B.C.). In this framework, the temple
centers formed a ceremonial network, providing access to non-local goods and other resources for participating communities. One of these YMRT temple
centers, Pukara, expanded its size and influence as a regional center in the northern Basin during the Late Formative (200 B.C.–A.D. 200). This paper
seeks to reframe the Late Formative in the northern Basin by focusing on evidence of significant breaks with existing traditions, which are reflected in new
forms of monumental architecture, stone sculpture and decorated pottery, and shifting settlement patterns. Data from Pukara, which have been collected
since the 1930s, are presented and then contextualized using recently acquired excavation and survey data from neighboring valleys. Lastly, the timing
and nature of these transformations in the north are briefly compared to new research at Middle and Late Formative centers in the southern Basin.
Klassen, Sarah (Arizona State University), Terry Lustig (University of Sydney) and Damian Evans (École française d'Extrême-Orient)
[262]             Using Adaptive Capacity to Assess the Water Management System of Koh Ker, Cambodia
Further research to understand what makes agricultural and water management systems resilient is critical for the continued existence and growth of
sustainable communities today, especially in urban contexts. Resiliency is a very useful concept for understanding how complex systems, but can be
difficult to operationalize. In this paper, we argue that adaptive capacity can be used as a middle-range theory that allows archaeologists to engage in
interdisciplinary discourses of system-level resilience. We argue that systems with strong adaptive capacity are more resilient, more likely to persist, and
more likely to successfully and actively navigate transformation into new beneficial states. Here, we present the results of an archaeological assessment of
the adaptive capacity of the water management system of Koh Ker, Cambodia. Koh Ker was occupied as the capital of the Khmer civilization (~ninth to
fifteenth centuries C.E.) for 40 years between 928–944 C.E. We assess the adaptive capacity of the system in terms of its natural, physical, and human
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                          231
capital and highlight examples of redundancy, equitable entitlements, social learning, and innovation. Assessing the system based on these criteria allows
us to build a narrative about the water management system at Koh Ker and assess its overall resiliency to change.
Klaus, Haagen [207] see Hurtubise, Jenna
Klein, Terry
[48]             Moderator
[89]             Discussant
Klemmer, Amy [225] see McTavish, Rachel
Klokler, Daniela (Universidade Federal de Sergipe - UFS)
[132]            Modified Landscapes, Modified Views: Transformations in Brazilian Shell Mound Archaeology
For many years, normative approaches to shell mound archaeology in Brazil have characterized hunter-gatherer-fisher (HGF) populations as nomadic
groups whose mound sites represent accidental accumulations of refuse, despite the fact that almost all contain numerous burials. A shift in perspective,
especially regarding the role of aquatic resources, allowed great advances in the understanding of mound-building activities. A dramatic transformation of
the southern Brazilian coast by HGF communities began about 4,000 years ago. During the next two millennia, the coastal plain housed monumental
accumulations of shells, some reaching over 30 m in height. Research focused on the ceremonial context of mound construction and the associations
between monumentality and ritual performance provides the basis for reconsideration of Brazilian shell mounds as structures that memorialize territoriality,
tradition, and ancestral ties. Mollusks and other animal remains that contributed to the construction of these mounds transmit these essential messages, in
addition to providing important signals regarding subsistence and ecological conditions.
Knappett, Carl (University of Toronto), Jill Hilditch (University of Oxford) and Duncan Pirrie (University of Exeter)
[214]            Microscopic Mapping of Technological Choice: The Use of SEM-EDS with QEMSCAN on Ceramic Materials
As instrumentation and software packages become increasingly sophisticated, the microscopic world of material culture comes ever more clearly into
focus. In doing so, however, we run the risk of privileging the mineral and the elemental above the human, those complex makers and users of ancient
artefacts. It would seem, then, that the importance of bridging analytical scales remains as pertinent now as when David Peacock first critiqued the use of
mineralogical and chemical techniques for analysing ancient pottery in 1970. Almost 40 years later, a technique has appeared that allows precisely this—
an ability to move from object to sherd, from mineral to provenance and from texture to technological choice—automated scanning electron microscopy
with linked energy dispersive spectrometers (SEM-EDS) and QEMSCAN imaging software. This paper highlights the seamless combination of textural and
mineralogical data that can be gained from using this technique on ancient ceramic material, using the Bronze Age wares of Miletus in western Anatolia as
a case study. We discuss the potential to identify specific technological choices within the production sequence of Milesian ceramic vessels using false
colour mineralogical maps of ceramic sections.
Kneisel, Jutta [95] see Weinelt, Mara
Knell, Edward (California State University, Fullerton) and Michael DeGiovine (Atkins)
[155]            Terminal Pleistocene-Early Holocene Lithic Raw Material Conveyance at Pluvial Lake Mojave and the Southern Conveyance Zone, Mojave
                 Desert
This paper evaluates Terminal Pleistocene-Early Holocene (TP-EH) lithic raw material conveyance patterns around pluvial Lake Mojave and the southern
conveyance zone proposed by Jones et al. (2003). Geologic samples from 12 fine-grained volcanic (FGV) source areas around Lake Mojave were
submitted for xrf analysis to expand the regional database, and 50 FGV and obsidian artifacts from the Campbell collection and sites along the TP-EH
shorelines of Lake Mojave were sourced by xrf to document the mobility patterns around this pluvial lake. Goldstone Variety 1 dacite (70-80 km northwest
of Lake Mojave) is the dominant nonlocal FGV as is obsidian from the Coso volcanic field (190 km to the northwest) and Shoshone Mountain (140 km north
of Lake Mojave in western Nevada). The Goldstone dacite and Coso obsidian depict a southeast pattern of movement to Lake Mojave and the Shoshone
Mountain obsidian a southward movement. We evaluate if and how the xrf data from Lake Mojave fit the proposed southern conveyance zone. Additionally,
we use extant xrf data from multiple Fort Irwin and other Mojave Desert TP-EH sites to evaluate the southern conveyance zone at the regional-scale.
Knight, Vernon [8] see Markin, Julie
Knight, Vernon (University of Alabama)
[290]            Discussant
Knudson, Kelly [25] see Blom, Deborah
Knüsel, Chistopher J. [215] see Pilloud, Marin
Knutson, Jen (University of West Florida) and Robert Lynch (University of West Florida, Department of Chemistr)
[6]              An Ethnobotanical Approach to an Apalachee Ceramic Jar
A nearly intact, Chattahoochee roughened variety Chattahoochee, Apalachee ceramic jar was excavated in the 2014 summer field season by the
University of West Florida Colonial Frontiers Archaeological Field School. It was recovered from the Spanish mission of San Joseph de Escambe situated
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               232
in northwest Florida and occupied from 1741–1761. Testing of the vessel for organic residue, specifically Ilex vomitoria, may provide evidence to support to
a hypothesis that the vessel was used to serve the “Black Drink,” a tea-like beverage prepared from yaupon holly leaves. Five grams of material were
removed from the vessel and subjected to Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis for the purpose of identifying yaupon holly
methylxanthine indicators: caffeine, theobromine, and theophylline as well as ursolic acid. The results of this study will further our understanding of the
function of the Apalachee ceramic jar in the context of prehistoric practices surviving into the Spanish Mission period of northwest Florida.
Kober, Brent [187] see McAllister, Martin
Koenig, Viola (Ethnologisches Museum)
[58]             The Mesoamerica Exhibitions in the Future Humboldt Forum in the Center of Berlin
The Ethnologisches Museum Berlin, Germany, will move into a new building called Humboldt Forum in the center of Berlin. The opening is scheduled for
2019. The concept and planning for the new exhibition of the collections from Meosamerica will be presented and discussed.
Koerner, Shannon (Colorado State University, CEMML), Brett Giles (Colorado State University, CEMML) and Eric Skov (Colorado State
University, CEMML)
[115]            Prehistoric Site Discovery and Evaluation Methods in Upland Landscapes on the Eastern Plains
This study compares the effectiveness of pedestrian walkover and shovel test survey for identifying and delineating prehistoric sites in the eastern Great
Plains. The cultural resource program at Fort Riley, Kansas, manages 100,000 acres along the Kansas River in the Flint Hills physiographic province. An
archaeological inventory of the Fort has been ongoing since the mid-1990s and less than 30 percent remains to be surveyed at this time. The two survey
methods approved by the Kansas SHPO include shovel test pits at a 15-meter interval or pedestrian walkover at a 15-meter interval. In this case, the Flint
Hills landscape surrounding Fort Riley plays a large role in choosing an effective survey method. Soil deposition in alluvial and low terrace settings often
produces deeply buried prehistoric sites. Upland landscapes, otherwise, have undergone very little soil accumulation and often contain surficial prehistoric
sites, even some dating to the Pleistocene/Holocene transition. These differences in landscape along with other tangible constraints, such as time, funding,
and workforce, may significantly influence the type and effectiveness of each archaeological survey method in the region.
Koerner, Shannon [155] see Giles, Bretton
Koetje, Todd (western washington university)
[124]            Leukoma Seasonality and Maturity in the Locarno Beach Phase Sites of the Middle Salish Sea
Leukoma staminea sclerochronology data are now available from several mainland sites along the middle portion of the Salish Sea dating to the Locarno
Beach Phase (~3500–2400 B.P.). Western Washington University field schools have conducted several seasons of test excavations, resulting in an
extensive collection of shell from spatially distinct sites of this phase. Leukoma seasonality and maturity data from these sites will be used in combination
with a modern sample of to address questions of site integrity, season of occupation, and placement in the regional context of Locarno beach sites.
Kohler, Timothy [65] see Ellyson, Laura
Kohler, Tim (WSU/SFI/CCAC)
[171]            Gini Coefficients and the Measurement of Inequality: An Introduction
We briefly explore the history and current use of Gini coefficients, emphasizing the relatively few studies previously completed in archaeology. Then we
explore the behavior of this measure against a variety of theoretical distributions, showing that it makes a useful though imperfect statistical summary of
interesting phenomena. Finally, we present Gini coefficients for a variety of contexts drawn from prehispanic Pueblo societies. Archaeological thought on
emerging inequality has tended to emphasize phenomena at just one end of the population distribution. Gini coefficients and similar distribution-based
measures usefully bring “population thinking” into the discussion.
[201]            Discussant
[171]            Chair
Kohut, Betsy [127] see Galvan, Melissa
Kohut, Betsy (Millsaps College), George J. Bey III (Millsaps College), Tomas Gallareta Negron (INAH), William Ringle (Davidson College) and
Evan Parker (Tulane University)
[127]            An Examination of Regional Variation in Early Middle Preclassic Ceramics of the Puuc Region, Yucatan, Mexico
In the last decade, major strides have been made in the study of early ceramics in the northern Maya Lowlands. Long considered to lack ceramic
occupations dating before the late Middle Preclassic (600–300 B.C.) it is now recognized that communities were founded throughout much of the northern
Maya Lowlands, particularly in the Puuc and northwestern Yucatan Peninsula, by 900–800 B.C. This paper examines similarities and differences among
these early pottery complexes at various occupations in the Puuc region. Although early ceramic using communities show similarities in a number of
ceramic types and varieties, regional variation is present even at this early date. Variation among the earliest ceramic complexes in the northern Maya
Lowlands suggests that despite culturally similar roots, communities were expressing their identity at the local level through their pottery, perhaps hinting at
even earlier occupation of the region.
Kohut, Lauren (Vanderbilt University)
[135]            Surveillance and Control in a Landscape of War: An Examination of Mobility and Fortification in the Colca Valley, Peru
Mobility is frequently examined in terms of interaction, confluence, and circulation. During periods of conflict, however, roads and paths can become arenas
for the negotiation and control of people, lands, and resources, and thus bring into sharp relief the often tense politics of mobility. This paper draws on
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                233
regional survey of Late Intermediate Period (A.D. 1100–1450) hilltop fortifications in the Colca Valley to examine the use of fortification to monitor and
control mobility during a period of warfare. Methodologically, this paper uses two complementary methods—least cost path analysis and circuit analysis—
as a measure of landscape permeability to examine the relationship between fortification placement and probable movement corridors at a regional scale.
The results show how the topography of the high-altitude mountainous environment of the Colca Valley canalized possibilities for movement into several
key corridors. It is clear that local groups strategically used fortifications to monitor and regulate access to the region, suggesting that control over mobility
was a key component in the local defensive strategy. Using these results, I explore how surveillance and control of access to the valley shaped the local
political landscape in this region during the Late Intermediate Period.
Kolb, Michael [81] see Bernstetter, Jessica
Kolbenstetter, Marie (Leiden University)
[163]             The Lower Central American Influences on Honduran Polychromy
Traditionally, polychrome pottery from Late Classic and Early Postclassic Honduras has been considered as falling under or being subjected to the
Mesoamerican sphere of influence, as well as showing certain central Mexican affiliations. Yet, the Lower Central American connection has rarely been
explored. This connection is nonetheless present as can be observed throughout the diversity of Honduran polychromy. In this paper, the influence of the
Greater Nicoyan style on Honduran polychrome vessels and their iconography will be addressed. We will also discuss the spread of new ceramic trends
through Honduras in the Early Postclassic. In this aspect, the Gulf of Fonseca appears to hold a prominent role as origin point for the distribution of
ceramics, allowing southern influences into western Honduras and southern El Salvador. Comparisons with ceramic material from Greater Nicoya and El
Salvador will be presented as possible indicators of these interregional ties. The proliferation of white slipped polychrome will be of particular interest.
Kolianos, Phyllis
[290]             Wood Preservation Dilemmas of Florida's Prehistoric Saltwater Sites: Famous Key Marco and Recent Weedon Island
Almost 120 years has passed since Frank Hamilton Cushing recovered hundreds of wood artifacts from a peaty muck lagoon at Key Marco, Florida.
Relatively few of these extraordinary, fragile wood specimens remain in existence today due to difficulties with excavation and preservation methods in the
late 1800s. In 2001, at Weedon Island Preserve, another mangrove peat saltwater site, was discovered containing an ancient waterlogged canoe and pole.
The salvage of Florida’s longest and only maritime prehistoric dugout in 2011 proved to be a pioneering effort in conservation and, perhaps through the
lessons learned, a standard for future saltwater finds.
Koller, Jared (Boston University)
[51]              3D Visualization and Soundscape Applications that Speak to Community Organizational Change on Luzon, Philippines during Spanish
                  Contact
This paper explores the organizational impact of Spanish contact on the island of Luzon, Philippines from the fifteenth–nineteenth centuries through an
analysis of sound landscapes (soundscapes) that are produced by the habitual ringing of Catholic Church bells. Church bells in Luzon were intended to
notify local residents of prayer congregation or of impending ‘Moro’ attacks; however, the bells were also Spanish territorial markers that flaunted power
and demanded the attention of residents living within auditory range regardless of their spiritual affiliation. I adopt a landscape approach that searches for
correlations between changes in social organization and urban planning evidenced in the archaeological and historical records that are within the auditory
range of Catholic churches bells on Luzon and compare those patterns to community organization outside the church bell auditory zone. These patterns
are markedly different on coastal communities if compared to the highlands of Ifugao, where in the later Spanish incursions did make significant inroads
until the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Excavation and survey data taken from the field is processed with 3D visualization software applications in
order to analyze how sight and sound can inform one another in archaeological analysis and suggest potential social mixing correlations.
Kollmann, Dana
[187]             Bridging the Gap: Bringing Archaeology into the Forensic Forum
Archaeological excavations are much like crime scene investigations in that to study them, is to destroy them. Consequently, full-scale documentation,
cataloguing, and proper packaging techniques are critical components of archaeological and forensic fieldwork. Archaeologists have the additional benefit
to law enforcement of being trained to conduct line and grid searches, interpret soils for evidence of disturbance, and perform exhumations using
standardized excavation techniques. Law enforcement, however, tends to operate as a closed system and has the propensity to draw upon resources
available in their department or those in other regional law enforcement agencies. Arguments for this insular practice tend to revolve around issues of
confidentiality and chain of custody. Drawing on case studies, this paper explores avenues for forensic archaeologists to break through the seemingly
impenetrable walls of law enforcement and apply their skills to cases involving surface searches and/or the identification and exhumation of clandestine
gravesites.
Komp, Rainer (German Archaeological Institute)
[34]              Large Fields—Big Data. Browsing the Meadows of Seip Earthworks, Ohio, using Multiple Gradiometer Arrays
Surveyed and first published in 1848 by Squier and Davis, the mounds being excavated in early twentieth century, Seip Earthworks today forms part of the
Hopewell Culture National Historical Park near Chillicothe, Ohio. While the restored burial mounds are among the largest from the so-called Hopewell
culture, the earthworks comprise further two miles of embankment walls forming big circles and a precise square with astronomical alignments, a typical
geometric figure at a number of places, which Hopewell people constructed sometime between 100 B.C.–A.D. 500.
A Team of the German Archaeological Institute joined the National Park Service in spring 2015 to perform a magnetic survey for the first time on this site. A
state-of-the-art vehicle-driven instrument comprising an array of 16 fluxgate probes was applied with great success. Nearly the complete conservation
area, a total of 250 acres, has been investigated within two weeks. Special, newly developed software allowed for straightforward processing of huge
amounts of data and integration to a GIS environment. The resulting images depict clear views of the underground features, consisting of archaeological as
well as huge geological structures. Besides confirming the large geometric enclosures, more subtle features were detected and open new insights.
Konwest, Elizabeth (Indiana University, Bloomington) and Stacie M. King (Indiana University, Bloomington)
[236]             The Early Colonial Period Glass Beads of Majaltepec, Oaxaca, Mexico
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               234
Among burials below the floor of an elite adobe residence, the Proyecto Arqueológico Nejapa/Tavela uncovered 448 fragments and complete glass and jet
beads at the early Colonial Period town of Majaltepec, located in the mountains of the Nejapa region, Oaxaca, Mexico. This poster will discuss the likely
biography of the beads, from manufacture in Europe to the current display in the local museum. Some of the glass beads match types known to have been
manufactured in Spain, France, and Venice. They likely arrived in the Nejapa region with Dominican clergymen tasked to convert and extract tribute from
local indigenous peoples throughout Mexico. During excavation, a majority of the beads were found as part of a piece (or pieces) of jewelry with a copper
clasp, a few of the beads still strung by cotton thread. Along with the metal knife also found amongst the burials, the beads provide a unique glimpse into
the lifeways of Majaltepec residents. Although continuing to bury their dead under house floors, like many prehispanic peoples of Oaxaca, they used
European goods as offerings.
Koons, Michele (Denver Museum of Nature & Science), Stephen Nash (Denver Museum of Nature & Science) and Deborah Huntley (Denver
Museum of Nature & Science)
[267]             The Reserve Area Archaeological Project
The Reserve Area Archaeological Project (RAAP) is a collaborative effort between the Denver Museum of Nature & Science (DMNS) and the United States
Forest Service. Centered in the Reserve/ Pine Lawn region of the Gila National Forest in New Mexico, this project brings together many extant datasets,
such as existing collections in the Field Museum from the 1940s/50s, GIS data from the Forest Service, paleoclimate data, and new research that to date
has focused on non-invasive methods. Project activities have included fieldwork to find and properly rerecord Field Museum-excavated sites from the
1940s/50s, pedestrian survey to locate new sites, field research on rock art with Zuni colleagues, compositional analysis of obsidian tools from Tularosa
Cave, ground-penetrating radar studies, analysis of existing regional paleoenvironmental reconstructions, analysis of existing archaeological tree-ring date
distributions, and analysis of new AMS radiocarbon dates on sandals from Tularosa Cave. Long-term goals are to investigate changes in population
density and settlement location as related to paleoclimatic changes and changes in resource availability, needs, and cultural significance/ importance. We
will also be reevaluating the chronology of the region through extensive radiocarbon dating and ceramic sequence correlation.
Koontz, Rex (University of Houston)
[117]             The Iconography and History of the Hacha in Classic Veracruz
The hacha has long served as a key element in the yoke/hacha/palma complex of portable sculpture known chiefly for Classic Veracruz (c. 100–1000 C.E.)
and closely related to the Mesoamerican ball game. Scholars have rightly associated hacha iconography with a specific decapitation sacrifice and related
that sacrifice to rites surrounding rubber ball game. While this iconographical analysis is sound, it does little to explain the appearance of the hacha as a
new category of material object, as well as its distribution in some but not all areas of Classic Veracruz visual culture. This essay will begin to localize and
historicize this object and the sacrificial rites with which the object is so closely related.
[209]             Discussant
[209]             Chair
Koontz Scaffidi, Beth [92] see Seyler, Samantha
Kornfeld, Marcel (PiRL - University of Wyoming) and Bob Dawe (Royal Alberta Museum, Edmonton)
[21]              Nunataks and Valley Glaciers: Over the Mountains and Through the Ice
The first peopling of the Americas is characterized by either a coastal route or an ice free corridor during the late Wisconsin glaciation, when continental ice
still covered the north half of the continent. While the pendulum has swung somewhat towards the coastal route, no smoking gun exists that will deliver a
champion in this controversy. With this paper we would like to present a third option—the “Icy Corridor.” We argue that a corridor is an unnecessary feature
for Clovis predecessors’ terrestrial arrival below the ice sheets. In this presentation, we review the recent genomic data and consider its compatibility with a
re-visioned Alberta/Rockies corridor.
Kornfeld, Marcel [244] see Larson, Mary Lou
Kosakowsky, Laura (University of Arizona)
[109]             Discussant
Kosakowsky, Laura [294] see Moyes, Holley
Kosiba, Steve (University of Alabama)
[105]             Navigating Cusco: Pathways to History and Landscapes of Social Conflict in the Inca Imperial Capital
In creating Cusco, the Incas assembled a landscape of monuments and pathways that embodied a mythic vision of the past. But how did Cusco’s
landscape, which was invested with pre-Inca meanings and memories, become Inca? In this paper, I present archaeological and ethnohistorical data from
Cusco to explore how Cusco’s indigenous people constructed their past under Inca and early Spanish rule. I examine how pathways and landscapes in
Cusco—the processions of the Capac Raymi and Situa ceremonies, the environs of the Inca mountain-deity Huanacauri, and the routes used to avoid or
resist early Spanish governance—engendered multiple perspectives of Cusco’s past. My principal argument is that the indigenous inhabitants of Cusco
both negotiated and bolstered their social positions when they walked the city’s pathways and participated in rituals that recalled key social conflicts with
Incas or Spanish. In tracing these pathways, I move beyond archaeological accounts of “place” that focus only on bounded sites, to instead examine how
movement manifests social memory. I also challenge top-down archaeological accounts of Inka origins and imperial history to explore what I term “cultures
of articulation”—the ways that indigenous agendas, sites, and memories may obstruct or become entangled with a state’s pretensions.
Kosiba, Steve [174] see Hunter, Raymond
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  235
Koski, Steven (University of Miami) and John A. Gifford (University of Miami, Emeritus)
[290]            Early Archaic through Middle Archaic Design Elements on Artifacts from the Basin at Little Salt Spring (8SO18), Sarasota County, Florida
Underwater excavations in the basin of Little Salt Spring by the University of Miami since 1992 have recovered seven artifacts made from bone, wood, and
shell with applied design elements from contexts associated with Early Archaic through Middle Archaic periods. These design elements represent some of
the earliest known from Florida; as early as 10560 to 10253 Cal. B.P. (2‐sigma). An analysis of these artifacts will be presented, with their relative and
absolute dates, and compared to regional design traditions.
Kostrzewa, Agata (University of Warsaw) and László Paja (University of Szeged)
[149]            Osteoarchaeological Assessment Of Generalized Stress Indicators in Skeletons from the Tápé-Széntéglaégető Cemetery, Hungary
Generalized stress indicators are non-specific anomalies produced by the body as an adaptive response to biological stressors such as malnutrition,
disease, or trauma. The prevalence of these lesions may be related to daily activity, lifestyle, or differential access to resources. Based on archaeological
analyses, the Hungarian Bronze Age is associated with significant socio-economic changes, including population increases, agricultural intensification, and
the emergence of social inequality. In this study, burials from the Late Bronze Age cemetery Tápé-Széntéglaégető are used to evaluate whether differential
burial treatment is associated with increased prevalence of generalized stress indicators and perhaps differing quality of life. Individuals were chosen
based on associated grave goods (high prevalence and low prevalence). Remains were analyzed using macromorphological methods for recording stress
indicators like cribra orbitalia and cribra cranii, linear enamel hypoplasia, periostitis, endocranial lesions, and superficial vertebral changes. Macroscopically
visible bone pathologies were also recorded.
Kosyk, Katrina (University of Victoria)
[179]            Notes from the Past: Identifying Communities of Practice within Musical Gestures and Production Techniques of Pre-Columbian Greater
                 Nicoya Aerophones from the Tempisque Period (500 B.C.–A.D. 300)
Typically, ephemeral aspects of material culture, such as musical gestures and sound, are often overlooked in the reconstruction of Greater Nicoya culture
history. Musical instruments offer clues to our understanding of cultural practices and the kinds of interactions between groups of individuals. Developing
from recent research based on both archaeological and museum collections, my research examines—from a music archaeology perspective—a variety of
highly decorated and culturally imbued ceramic ocarinas, whistles, and flutes. I examine the level of variation within organological and stylistic aspects of
precolumbian Greater Nicoya aerophones to demonstrate intrasite micro-scale levels of interaction and communities of practice. I also propose an
innovative approach to identifying communities of practice within sound and musical gestures observed through an instrument’s construction.
Kotegawa, Hirokazu (Universidad Veracruzana)
[264]            Tradición regional e impacto cultural foráneo: Los logros y tareas a través de las tres temporadas de campo por el Proyecto Arqueológico
                 Estero Rabón
El sitio arqueológico de Estero Rabón, conocido como un centro secundario de la primera capital olmeca San Lorenzo, se encuentra a unos 12 km hacia
el oeste de dicha capital. Según los estudios realizados en esta región y el sitio mismo, el sitio tuvo muy larga ocupación humana a partir de pre olmeca
hasta el Clásico Tardío/Terminal llamado la fase Villa Alta. Sin embargo, no existió un proyecto sistemático a través de la excavación arqueológica. Por
ello, no habíamos sabido los detalles del desarrollo y de la función del sitio dentro y fuera de esta región del Golfo de México. Por ello, a partir del año
2012, se inició el Proyecto Arqueológico Estero Rabón (PAER) por el objetivo del averiguar la vida de los olmecas de menor rango social. Así, desde
enero del 2013, se han llevado a cabo las tres temporadas de campo con excavaciones intensivas por sondeos estratigráficos y pruebas de barreno en
este sitio y se arrojaron diversos resultados relevantes. En esta presentación se enfocará a examinar la posibilidad de la tradición regional y el impacto
cultural foráneo en el sitio basando en los datos excavados por el PAER.
Kotsoglou, Anastasia (Cornell University)
[77]             Functional Flesh: A Consideration of Bodily Loci in Classic Maya Bloodletting Practices
Bloodletting is generally accepted as a pan-mesoamerican practice, varying both in ideology and process. The Classic Maya drew blood from two specific
areas: men most commonly let blood from their genitals while women more often let blood from their tongue or cheeks. Previous research into the choice
of oral and genital perforation for non-permanent piercing includes little-investigated functional qualities, which may have been a key factor for locus
choice. I argue that the functionality of these areas was a potentially decisive factor for bloodletting practices by examining vascularity, susceptibility to
infection, propensity for hypertrophic scar tissue build-up, and rate of cellular regeneration in order to contrast tongue and genital non-permanent
perforation against the viability of other potential perforation sites. The evidence suggests that the chosen locales provide marked physiological advantages
and were neither purely ritual nor incidental in their selection.
Kovacevich, Brigitte (University of Central Florida), Michael Callaghan (University of Central Florida), Karla Cardona (Universidad del Valle),
Whitney Goodwin (Southern Methodist University) and Katelyn Bishop (University of California, Los Angeles)
[27]             New Investigations at Holtun: A Preclassic Maya Ritual Center
The site of Holtun is located in the department of the Peten at about 12 km south of the site of Yaxha and 35 km from Tikal. Holtun is considered a civic-
ceremonial center and is part of a Group of Preclassic epicenters located south of Yaxha Lake. This paper will summarize the results of the field and lab
seasons from 2012–2015. We will also discuss the preliminary results of the analysis of radiocarbon, fauna, lithics, ceramics, and soils. The analyses
suggest that Holtun was a Preclassic ceremonial center in this region and has early evidence of social inequality, monumental architecture, and public
ritual.
Kovacevich, Brigitte [235] see Crawford, Dawn
Kralick, Kolleen (USFS Medicine Bow - Routt National Forest), Bridget Roth (USFS Medicine Bow - Routt National Forest), Towny Anderson
(HistoriCorps) and Molly Westby (USFS Rocky Mountain Regional Office)
[267]            16 by 16—Forest Service Fire Lookout Restorations in the Rocky Mountain Region
Fire lookouts are symbolic within the U.S. Forest Service. Following the devastating fires of 1910, early fire detection became a priority, and lookout towers
began to be built throughout the country. Although technology has practically made lookouts obsolete as early fire warning systems, their historic
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              236
significance and a powerful nostalgia makes them the ideal subject for a preservation initiative which focuses on restoration and celebration of these
important icons. In 2013, the USFS, Forest Fire Lookout Association, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, and HistoriCorps entered into an MOU
which formalizes their cooperative spirit in collaborating on Sixteen Lookout Restorations on USFS lands by 2016. We highlight the Rocky Mountain
Regions restoration work with volunteers from HistoriCorps, the Forest Fire Lookout Association, USFS Job Corps, and the USFS Passport in Time
program.
Kramer, Karen [279] see Greaves, Russell
Krämer, Thomas [224] see Bouwman, Abigail
Krause, Samantha (University of Texas at Austin)
[130]             Understanding Environmental Thresholds through Geoarchaeology: Case Studies from the Maya Lowlands
All depositional environments can leave complex records of environmental change over time. We consider floodplains, alluvial fans, and wetlands of the
Maya Lowlands at present day Neundorf, Belize. We have documented a rich history of sedimentation, water chemistry, and archaeological data that show
a measurable environmental and archaeological signature that date back over 4,000 years in this region. This research uses soil geomorphology to study
the chronology and processes of wetland formation. It also seeks to characterize human manipulation of these environments and understand different
types of environmental change. We base this work on a suite of techniques: AMS dating, LOI, magnetic susceptibility, XRF/XRD, Pb-210, and
micromorphology. We present new findings from our 2015 field season in two major excavations. The first, through an ancient Maya canal and field system
exposed the underlying natural floodplain. The second, through an adjacent alluvial fan also exposed the buried floodplain. These represent abrupt
transitions 30 m apart: the first from an Archaic floodplain to a human engineered wetland field, and the second a facies change from the karst and alluvial
floodplain to the colluvial fan. We compare these facies changes with a range of other abrupt and gradual transitions in the geomorphic record.
[130]             Chair
Krause, Johannes (Max Planck Institute - SHH), Maria A. Spyrou (Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human Hist), Michal Feldman (Max
Planck Institute for the Science of Human Hist), Alexander Herbig (Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human Hist) and Kirsten I. Bos (Max
Planck Institute for the Science of Human Hist)
[223]             Genome Analysis of Medieval Yersinia pestis Suggests an Ancient European Source Population for the Majority Of Modern Plague Strains
Yersinia pestis is among the most notorious pathogens and is thought to be responsible for at least three major Eurasian plague pandemics since the Late
Antique. Much has been speculated about the origin of the disease, and its potential migration routes to various parts of the world. Historical documents
point toward an African origin for the first pandemic during the sixth century A.D. and an Asian source for the fourtheenth century Black Death. Modern
molecular data, however, suggest an east Asian origin for all strains based on the high genetic diversity observed in China. Here, we make use of ancient
Y. pestis genomes isolated from skeletons that span more than 1,000 years of European history to reconstruct the relationship between historical and
modern bacterial strains. We find that the two historical pandemic periods gave rise to independent Y. pestis lineages that traveled through Europe and
later disappeared. The pervasive and worldwide third pandemic, however, derives from a lineage that likely originated during the Black Death, and spread
eastwards after leaving Europe to become established in China. Our results thus illustrate how ancient genomes can be used to make inferences about the
spread of historically important pathogens.
Krause, Johannes [223] see Bos, Kirsten
Kretzler, Ian [266] see Gonzalez, Sara
Krigbaum, John [134] see Eusebio, Michelle
Krigbaum, John (University of Florida (Anthropology))
[295]             Holocene Seasonality, Mobility, and Diet at Niah Cave (Sarawak, East Malaysia): New Isotope Results on Rainforest Foragers and
                  Farmers?
Assessment of fine-grained proxies to infer paleoclimate and paleoecology in tropical southeast Asia is hampered by the coarseness of the archaeological
record. Advances in technology, however, do permit fresh insights into past rainforest ecologies using isotope ratios from tooth enamel, albeit with very real
spatial and temporal limitations. This is especially true for isotopic analysis of incremental growth layers in human tooth enamel. In this paper, oxygen and
carbon isotope ratios are reported for ‘bulk’ and serially sampled molars recovered from Holocene deposits at Niah Cave (northern Borneo). These data
are coupled with ‘bulk’ strontium and lead isotope ratios derived from the same tooth. Oxygen and carbon data, respectively, reflect sequential events of
seasonality and diet of each individual sampled, whereas lead and strontium reflect inferred dietary catchment. The data show a complex pattern of life
history for different individuals and groups of individuals interred at the site, and underscore diverse patterns of mobility and subsistence. Results are
examined against Holocene climate variables in the region. For example, oxygen and carbon results of ‘Neolithic’ individuals show increased subannual
variation, which may correlate with increased incidence of El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) variability during and after the Holocene thermal maximum.
[134]             Discussant
Kristan-Graham, Cynthia (Auburn University)
[209]              Pondering Prehistory, Texts, and Roads in Yucatan
Roads in Yucatan, Mexico, were aesthetic, territorial, and communicative systems that both united and divided the landscape. I employ network theory,
placemaking, and urban planning and landscape models to analyze Maya road systems at Yaxuna, Coba, Ek Balam, and Chichen Itza as site extensions,
markers of identity, and ritual and commercial corridors. It may seem heretical for an art historian to abandon historical documents available for one’s
arsenal for analysis. However, Gil Stein and others characterize the complicated times when conquerors and explorers met the colonized as the “colonial
entanglement.” In Yucatan, this entanglement occurred in the sixteenth century; the resultant historical literature is several centuries later than the roads in
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              237
question, a timespan long enough to question accuracy, memory, and problematic cultural stances.
[209]             Chair
Kristensen, Todd [148] see Jones, Travis
Kroot, Matthew (Skidmore College)
[144]             Reinterpreting Winney’s Rift: Material Culture, Language, and Ethnogenesis Outside of Iroquoia
Winney’s Rift, located along Fish Creek in Saratoga County, New York, has been the focus of several systematic and publicly reported excavations, as well
as countless disturbances by looters, collectors, and amateur archaeologists. This paper reviews the history of material recovery and interpretation by
these various parties before reexamining the anthropological significance of the site. Reported artifacts show occupations at the site ranging from two
Clovis points through to present-day materials. The most recent systematic professional excavations at the site show the depth and density of materials
recovered continuously increasing during the Middle and Late Woodland periods. The excavators interpreted the site as a nucleating central settlement at
this time, occupied by Algonquian speakers utilizing pottery, which shared traits with both Ancestral Iroquoian and Algonquian ceramics. In the years since
these results were published, nearly all of the concepts utilized in this interpretation have undergone scrutiny in the broader literature. By revisiting the
materials recovered from the site and their spatial, environmental, and cultural contexts, this paper shows that the heuristic concept of ethnogenesis as a
way of understanding northern Iroquoian speaking communities can also provide insights into those communities that did not become Iroquoian.
Kroot, Matthew [177] see Gokee, Cameron
Krug, Andrew (University of Missouri), Kyle Waller (University of Missouri) and Christine VanPool (University of Missouri)
[66]              Isotopic Approaches to Animas Phase Marine Shell Exchange
Previous studies of shell exchange in the greater southwest have supported archaeological interpretations of competing exchange networks in which the
Hohokam, Sinagua, and Anasazi acquired shell from the Gulf of California, while the Casas Grandes, Mimbres, and western Puebloan groups acquired
shell from West Mexico. Notably, these studies found that Animas phase sites, including Joyce Well, clustered with the Casas Grandes shell network. In
this study, we attempt to further studies of economic interaction in the borderlands region by comparing carbon and oxygen isotope ratios of Olivella shell
from the 76 Draw, a large Animas phase site near Deming, New Mexico, with several published modern Gulf of California datasets. The geochemical
analysis of Olivella shells from 76 Draw, as well as other Animas phase samples, will provide a clearer picture of exchange and interactions between
Paquimé and the hinterlands.
Krus, Anthony (Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre)
[285]             Bayesian Chronological Models for Mississippian Fortifications with Bastions
Bayesian chronological modeling is used to investigate the origins and causes of warfare during the Mississippian Period (A.D. 1000–1500) in the
midwestern and southeastern United States. Radiocarbon results from seven Mississippian centers are presented within an interpretative Bayesian
statistical framework. The results indicate that bastioned palisades were built and maintained primarily in A.D. 1200–1400. While there are a number of
reasons for the origins of widespread intensified Mississippian warfare, it appears to have been sustained by a climate of political instability. Additionally,
Mississippian centers continued to construct and maintain palisades for generations demonstrating long lasting social and psychological transformations.
Krussow, Lisa [104] see Cannon, Mike
Kubicek, Richard [112] see Richards, John
Kuckelman, Kristin (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center)
[215]             Ritual Modification in the Context of Social Unrest in the Northern San Juan
Among the Ancestral Pueblo peoples of the northern San Juan, outbreaks of warfare coincided with periods of environmental deterioration and subsistence
stress. The archaeological record of this region contains abundant data that reflect a final period of heightened lethal interactions in the late A.D. 1200s.
The data reveal a pattern of attacks that ended the occupations of several villages just before the northern San Juan was permanently depopulated by
Pueblo peoples about A.D. 1280. Evidence of these hostilities is preserved in the form of traumatic injuries, perimortem modifications, and the remains of
men, women, and children left in abandonment contexts on structure floors or roofs.
However, some fractured and burned remains at Goodman Point Pueblo diverge from this pattern. The contexts of these modified remains suggest that the
remains were deposited by residents during village occupation rather than by attackers when occupation of the village ended. This paper explores what the
different contexts and treatment of these remains might reveal about the identity of the deceased individuals, the relationship between these individuals
and the residents of the village who processed the remains, and about the ritual meanings of both the locations of deposition and of the processing itself.
Kuijt, Ian [37] see Sluka, Victoria
Kuijt, Ian (University of Notre Dame)
[52]              Skull Removal and Mediation of Personhood over the Forager-Farmer Transition
The transition from forager-collectors to small-scale agricultural communities, in the case of southern Levant the Natufian to Pre-Pottery Neolithic periods,
is widely viewed by researchers as a critical evolutionary threshold, one that both sees the development of new economic realities, and at the same time,
long-term continuity in select ritual practices.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               238
Numerous studies have put forth functional and symbolic interpretations for the existence of skull removal in specific ethnographic, temporal or
geographical case studies, often through the interpretive lens of ancestor worship, community integration, or human conflict and trophy taking.
Researchers have yet, however, to critically examine aspects of these arguments or to put forth broader modelling of the long-term development,
maintained, and expansion of the social practice of skull removal and modification through the Near Eastern forager-farmer transition. Drawing upon
ethnographic and archaeological data, this presentation develops a comparative long-term perspective on human skull removal and modification, and
considers how identity and personhood may have been linked to and symbolized by the human skull and face.
Kullen, Douglas
[193]            Archaeological Signatures for Mechanized Threshing Operations in the Midwest and the Plains
Nineteenth and twentieth century grain threshing operations left imprints on the rural landscape and social fabric of midcontinental North America. Traces
of threshing activity are seldom recognized archaeologically, despite the importance of this activity to the history of agricultural development and rural
lifeways in the Midwest and Plains regions. Changes in threshing technology followed a chronological sequence with inter-regional variability. Different
stages of the technology can be identified and dated through specific archaeological signatures, which are discussed here.
Kuntz, Aaron (Grant County PUD), Andrew Murphy (Grant County PUD) and Brett Lenz (Grant County PUD)
[114]            Archaeological Recovery Associated with the Wanapum Dam Emergency Drawdown, Central Washington State
In spring 2014, a 60-foot crack was discovered in the Wanapum Dam, a large hydroelectric dam on the mainstream Columbia River. In order to avoid
catastrophic failure of the dam the reservoir it impounded was drawn down 26 feet. As a run-of-the-river dam, a complete drawdown is not normally
planned, and more than 4500 acres of inundated landscape was exposed for the first time in more than 50 years. Under normal operating conditions,
around 1,400 archaeological sites are known to exist along the reservoir margins. As a result of the drawdown, 45 new sites were exposed, ranging in age
from the Paleoindian through the historic periods. Our presentation provides an overview of the newly exposed sites and details related to treatment of
significant archaeological sites under emergency management conditions.
Kupprat, Felix [256] see Vázquez López, Verónica
Kupsch, Mary [286] see Rafidi, Brianna
Kurin, Danielle [91] see Pink, Christine
Kurnick, Sarah (University of Colorado Boulder)
[54]             Archaeology and the Production of Capital in the 21st Century
Over the last two decades, archaeologists have increasingly debated whether and how archaeology can be used to promote public welfare and foster
progressive social change. Some scholars have emphasized the methodological importance of praxis. Others have emphasized the pragmatic need for
public intellectuals. And, still others have emphasized the ethical necessity of community engagement. In this paper, I maintain that archaeology can and
should be an ally in the effort to understand, and perhaps even mitigate, one of the most pressing contemporary concerns—social inequality. Pierre
Bourdieu has suggested that inequality derives, at least in part, from the unequal distribution of capital, be it economic, cultural, or social. In this paper, I
suggest that Bourdieu’s framework offers a useful model for archaeologists, and that we can attempt to rectify social inequality—in a small way—by
producing forms of capital that benefit the communities for which we work. By doing so, I aim to propose a form of engaged, public archaeology useful to
those working in various contexts around the world.
[54]             Chair
Kurosaki, Mitsuru
[264]            Las características de ofrenda de terminación en La Joya, Centro-Sur de Veracruz
En el sitio arqueológico La Joya, en el Centro- Sur de Veracruz se han encontrado ofrendas. En la Plataforma Este se encontraron los depósitos de
terminación del período clásico medio-tardío 500–1,000 d.C.
Basado en los datos de excavación, en este trabajo proponemos que hay dos tipos de ofrendas de terminación:
1) Ofrendas masivas de los materiales, en especial, vasijas y figurillas y
2) Ofrendas con presencia cerámica en pares.
En primero, se asocia con los entierros sacrificados y posteriormente se colocó un depósito masivo de cerámica encima de los entierros.
En segundo, se descubre que el depósito consiste en simplemente vasijas, no con figurillas ni entierros. La mayor parte fue la de uso doméstico.
Por lo consiguiente, analizamos cada uno de los contextos y observamos los materiales de la ofrenda de terminación en la Joya, Veracruz.
Kurosky, Alexander [103] see Wiktorowicz, Conner
Kurozumi, Taiji [173] see Takamiya, Hiroto
Kusmartono, Vida (Australian National University)
[295]            Reconstructing the Peopling of the Deep Interior of the Equatorial Rainforest of Kalimantan
Previous archaeological discoveries by Soejono (1977) and Chazine (2010) at Nanga Balang and Diang Kaung in the deep interior of Kalimantan
(Indonesian Borneo) have documented human occupation there at c. 3000 B.P. But sites closer to the coastline of Borneo, especially the Niah Caves in
Sarawak, have yielded chronologies indicating a much greater span of late Pleistocene (50 Kya onwards) to Holocene occupation. So, did hunter-gatherer
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               239
populations also exist in the deep interior of Borneo throughout the same period? Were they present prior to 3000 B.P.? My two seasons of excavation
(2013–2014) in two caves in the upper Kapuas Basin indicate at least six different periods of activity, ranging in date (14 charcoal samples) from 15 cal.
Kya to recent. Recovered materials include pebble and flake tools, pottery, iron artifacts, marine cowry shells, glass and shell beads, human bones, and a
quantity of rice husk. Today, this region is exploited occasionally by Punan hunters and swiddeners, but has no permanent settlement. These new
chronologies for human occupation of deep interior equatorial rainforest are significant for the “rainforest debate” of the late 1980–1990s, and confirm the
importance of interior Borneo within the prehistory of Indonesia and Island Southeast Asia.
Kutys, Thomas [36] see Lennon, Mary
Kuwanwisiwma, Leigh [267] see Coleman, Julie
Kuzminsky, Susan [204] see Coonerty, Nina
Kuzminsky, Susan (Universidad Católica del Norte, Chile, University of California, Santa Cruz), Tiffiny Tung (Department of Anthropology,
Vanderbilt University), Mark Hubbe (Ohio State University, Univ Católica del Norte) and Antonio Villasenor-Marchal (Department of
Anthropology, Vanderbilt University)
[207]             The Standardization of Prehistoric Cranial Vault Modification Practices in the Andes: A 3D Geometric Morphometric Approach
Bioarchaeologists have long been interested in documenting the forms and techniques involved in cranial modification and exploring the larger social
significance of such practices, particularly in the Andes. While such studies have enriched our understanding of head-shaping practices among pre-
hispanic populations, there has been a dearth of research that investigates the individuals who were responsible for carrying out these corporeal
modifications on infants. Was the practice carried out by a specialist class tasked with developing and performing the modification techniques? Or was this
practice much more individualized and done by parents or other older kin? Our study examines whether the standardization of head-shaping practices
among Andean groups indicates that specialists modified infants' heads or whether group variability within general categories of modification may suggest
that the practice was conducted by family members at the household level. We conducted analyses using 3D geometric morphometric methods to compare
vault shapes within and between prehistoric populations from the central Peruvian Highlands (n=15) and the coast of northern Chile (n=38). The results
show distinct spatio-temporal trends in the standardization of this cultural practice and demonstrate that 3D quantitative approaches can discern
modification types that are difficult to differentiate using gross visual assessments.
Kvetina, Petr (Institute of Archaeology Prague, Czech Republic), Klara Neumannova (Institute of Archaeology Prague, Czech Republic) and
Richard Ther (Department of Archaeology, University Hradec Kralo)
[146]             Technological Variability of Pottery in Long-Term Perspective: A Case of the Neolithic Settlement at Bylany (Czech Republic)
The paper presents the development of the technological analysis of pottery at the large Neolithic settlement at Bylany (Czech Republic). The aim of the
study is to identify technological chains and interpret the technological variability as materialisation of social networks. Technological variability is studied in
relation to the chronological and spatial diversity of the settlement area. The approach is based on visual examination of macroscopic features coupled with
validation of the observed phenomena by microscopic analysis. The analysis is focused not only on defining technologically distinctive groups of pottery but
also on revealing the nature of these groups. For this reason, emphasis is placed on the quantification of observed phenomena. Until recently, complex
quantitative analysis was not imaginable without enormous time consuming effort. The development of techniques of automated image analysis brings new
possibilities for understanding the nature of the technological variability. It allows us to locate pottery samples in the multidimensional space of relevant
variables and to interpret where intentions and accents of potters were in terms of technological behaviour.
Kwan, Daniel (University of Toronto) and Leping Jiang (Zhejiang Institute of Archaeology)
[173]             An Overview of Technological Changes in the Pottery of the Early Holocene Shangshan Culture, Zhejiang Province, China
This paper will outline diachronic trends in pottery technology and subsistence practices of the early Holocene Shangshan culture (11,400 to 8400 cal.
B.P.) in the lower Yangtze Valley, China. It is hypothesized that Shangshan peoples engaged in low-level production of rice and began the process of
bringing this crucial cereal under domestication. Early Shangshan pottery was tempered with rice leaves, stems, and chaff, and is the earliest known
Chinese pottery tempered with dry organic material and the earliest known fine ware. Later in the Shangshan sequence, there was a shift to pottery
tempered with non-organic materials. We are exploring the relationship between changes in Shangshan pottery technology, culinary practices, and the
emergence of rice cultivation as factors in the complex human-environmental interaction that occurred in the lower Yangtze Valley after 12,000 years ago.
[173]             Chair
Kwoka, Joshua (University at Buffalo) and Alyce de Carteret
[179]             Debitage and Diminutive Domiciles: Late-Terminal Classic Lithic Production, Consumption, and Raw Material Availability at El Zotz,
                  Guatemala
El Zotz is an ancient Maya site located in the contemporary Department of El Petén, Guatemala. Its influence on Classic Lowland geopolitics and the
political fortunes of its elites are attested by inscriptions at home and abroad. Dwarfed by funerary temples and palace complexes, multiple small
household groups dot the site’s periphery. This paper shifts the focus of analysis to populations located toward the opposite end of the sociopolitical
spectrum through an analysis of lithic data recovered from 17 Late to Terminal Classic (A.D. 600–980) residential structures. Preliminary results of
aggregate and technological analyses of chert and obsidian artifacts are presented. Of particular interest is interhousehold variability in lithic production
and consumption practices as indices of economic and/or social differentiation or integration. Furthermore, obsidian data is employed to evaluate current
models of obsidian production and distribution for the Maya Lowlands.
La Mattina, Nicco [99] see Sayre, Matthew
Lacquement, Cameron (The University of Alabama)
[119]             Formulating an Energetics Assessment of the Moundville Landscape
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             240
Platform mound building is a key indicator of sociopolitical complexity in the southeastern United States. In this presentation, the human energy employed
in earthen monumental construction at the Moundville polity in west-central Alabama is quantified as a means of exploring the organizational variability of
the control of surplus labor and material resources in an emerging complex society. To reconstruct the scale of sociopolitical differentiation invested in
mound building, the energy necessary to excavate, transport, and compact mound and plaza soils is used in conjunction with data and techniques from
other disciplines such as geotechnical engineering, human physiology, human biology, and ergonomics. This cross-disciplinary approach allows for the unit
of measure in energetic studies of earthen mounds to be reformulated from person-hours to kilojoules.
Ladefoged, Thegn N. [296] see Mulrooney, Mara
Ladron De Guevara, Sara (Sara Ladron de Guevara)
[264]             El maiz. Iconografía ritual y de poder en la Costa del Golfo.
Los avances en la arqueobotánica nos han permitido conocer los procesos por los cuales el maíz fue domesticado y hasta hace relativamente poco se
creía que su consumo estaba ligado a las necesidades alimentarias y el incremento poblacional. Sin embargo, nuevos datos sugieren que una de las
principales causas de la domesticación fue su uso ritual; esta característica constituyo uno de los pilares de la tradición iconográfica mesoamericana ya
que se fue complejizando y articulando a otros dispositivos discursivos e iconográficos, específicamente a los lenguajes rituales y de poder. En este
trabajo se realizará una revisión de los motivos iconográficos de la Costa del Golfo que asocian al maíz y su cultivo con las prácticas rituales vinculadas al
ejercicio y despliegue poder a lo largo de la histórica mesoamericana.
Ladwig, Jammi (University of Minnesota, Twin Cities)
[11]              The Microscopic World and Curated Collections as Entry Points to Discuss Archaeological Stewardship with Multiple Publics
The very word “archaeology” conjures interest by the public generally. Finding meaningful ways to engage that interest, however, is less straight-forward
for practitioners, educators, and researchers. Sitting within any given repository of archaeological materials are collections in need of additional
documentation and analysis, some of which may have not been handled since the time of their initial excavation and curation. Additionally, while much can
be learned through microbotanical research (specifically phytolith analysis), the necessary training in the laboratory preparation of samples and their
subsequent examination proves a stumbling-block. Questions involving paleoethnobotany are doubtless of interest to many groups of people, but the very
use of this term demonstrates how archaeological jargon can discourage the participation of the general public. This paper will highlight several cases
where the author has used archaeological/paleoethnobotanical materials in innovative ways in many settings to engage various publics with archaeology,
the microbotanical record, and issues of heritage and stewardship.
Laffere, Clint [78] see Nichols, Kristi Miller
Laffey, Ann [235] see Duffy, Lisa
Laffoon, Jason (Leiden University)
[222]             Investigating Animal Trade, Transport, and Translocation in the Precolonial Caribbean: New Isotopic and Zooarchaeological Evidence
Investigations of the dynamic relationships between humans and (non-human) animals are of interest to a broad range of scientific disciplines throughout
the world. In the Caribbean, the complexities of island biogeography, transportation technologies, and human agency converge to condition the spatial
distribution of both humans and animals. This region has long been characterized as relatively impoverished in higher order species diversity and scarcity
of domesticated animals, yet the precolonial movement of various animals and their physical remains between islands or archipelagoes, and between the
mainland and insular Caribbean by indigenous peoples, is evidenced by ancient and modern faunal distributions. However, many questions concerning
these processes remain unresolved, including the dating, intensity, and frequency of these movements; the mechanisms involved (transported, traded, or
translocated); the number and types of species; and their geographic origins. Here, we highlight an ongoing multi-disciplinary study of animal mobility and
exchange in the precolonial Caribbean combining zooarchaeological and isotopic analyses. Results to date indicate the previously undocumented
movement of certain mammal species; the early presence of locally born ‘introduced’ taxa; the continued inter-island transport of animals long after initial
colonization; correlations between geographic origins and certain taxa; and macro-regional correlations between human and canine dietary patterns.
[222]             Chair
Laffoon, Jason [223] see Field, Michael
Laguens, Andrés [91] see Giesso, Martin
Laguens, Andres and Benjamin Alberti (Framingham State University)
[99]              Towards a Situated Ontology of Bodies and Landscapes in the Archaeology of the Southern Andes (First Millennium A.D. Northwest
                  Argentina)
Past ontologies of Andean worlds have been reconstructed in relation to archaeological landscapes, objects, and contexts. Relational and animated worlds
build on Andean concepts such as Apu, wa’ka, and Pacha, as well as Amazonian theories. In our case, we work with Amazonian perspectivism as a broad-
based Amerindian ontology to analyze a case from Andean northwest Argentina. Perspectivism provides us with a radically different ontological premise for
the world: things do not need to be animated, neither are they perceived as animated; they simply are, fundamentally, animated. More precisely,
“subjectivity” is a condition of being and relating as much as its result.
Starting from that premise, we take dwelling as a profoundly relational activity where human and non-human bodies participate actively. Recognizing the
theoretical mutuality of the concepts of body and landscape in archaeology, we explore what happens to ‘landscape’ when we start from an alternative
ontology of bodies. To that end, we explore why La Candelaria peoples existed in two different environments (yungas and semiarid valleys) in the first
millennium A.D. We argue that perceiving and experiencing a landscape does not exist as such; rather people experience “social” relationships with other
beings that inhabit and, indeed, constitute the world.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              241
Lail, Warren (New Mexico Highlands University), Victoria Evans (New Mexico Highlands University), Amanda Aragon (New Mexico Highlands
University) and Joaquin Montoya (New Mexico Highlands University)
[65]             A Possible Mammoth Kill Site in Northeastern New Mexico
Several years ago, in a remote canyon in northeastern New Mexico, a rancher found the fragmented remains of what was later determined to be a
Columbian Mammoth (Mammuthus columbi). In addition to the mammoth remains, now dated to 13,000 B.P., the rancher also found several blades,
allegedly in context, of chert that originated on the Edwards Plateau in central Texas (microanalysis of the blades is underway). At the invitation of the
ranch manager, we began limited testing at the site in 2010. Since that time, fragmented mammoth remains have been recovered, including teeth, bones,
and the tip of a tusk. We have also recovered additional chert flakes mixed with many of the bones. However, because of the fragmented condition of the
remains and the narrow canyon in which they are found, context remains uncertain. Moreover, no diagnostic Clovis-era tools have been recovered. We
continue our testing at the site in hopes of discovering intact bones and diagnostic stone implements in reliable contexts. Additionally, we are in the
process of obtaining Optically Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) dates of the buried soils in order to reconstruct the depositional history of the site. Here, we
present our activities and findings to date.
Laluk, Nicholas (White Mountain Apache Tribe), Larry Ludwig (Fort Bowie National Historic Site ), Dan McGrew (Bureau of Land Management)
and Chris Adams (Gila National Forest)
[78]             Searching for Cochise: The 2015 Archaeological Survey for an Apache Campsite associated with the Bascom Affair
In the winter of 1861, an event took place between the U.S. military and the Chokonen band of Chiricahua Apache under the leadership of Cochise that
intensified Apache-U.S. military hostilities for another 10 years. This paper presents the initial pedestrian and metal detector survey results from the
Bascom Affair project. Archaeologists utilizing metal detector surveys at military sites have met with great success (e.g., Adams 2000a, 2000b, 2001;
Laumbach et al. 2001; Ludwig and Stute 1993; Scott et al. 1989). Adams (2001:110) has suggested that the metal detector is one of the most important
tools used today in discovering and defining Apache sites, especially at shallow depths. Use of metal detectors also minimizes disturbance of the land,
including the potential for disturbing other sub-surface archaeological remains. Furthermore, because the project employed a “Least Impact” research
strategy—based upon Apache tribal best management practices, the use of a metal detector minimizes the usual site damage in terms of excavation and
other forms of destructive data collection methods. Moreover, integrative approaches to such research projects involving tribal descendent communities
are imperative to form more complete understandings of historical-period Apache life-ways.
Lam, WengCheong (Chinese University of Hong Kong Department of Anthropology), Jianrong Cong (Shaanxi Provincial Institute of
Archaeology) and Xingshan Lei (Peking University)
[173]            Formation of Iron Market System in the Capital Area of the Qin and Han Dynasties
Market system plays a key role in the formation of the imperial economy of Chinese early Empire. Previous scholarship usually paid attention to prestige
goods in this regard, giving a good albeit partial description about the market system in Early China. Putting in the anthropological discourse of market
exchange, this presentation explores the production and distribution of iron objects—one major type of daily-use items—in the Guanzhong Basin according
to burial data to better understand the formation processes of iron economy and its contribution to the state finance. This presentation argues that, during
the Qin Period, the iron market system was still less developed and circulated iron objects nearby the capital area, whereas a more systematic market
system developed only during the Han period, which led to the distribution of iron to more far-flung areas. Alongside the development of cast iron industry,
the distribution of iron objects during the Han Period presents a more ubiquitous pattern in burial contexts, indicating a full-fledged market system finally
took shape during this critical period.
Lambert, Stephanie (Brigham Young University), Joseph Bryce (Brigham Young University), Jaclyn Eckersley (Brigham Young University) and
Paul Stavast (Museums of Peoples and Cultures )
[39]             Collections and Conveyor Belts: A New Way to Look at Artifacts
The process of labeling, measuring, photographing, and classifying artifacts consumes significant amounts of resources for museums and archaeologists.
This poster presents technology developed by staff and students at the Museum of Peoples and Cultures at BYU for high-volume cataloging and
processing of artifacts. The current project is an integrated system that will reduce basic cataloging tasks from over 10 minutes per item to less than 15
seconds per item. The system automates artifact labeling, photography, basic measurement, and classification for objects smaller than 12” W x 10” L x
3”H. This significantly reduces manual data entry, reduces classification errors, virtually eliminates typographic errors in object labels, and improves long-
term accessibility to artifacts and associated data. Using vision recognition algorithms, the system identifies objects as they pass beneath a calibrated
camera. A publication quality image is taken and basic measurements are extracted and written to a database. The system allows for better control over
collections by having every item in a collection numbered, photographed, and measured for reference and tracking. Time saved by the system allows staff
to focus efforts on other tasks.
Lambert, Spencer (Brigham Young University) and Joseph Bryce (Brigham Young University)
[113]            The Elements of Bone: A Look into Fremont Diet at Wolf Village
Fremont diet is an aspect of Great Basin archaeology that has long fascinated Fremont scholars. Excavations which occurred at Wolf Village, a Fremont
site in Goshen, Utah, have yielded a large amount of faunal remains which can help archaeologists to identify the types of animals used in Fremont diet.
Excavations at the northern most knoll of the site uncovered a large bell-shaped pit filled with a high quantity of faunal remains. The high concentration of
bone provided a significant amount of data to analyze, to determine the types of animals being utilized by the Fremont at this site. Dr. Joel Janetski has
previously discussed Fremont diet at Five Finger Ridge. He theorized that there was a tendency to discard “low utility” elements of bones that contained
less meat than elements such as long bones. At Five Finger Ridge there was a presence of low utility elements of small artiodactyls, such as mandibles
and foot bones. Similar high and low utility elements were recovered from the bell-shaped pit at Wolf Village, which probably served as a kill/butchering
area due to the presence of these low utility portions.
Lambert, Spencer [113] see Bryce, Joseph
Lamkin, Sarah (Truman State University), Kayleigh Mrasek (Truman State University) and Luke Edwards (Truman State University)
[94]             How to Build an Input File for Binford's Frames of Reference from Existing Data Sources
This poster demonstrates how to build an input file to calculate Binford’s environmental and hunter-gatherer frames of reference using available global data
standards and GIS technology. Required input values include latitude, longitude, elevation, distance to the nearest coast in km, soil type, vegetation type,
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               242
and mean monthly values of temperature and rainfall. All of these data are freely available in global standard data sets (WORLDCLIM: Hijmans et al 2005,
World Wildlife Foundation Habitat Types: Olson et al. 2001, Soil Types: FAO-UNESCO 2005 Soil Map, Coast distance: NOAA/NASA 2009) for use as
raster files in GIS. Integrating these data with locations of interest through GIS serves to 1) standardize the input data compared to collecting locally
available weather station data, 2) eliminate the problem of missing data in some regions, and 3) automize the process of building an input file, making it as
easy to compile data for hundreds or thousands of locations as it is for only a few locations. The resulting input file structure can be run through the
EnvCalc 2.1 program to calculate Binford’s frames of reference so researchers anywhere in the world could use these variables to leverage learning from
the archaeological and ethnoarchaeological record.
Lamkin, Sarah [94] see Pintar, Elizabeth
Lanata, Jose (LCHES - University of Cambridge), Claudia Briones (IIDyPCa-CONICET), Adrian Monjeau (F.Bariloche-CONICET), Andrés Vaccari
(F.Bariloche-CONICET) and Florencia Bechis (IIDyPCa-CONICET)
[272]              Evolutionary Archaeology and the Anthropocene
Recently, the Anthropocene has challenged us to reflect on the era we live in and about the very terms in which we can frame its definition. As a geological
era, the Anthropocene seems to be the field of geologists, paleontologists, and biologists. However, now that the impact of Homo sapiens on the planet
became focus of preoccupation, an excellent opportunity has arisen to rethink the relationship H. sapiens—nature from the viewpoint of other disciplines.
As controversy, the Anthropocene can allow us the revision of paradigms entrenched for centuries in terms of the scientific criteria that has guided the
characterization of a "new era." Since the 1980s, Evolutionary Archaeology has studied numerous cases showing how H. sapiens has created different and
new ecological niches, modifying as a result not only the living conditions of animals and plants, but also of ecosystems. Our framing of the potential
contribution of Evolutionary Archaeology to the Anthropocene-controversy aims at pondering criteria and indicators to establish the onset of this "new era"
from a perspective that should be transdisciplinary in a comprehensive sense.
Lancelotti, Carla (Universitat Pompeu Fabra)
[125]              Untangling Activity Areas in Open Spaces: Ethnography at Jandhala, North Gujarat, India (part II)
Jandhala is a small village in the rural countryside of North Gujarat (India) where many of the activities related to food processing are still non-mechanized.
One compound within the village has been investigated ethnographically to test a novel methodology to unravel activity areas. In this paper, we present the
results of investigations in the courtyard of the compound. Over 170 samples were collected, in a regular grid of 2 x 2 meters, and analyzed for multi-
element geochemistry. We compare our results with the outcomes of previous analyses on the use of domestic space within the house. In addition, we
analyze the effects of anisotropy (directionality of movement) and physical barriers (walls, fences, and accumulations of different material) on chemical
proxies. Our experiment is not intended to create direct parallelisms between present and past-times, but to test the reliability of our methodology against
known activities. We conclude that the use of ethnography and geostatistical approaches can help in unlock the patters and identify activity areas in a
controlled environment.
[125]              Chair
Landau, Kristin (Northwestern University)
[212]              Copán’s Preclassic Pioneers: New Evidence from the San Lucas Neighborhood
Recent work in the San Lucas neighborhood outside of Copán’s urban core discovered significant human occupation in the Late Preclassic Period—
centuries before the first king came to power. Construction materials, ceramic styles, obsidian tools, human remains, and radiocarbon dates from three
households attest to the early and continuous settlement of this area in the foothills south of the Copán River. This paper reviews the evidence for San
Lucas’s Preclassic population, and its significance for a revised understanding of early Copán culture history. Comparisons are then made to known
Preclassic settlement within the southeast borderlands region, to begin to explore the cultural and ethnic affiliation of Copán’s pioneering families.
Lane, Brian [296] see DiNapoli, Robert
Lange, Frederick (Smithsonian Institution Department of Anthropology)
[53]               Pioneering Archaeology in Nicaragua (1983)
Three years after the Triumph of the Sandinista Revolution in 1979, this author was invited by the Council of National Reconstruction to assist Nicaraguan
cultural authorities in developing an archaeological research program for the Pacific side of the country. The revolutionary government had made a
conscious decision to prioritize the protection and investigation of the cultural heritage. I had conducted extensive research in northwestern Costa Rica,
known to be similar to southern Pacific Nicaragua. One of my colleagues at the University of Colorado-Boulder, where I had relocated, was Payson Sheets,
who had researched extensively in El Salvador; I thought he would be able to compare northern Pacific Nicaragua with El Salvador. Payson also was a
lithic specialist and was interested in volcanic landscapes; I raised funds from a private foundation to bring him along. We visited and recorded 26 sites and
defined 4 lithic zones and 4 ceramics zones. In 1992, the University of New Mexico Press published The Archaeology of Pacific Nicaragua, written in
collaboration with Suzanne Abel-Vidor and Anibal Martinez, which has remained the baseline for research on the Pacific coast of Nicaragua. Finally, we
made the phrase “mucho gusto” the saying of the century.
Langebaek, Carl [122] see Bernal, Marcela
Langenwalter, Paul (Biola University, La Mirada, CA) and Titus Kennedy (Biola University)
[131]              Eccleston’s Pictograph: The Great Medicine Rock
During 1851, the Mariposa Battalion was formed to quell conflict between a number of Central California tribes and settlers during the California Gold
Rush. The battalion’s pursuit of the Chowchilla and Chukchansi tribes led to several important discoveries including a Chukchansi curing shrine and
Yosemite Valley. Diarist Robert Eccleston named the shrine “The Great Medicine Rock” and provided a brief description of its use. This is the earliest
account of any rock art in California and one of the few descriptions of the function of such a site. Eccleston illustrated 26 of the black and white
pictographs, which he remarks was only a sample. He also noted the presence of natural deterioration and apparent differences in age, without specifying
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               243
individual pictographs. The site is important because Eccleston’s account associates specific design elements with curing. Documentation of the panels in
1987 and again in 2015 using different types of photography and lighting have revealed new elements and enhanced others, providing evidence of at least
10 additional design elements. Many more have likely been lost to weathering. The use of multiple photographic techniques provides the opportunity to
compare results between color photography, black & white infrared, and color infrared techniques.
Langlie, BrieAnna (Washington University in St. Louis)
[205]             So Many Chenopods: Paleoethnobotany of the Late Intermediate Period, Puno, Peru (A.D. 1100–1450)
Following the collapse of Tiwanaku in the Andean altiplano, warfare, sociopolitical balkanization, and a severe drought lead to economic hardships during
the Late Intermediate period (LIP) between A.D. 1100 and 1450. Previous research in the region has shed light on how martial conflict between and
possibly among competing ethnic groups incited people to live in defensive fortified hilltop villages. Although scholars have previously speculated on the
severity of lifeways for residents of hillforts during the LIP, no quotidian data existed to substantiate these hypotheses. Drawing on macrobotanical
information collected from Ayawiri, one of the largest hillforts in the northern Titicaca Basin, I reconstruct plant use and foodways during the LIP. Analysis
of caches and other domestic contexts indicate LIP peoples relied heavily on quinoa and other Chenopodium spp., demonstrating Ayawiri foodways were
nonetheless salubrious. I assess the diversity of food assemblages across households to elucidate intra-community economic variation. In doing so, I
present a comprehensive understanding of LIP plant use.
Langston, Lucinda [278] see Franklin, Jay
Lanoë, François (University of Arizona)
[242]             Animal Resources and Technology in Eastern Beringia During the Late Pleistocene
Bone technology is often omitted from discussions about technological variability and functionality in eastern Beringia, where recovered organic artifacts
are rare. However, based on discoveries in northeastern Eurasia with good organic preservation, it can be surmised that bone technology was similarly
important to Beringian hunter-gatherers during the Final Pleistocene.
Here, we present the results of faunal and spatial analyses of the site of Swan Point CZ4b, the oldest known archaeological site in eastern Beringia
(~14,000 cal. B.P.). Faunal and spatial evidence highlight the function of the site as a specialized organic raw material workshop. Beringian people
possessed a breadth and depth of technological skills, and this investment suggests that bone technology formed a major part of their economy. Mammals
and birds were clearly regarded as raw material sources in addition to nutritional resources.
Most models describing the process and timing of the colonization of Beringia deal with technological change in terms of lithic technology only. The idea
that Beringian people relied heavily on bone technology, in a context where the nature and abundance of animal resources were rapidly and dramatically
changing, has important bearings on our understanding of this period.
[242]             Chair
Lape, Peter (University of Washington), Emily Peterson (University of Washington), Jenn Huff (University of Washington), Joss Whittaker
(University of Washington) and Lauryl Zenobi (University of Washington)
[252]             Exploring the Island Southeast Asian Neolithic: New Results from Seram Island, Indonesia
The Island Southeast Asian Neolithic remains a controversial archaeological construction. Traditional theories explain the appearance of pottery, domestic
plants, and animals in the region about 3,500 years ago as the result of migrations from Taiwan and SE China. Archaeological and genetic data collected
in the past decade do not fit well with those theories, and scholars have begun to investigate new explanations. One area of renewed focus is in the
relationship between fishing and farming at the beginning of the Neolithic Period. Our team has been investigating the ways in which fishers and nascent
farmers utilized large islands and how those use histories differed on small islands and atolls at different levels of isolation from the large islands. In this
paper, we present the results of a 2015 archaeological and paleoenvironmental survey of the large Seram Island and several nearby small islands and
atolls, located in eastern Indonesia.
Lapham, Heather (Southern Illinois University Carbondale) and Ronald Faulseit (The Field Museum)
[237]             Meat Consumption and Animal Use at Cerro Danush, Oaxaca, Mexico
Cerro Danush is located in the Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico, within the Dainzú-Macuilxóchitl region—an area that underwent significant sociopolitical
reorganization as the Zapotec state centered at nearby Monte Albán weakened and its regional power declined during the Classic to Postclassic transition.
Comparing and contrasting zooarchaeological assemblages from a commoner household, an elite residence, and a ceremonial complex at Cerro Danush
provides new insights into differential patterns of meat consumption and animal use during the Late Classic (A.D. 600–900) to Early Postclassic (A.D. 900–
1300) periods. This poster presents new data from the 2015 excavations at Cerro Danush’s Terrace S25 and newly analyzed data from earlier excavations
at Terrace S19 to explore diachronic economic patterns of animal production and consumption within a single residential neighborhood.
Lapp, Jennifer
[86]              The Human Burials of Conchal, Rivas, Nicaragua
The mounds of Conchal in Nicaragua were originally thought to be domestic refuse mounds, filled mostly with crushed shells and broken ceramics. Only
upon excavation was it discovered that there were multiple individuals buried in the mounds. What did this mean to the inhabitants who lived here? Why
were these individuals buried with refuse? Using an analogy from across the pond, it is believed that the individuals were not necessarily buried here
purposefully. The individuals were possibly placed here to decompose then interred in other parts of the site. Only later the mounds grew in size and then
became significant to the population; going from ordinary to extraordinary. This site began to hold meaning with the ancestors being nearby and the
mounds giving the inhabitants visible markers of their territory. The populations of inhabitants past and present give this site meaning.
Larios, Jennifer [205] see Jones, Terrah
Larmon, Jean
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              244
[234]            Examining the Environment: Pollen Data from Cara Blanca, Belize Pools 1 and 6
Teetering on the edge of a 60-meter deep cenote, or karstic sinkhole, partially consumed by the pool and constantly threatened by erosion, is an Ancient
Maya Water Temple. This particular cenote, Cara Blanca Pool 1, is one of 25 pools (cenotes and lakes) in the Cara Blanca region. Exploratory diving from
the pool and excavations from several of its associated structures suggest the temple was a pilgrimage site for Terminal Classic (A.D. 750–900) Maya.
Seeking reprieve from the Terminal Classic droughts, people traveled to Pool 1 to provide offerings to Chaak, the Maya rain deity. This poster presents the
preliminary analysis of a sediment core extracted from Pool 1 during the 2015 field season. In order to produce a more localized environmental
reconstruction for Pool 1 during the Terminal Classic Period, fossil pollen was extracted from the Pool 1 sediments. The assemblages were then compared
to nearby Pool 6 sediment assemblages. This study fills a gap in the environmental history of central Belize while trying to elucidate the relationship
between Terminal Classic Maya and Cara Blanca.
Larsen, Clark Spencer [215] see Pilloud, Marin
Larsen, Matthew (Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute)
[295]            Contemporary Human uses of Forested Watersheds and Riparian Corridors: Hazard Mitigation as an Ecosystem Service, with Examples
                 from Panama, Puerto Rico, and Venezuela
Humans have long favored settlement along rivers for access to water supply for drinking and agriculture, transport corridors, and food sources. Settlement
in or near montane forests include benefits such as food and wood supply, and high quality water resources derived from watersheds where upstream
human disturbance and environmental degradation is generally reduced. However, the advantages afforded by these floodplain and montane settings pose
episodic risks for communities located there as floods, landslides, and wildfires cause loss of life, and destroy infrastructure and crops. Understanding of
flood probability and magnitude as well as hillslope stability by residents in these environments mitigates these risks. Early humans presumably developed
a basic understanding through long periods of occupation and environmental observation of rainfall patterns and river discharge. Modern global
urbanization, particularly in regions of rapid economic growth, has resulted in much of this "organic" knowledge being lost, as megacities encroach on
floodplains and mountain fronts. Moreover, the most likely occupants of these hazardous locations are often economically constrained, increasing their
vulnerabity. Effective stewardship of river floodplains and upstream montane forests provides a key ecosystem service, which in addition to the well-
described services, i.e., water, hydroelectric energy, etc., reduces natural hazard and vulnerability.
Larson, Greger [176] see Linderholm, Anna
Larson, Greger (University of Oxford)
[223]            Genomic Insights into Long-Term Domestic Animal Translocation
Animal domestication first began at least 14,000 years ago with the archaeological emergence of domestic dogs. A multitude of other animals followed suit
more or less coincident with the origins of settled agriculture in numerous locations independently. The history of human translocations of wild animals
dates back to at least 40,000 years ago, and humans were certainly responsible for the appearance of the wild progenitors of domestic animals on islands
prior to their domestication. Here, I will present the evidence for human manipulation of wild and domestic animal populations, and demonstrate how new
genomic evidence is shaping our perceptions of both the frequency of human-mediated translocation and the role of admixture between domestic and wild
populations across the globe. More specifically, I will show how an assessment of modern and ancient DNA can reveal long-term patterns of gene flow in
several domestic species and how those patterns mirror the migration pathways and timings of the people with whom they travelled.
Larson, Mary Lou (University of Wyoming) and Marcel Kornfeld (University of Wyoming)
[244]            Trarsh or Treasure? A Critical Analysis of Hell Gap Zooarchaeology
Over the past century, archaeologists have treated faunal remains differentially: either discarding all bones as unimportant, selectively collecting the
informative ones, or treasuring all for eternity and future research. Studies at the stratified Paleoindian Hell Gap site in southeastern Wyoming included
several of these treatment options. Our presentation investigates the different treatment of bones at Hell Gap over more than 60 years (1960–2015) of site
studies. Such treatment is argued to have biased interpretations of zooarchaeological remains, making them problematic in reconstructions of procurement
and processing strategies. Recent site investigations (after the mid-1990s) are systematic and explicit in recording and collecting field and lab protocols,
enabling us to compare ‘complete’ collection (1990s and on) with collections that underwent unknown deletional biases (1960s). In this presentation, we
compare the overall 1960s and recent faunal assemblages and evaluate the spatial characteristics of faunal remains in several Paleoindian components of
the Hell Gap site to begin modeling site structure.
LaSarge, Diana [266] see Neller, Angela
Lash, Samantha [217] see Huang, Yongsong
Lassuy, Mila [182] see Dodrill, Taylor
Latombe, Guillaume [211] see Burke, Ariane
Latorre, Claudio [139] see Capriles, Jose
Lattanzi, Gregory (New Jersey State Museum)
[265]            The Other 99%: Archaeological Collections, Research, and the New Jersey State Museum
Since 2001, the Bureau of Archaeology & Ethnography began accepting interns and opened its collections to scholars and professionals conducting
research. Numerous undergraduate and graduate students have completed both senior honor theses, M.A.s and Ph.D.s working with the over 2.5 million
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               245
objects in our collections. Numerous professionals have utilized the collections for their ongoing research interests. The Bureau itself has had to build this
program from the gound up along side these researchers. Additionally, the Bureau has conducted ongoing consultations with Native groups, invited college
anthropology classes, carried out International Archaeology Day, and completed many accomplishments. This poster presents some of those highlights
along with data generated through research with the collections.
[2]               Discussant
Lau, Hannah [87] see Proctor, Lucas
Lau, George (Sainsbury Research Unit, UNIV OF EAST ANGLIA)
[105]             The Lives of Mountains: A Cultural Orogeny in Peru's North Highlands
There is no more palpable or ambivalent a presence in the Andean landscape than that of mountains—distant and harboring, fertile and terrible, rocky and
liquid, inviting and impervious. Yet their understanding for Andean groups is only in its infancy, and largely informed by insights from Inka, colonial, and
ethnographic studies. This paper focuses on pre-Inka engagements with 'mountains' as nonhuman beings on the landscape, especially around Peru's
Cordillera Blanca. I am interested in when and how they are seen to come about, their 'orogeny,' and how they come to hold utmost importance for many
groups as social others. Archaeological, linguistic, and iconographic evidence from the region and adjacent areas help to explore three main points. First,
mountains (locally, 'jirka') were seen as old, agentive beings. While human in nature/culture, they were profoundly nonhuman in form, materiality, and
action. Second, elements of their bodies (feet, orifices, prominences) formed key spatial contexts for human activity and organisation. Finally, dwelling
and ritual sought to feed and tap into their reservoirs of potency through a cyclical process—theorised broadly as nurturing generative capacity. The
different lines of evidence offer an emerging picture of ancient understandings of mountains and their mediating role for pre-Inka groups.
Laubach, Amber (Eastern Connecticut State University) and Sarah Baires (Eastern Connecticut State University)
[112]             Monumental Construction at Cahokia, a Geoarchaeological Perspective
Examining precolumbian earthen mounds from both a macro- and micro-scale lens can reveal geotechnical knowledge of construction as well as the
cultural significance of this pervasive past practice in the Eastern Woodlands. Micromorphology soil samples provide a rich volume of data to examine fine-
grained construction fill composition, pedogenic activity, and the relative rate of monumental construction. These geoarchaeological methods are capable
of providing meaningful re-constructions of past practice. In this poster, we examine micromorphological soil samples recovered from two precolumbian
non-domestic construction projects from Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site in southern Illinois. These samples were obtained from a ridge-top mortuary
mound (Mound 66) and the Rattlesnake Causeway both monumental features dating to Cahokia’s formative years (ca. A.D. 1050–1150). Our analysis will
examine past construction methods, estimate rate of construction for both the Causeway and the burial mound, and will determine types of deposits utilized
in construction. Further, we will utilize these data to understand the broader social significance of mound and causeway construction projects to examine
their impact on Cahokia’s early years as a burgeoning city.
LaValley, S. Joey (EnviroSystems Management, Inc.)
[113]             Tiptoe the Steptoe: A Report on and Examination of Survey Results from Steptoe Valley and the Schell Creek Range of East-Central
                  Nevada
This poster reports on results from 25,745 contiguous acres of pedestrian survey in southern Steptoe Valley and the Schell Creek Range of east-central
Nevada. An extensive Class III cultural resource inventory conducted in 2014 and 2015 by EnviroSystems Management, Inc., resulted in the recordation of
285 new sites, seven previously documented sites, and 386 isolated artifacts/features. These resources span the entirety of human occupation in the Great
Basin. Sites include Paleoindian, Archaic, Late Prehistoric, Fremont, Numic, Protohistoric, and Historic Period artifact scatters. Features observed include
pine nut caches, rock foundations, a wikiup, historic corrals, cabins/dugouts, and newly identified areas of historic charcoal production. Additionally, this
poster provides an analysis of diachronic shifts in spatial distribution of prehistoric cultural resources, as well as highlights noteworthy aspects of other
documented archaeological resources.
Law, Karly, Ben Chiewphasa (University of Montana) and Lorena Craig (University of Montana)
[175]             Phylogenetic Approaches in Examining Western North American Rock Art: The Evolution of the Shield-Bearing Warrior Motif
The present study examines rock art and its ritual landscapes as the physical remnants of evolving cultural traditions. By incorporating an evolutionary
framework in rock art studies, we can determine if rock art traditions evolved via descent with modification versus blending and borrowing of ideas. This
project focuses on Fremont and Ceremonial Style shield-bearing warrior motifs associated with ritual contexts and spaces (animal medicine, cosmology,
and shamanism). Drawing upon several approaches to phylogenetic analysis, we argue that motifs were evolved more by phylogenesis than ethnogenesis.
Signals of descent with modification can best be explained by the continuity of ritual standardization where spatial awareness and certain visions and
imagery are expected during vision quests and shamanistic initiations. The shield-bearing warrior may have changed from a motif representative of the
individual into a motif more emblematic of broader group identities (i.e., warrior brotherhoods, ethnic or cultural groups, and secret shaman societies).
Law-de-Lauriston, MacLaren [67] see VanPool, Christine
Lawrence, John, Scott Fitzpatrick (University of Oregon ) and Kathleen Marsaglia (California State University of Northridge)
[41]              Petrography and Provenance of Pottery Sherds from Islands in the Southern Lesser Antilles, Caribbean
Native Amerindian groups who inhabited the southern Lesser Antilles of the Caribbean likely used local materials for temper in the manufacturing of
pottery, but may have transported pottery once it was produced. To identify potential sources of temper and possible movement of these resources and/or
pottery, we conducted petrographic analysis of precolumbian ceramics found on various islands, including Barbados, Mustique, Carriacou, and Union.
Each island exhibits distinct geology with sand components that may have been used in the tempering of ceramics. A sample set of 93 sherds was thin
sectioned and stained for feldspar identification prior to petrographic analysis. Sherds were categorized by their temper types and representative samples
from each type were selected for point counting using the Gazzi-Dickinson method. Sherds from Carriacou exhibit four distinct tempers, Union two,
Mustique three and Barbados, which has one distinct temper with two sub-types. Results demonstrate that the Mustique and Barbados temper
compositions directly reflect their own island geology, implying local production of temper and pottery. In contrast, Carriacou tempers appear to be
imported, possibly from nearby Union Island, due to similar temper compositions of two temper groups.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               246
Lawrence, Ken (SWCA-Texas State University) and Jon Lohse (Coastal Environments, Inc)
[55]              Soil, Climate, and Culture Records on the Southern Great Plains
This paper compares radiocarbon chronologies for climatic and cultural changes in Texas and the Southern Plains region utilizing multiple sources. A
radiocarbon baseline (>100) from select river basins across Texas helps reconstruct the alluvial histories of these catchments. This baseline establishes a
framework for understanding aspects of climate change, as alluviation provides a proxy for general cycles of precipitation and aridity.
Next, the alluvial-climatic records are supplemented by a dataset of 69 XAD purified AMS-dated bison remains from archaeological contexts in Texas and
Oklahoma. This dataset also provides delta 15 N and delta 13 C data that allow direct examination of climatic variability (temperature and precipitation)
during sharply defined periods of bison presence.
Finally, these climatic trends are compared against three different radiocarbon-based studies of culture change. First, we evaluate (>400) 14C dates from
Ft. Hood, Texas. Second, the bison dataset provides a record of cultural change, since samples represent the presence and exploitation of that resource.
Third, an earlier study evaluated hundreds of radiocarbon dates and their association with certain key diagnostic point types across Texas. All radiocarbon
assays have been recalibrated using the INTCAL09 curve in order to provide a consistent chronological framework.
Lawrence, Michael [120] see Cartagena, Nicaela
Lawres, Nathan (University of Florida - Department of Anthropology) and Matthew Colvin (University of Georgia - Department of Anthropology)
[246]             Gathering Relations in an Aqueous World: Monumentality, Ontology, and the Belle Glade Landscape
Recent research on precontact South Florida has reinforced the notion that the peoples dwelling in the region inhabited a past material world much
different from our own and from neighboring areas. In particular, the hydrologic characteristics of a subtropical landscape centered on the Lake
Okeechobee Basin are one of the central features of both the epistemology and ontology reflected in the earliest monumental architecture in the region.
Yet these worldviews and worlds were not static entities; rather, much like the rising, falling, and continual flowing of their aqueous world, these ontologies
were also in motion, gradually expanding in inclusivity. This research suggests that the monumental architecture of the region is a concretization of an
ontology. However, both the monumental practices and the ontology it reflects underwent transformations tied to the experiencing of a landscape
undergoing its own transformations. Yet, within these transformations are visible continuities that reference the past through citational practice.
Lazzari, Marisa, Lucas Pereyra Domingorena (CONICET-Museo Etnografico), Maria Cristina Scattolin (CONICET-Museo Etnografico), Wesley
Stoner (University of Arkansas) and Michael Glascock (University of Missouri)
[57]              Social Interaction and Communities of Practice in Formative Period NW Argentina: A Multi-Analytical Study of Ceramics
South-central Andean scholarship has extensively discussed a variety of circulation and exchange practices, with particular emphasis on llama caravan
long-distance trade. In NW Argentina, traditional approaches proposed that regional interaction was an increasingly centralized process, based on
typological similarities observed in a variety of materials across the region. While material culture styles and traits were undoubtedly shared, the
unexamined focus on similarities leaves the mechanisms, direction, and intensity of interaction to speculation. Provenance analyses can shed new light on
these ancient relationships, yet focusing on single analytical techniques obscures the nuances of early interaction.
To further contribute to the detection of the intricate relationships supporting ancient networks, we implemented a multi-analytical approach to different
classes of artefacts. We focus here on the results of the analysis of 542 pottery sherds from first millennium A.D. sites, as well as clay samples, obtained
through petrography, NAA, and targeted LA-ICP-MS.
The results provide a platform to examine close intercommunity links rooted on common craft practices rather than solely on stylistic reconstructions, and
to explore the ancient circulation of goods, skills, and people without assuming the capacity of early elites to manipulate and capitalize on such networks.
Lea, Trevor (New Mexico State University), Danielle Soza (New Mexico State University), Candice Disque (New Mexico State University) and
Kevin Conti (New Mexico State University)
[67]              Modernizing Empirical Data in Alkali Ridge, Southeastern Utah
The Alkali Ridge Project conducted by New Mexico State University is a data modernization project geared towards updating maps and providing artifact
analysis around the Ten Acres community in the National Historic Landmark Southern District in southeastern Utah. Though much work in this area has
been done by our predecessors, additional data is necessary to better understand the community organization. The 2015 field season allowed us to survey
four sites, including the Ten Acres site (42SA15206) excavated by Alfred Kidder in 1908, a previously unmapped tower complex site (42SA4998), and two
other small satellite sites. As a result of our survey at those four sites, we were able to recognize architectural similarities among them and clearly identified
the Ten Acres site, which had multiple story structures and more than 40 kivas, as a community center. Further, there are a great number of medium and
small satellite sites surrounding Ten Acres in addition to the ones surveyed. In this poster, we will tackle three major questions: 1) What was the role of the
Ten Acres site? 2) Were other satellite sites occupied at the same time? and 3) How did these other sites interact with the Ten Acres community?
Leach, Melinda [37] see Scharf, Elizabeth
Leach, Melinda (University of North Dakota), Elizabeth Scharf (University of North Dakota) and Ann Reed (Iowa State University)
[37]              Capstones and Competency across the Anthropology Major: Assessment of Student Learning with an Archaeological Case Study
In this poster, we examine ways in which an archaeological case study can usefully serve multiple purposes in the assessment of undergraduate student
learning. In the context of our senior capstone course, we have developed a three-tiered assessment plan for examining effective learning outcomes at the
course, program and general education (“Essential Studies”) levels. The assignment, based on real events and surrounding controversy, asks our
capstone students to reflect deeply on ethical issues, community engagement, diversity of perspectives, policy implementation, historic preservation, and
archaeological responsibility. Using both direct and indirect assessment tools, we are able to address the following Anthropology program and general
education learning goals: awareness of global diversity, holistic and critical thinking about local and global problems, anthropological research design,
understanding sources of cultural variation, communication about anthropological theory, and ethics. Data from four years of capstone assessment will be
summarized and graphically presented.
Leach, Peter (Department of Anthropology, University of Connecticut)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               247
[249]            Discussant
Leakey, Louise [269] see Evans, Adrian
Leavitt, Steven [218] see Panyushkina, Irina
Leclerc, Natasha [185] see Burchell, Meghan
LeCount, Lisa (University of Alabama), Kara A. Fulton (University of South Florida), David W. Mixter (Washington University in St. Louis), E.
Christian Wells (University of South Florida) and Thomas R. Jamison (Hartgen Archeological Associates, Inc.)
[125]            Activity Area Analysis of Elite and Commoner Spaces in the Ancient Maya City of Actuncan, Belize
This report describes the results of a geochemical analysis of nearly 1,000 samples from earthen and plaster surfaces at Actuncan, a prehispanic Maya
city in western Belize. Studies of the social, political, and economic relationships between elites and commoners demonstrate that the lived experiences of
both groups were dramatically different. However, we know little about how social roles and relationships impacted the organization and daily use of
domestic and public spaces. Multivariate quantitative modeling and spatial interpolation were used to study large expanses of a Terminal Classic
commoner residential area, a Late Classic elite palace complex, and a Terminal Classic civic complex. Data from commoner space shows that residents
used both formal patio spaces and the interstices between architectural groups for domestic activities. Research in the palace complex demonstrates that a
variety of domestic, ritual, and possibly administrative activities took place therein, a finding that challenges previous assessments of palaces as primarily
royal residential compounds. The data also indicate that, after the palace was abandoned in the late eighth century, some of its public functions were
displaced to a new, dedicated civic complex where community members gathered to participate in the consummation of a new sociopolitical regime.
Lee, Jinok (University of Texas, Austin)
[130]            Subsistence Ecology in the Making of the Shang State, Eastern China
This study examines the transition of subsistence practices in early Bronze Age sites in eastern China, when the region was integrated into the Shang state
in the second millennium B.C. Through a combination of geomorphological and archaeobotanical analyses, I reconstruct the long-term environmental
history as well as land-use practices at the Yueshi cultural sites, to explore a variety of responses and adaptations that would have been developed before
and after the Shang expansion into the area. In so doing, I seek to demonstrate that indigenous farmers had sophisticated buffering strategies to ensure a
better adaptation to the environmental and social transitions, and that they affected the Shang state formation as active participants, rather than as minor
or miscellaneous players.
Lee, Craig [191] see Yu, Pei-Lin
Lee, Lori (Flagler College)
[284]            Nineteenth Century Race, Gender, and Consumerism in Virginia
This paper uses historical and archaeological evidence to which consumer goods were available to enslaved men and women in nineteenth century
Virginia. At the scale of local markets and stores, supply and variable adherence to laws constrained which goods were available to slaves who were able
to purchase or trade for them. By comparing purchases of enslaved African Americans with purchases of whites at the same store, I assess which goods
were accessible to each group. I use archaeological data to evaluate the relative significance of various goods. Then, I consider what choices among these
goods by men and women reveal about needs, desires, opportunities, and risks.
Leentjes, Danyelle [267] see Smith, Lindsey
Lees, William (University of West Florida)
[48]             Discussant
[260]            Chair
Lee-Thorp, Julia [76] see Santana Sagredo, Francisca
LeFae, Jones
[20]             Temporal and Spatial Variability of Mortuary Assemblages at Los Guachimontones, Jalisco, Mexico
Mortuary offerings play an important role in understanding the social structure, status-building mechanisms, trade networks, and ideological symbols and
beliefs of ancient cultures throughout Mesoamerica, particularly of less well-understood areas such as west Mexico. Changes in these structures,
mechanisms, and networks may be recognized through analysis of mortuary assemblages and treatments. During the 2015 laboratory season, mortuary
offerings from the site of Los Guachimontones in the Tequila Valley region of Jalisco, Mexico, were analyzed. In order to investigate changes in craft
production of mortuary offerings, I collected data on the number, type, technologies used, and quality of offerings for each excavated burial at the site.
Offerings include ceramic vessels, figurines, jewelry, and lithics that exhibit distinctly different styles and technologies between separate locations (e.g.,
ceremonial vs. habitational), as well as time periods represented. Initial analysis revealed changes in burial offerings and treatment of human remains from
the site between the Tequila III (160 B.C.–50 B.C.) and Tequila IV (A.D. 200–500) phases through the El Grillo (A.D. 600–900), and Atemajac II (A.D.
1400–1600) phases that may represent changes in population composition, social structure, or trade networks. This analysis is an important addition to the
understanding of precolumbian west Mexican cultures.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            248
LeFebvre, Michelle [7] see Rock, Carolyn
Lefebvre, Karine (CIGA - UNAM)
[20]               Aportación de las fuentes históricas para un avance de la arqueología colonial en México
En México, los dos primeros siglos de la Colonia española siguen sin considerarse suficientemente en la investigación arqueológica. Los proyectos se
enfocan principalmente en estudiar la época prehispánica y posteriormente las haciendas (principalmente después del siglo 18), creando un verdadero
hiato de conocimiento de la cultura material y de la arquitectura de los siglos 16 y 17. Además, esta asimetría es todavía más evidente en las zonas
rurales. Esa situación se explica tanto por la permanencia de numerosos asentamientos y estructuras agropecuarias en un mismo lugar desde el principio
de la colonia (estructuras modernas cubriendo otras más antiguas), como por el carácter efímero de los materiales de construcción. A partir de un estudio
llevado a cabo en la región de Acámbaro (Guanajuato, México), veremos como la documentación histórica (escrita y cartográfica) permite avanzar en el
conocimiento de la cultura material rural local orientando a la investigación arqueológica. Apoyándose en ejemplos concretos, presentaremos la
metodología que relaciona la arqueología y la historia, para entender el patrón de asentamiento colonial, tanto en los pueblos como en las estructuras
agropecuarias.
LeFebvre, Michelle (University of Florida and Leiden University)
[222]              Environmental Archaeology in the Caribbean Islands: Multi-disciplinary Approaches to Past Human-Environment Dynamics across Time
                   and Space
Environmental Archaeology is a diverse field that focuses on the inherent relationships between past people and the physical environments in which they
lived. Archaeologists employ traces of past human behavior and cultural practices in their macro-, micro-, geo-, and bio-chemical forms to study past
environmental conditions as well as human activities that directly or indirectly involved or impacted the environment. In the Caribbean islands,
archaeologists employ a diversity of analytical techniques for the analysis of past environmental signatures and cultural remains. Questions pursued by
Caribbean scholars address topics of cultural, ecological, biological, and geological significance, contributing to broader understandings of human
ecodynamics in island and coastal settings through time. This presentation reviews traditions and tenets of environmental archaeological scholarship within
the Caribbean islands, provides an intellectual context for the symposium papers, and situates Caribbean island-based research within broader topics of
environmental archaeology.
[222]              Chair
Leffler, Paul [287] see Parsell, Veronica
Lehmkuhl, Iva Lee [268] see Reitze, William
Lehner, Joseph (Research Center for Anatolian Civilizations, Koç Univeristy)
[79]               Cooperation, Craft Economy, and Metal Technology during the Bronze and Iron Ages in Central Anatolia
The role of copper and bronze in the context of the emergence of Bronze and Iron Age states in the Near East is poorly understood due to a relative lack of
comprehensive analysis of diachronic archaeometallurgical data. Excavations from Boğazköy and Kerkenes Dağ in central Anatolia have recovered one of
the largest, diverse, and stratified corpora of copper objects and metal production debris, spanning the period from the Early Bronze Age, ca. 2300 B.C.,
until the Late Iron Age, mid-fifth century B.C. Analysis of over 1,100 objects employing energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (EDXRF), in field portable X-
ray fluorescence (pXRF), and select lead isotope analyses using multiple collector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (MC-ICPMS)
demonstrate that the rise of political complexity is closely tied to increases in trade and the management of commodity chains. Textual evidence illustrates
how the Hittite state in particular managed the mobilization of metal commodities and finished goods as taxes, gifts, and payments for labor. Metal trade is
further linked to state finance systems to explain how production and trade are tied to strategies of economic integration and interregional networking in
Anatolia and beyond in the Near East and Mediterranean regions.
Lei, Xingshan [173] see Lam, WengCheong
Leight, Megan (CUNY Graduate Center)
[291]              Art Objects Don’t Make Themselves! A Consideration of the Ik’ Style from the Petén Lakes Region
Art-making is an essential element of Mesoamerican culture. Asserting the primacy of the art object as a site of inquiry can provide a fascinating framework
for organizing, imagining, and interpreting the past. This paper considers art objects produced during the Late Classic (ca. 600–900 C.E.) by the Maya Ik’
polity in Petén, Guatemala. The elaborately painted surfaces with naturalistic figures, realistic color schemes, and detailed hieroglyphic inscriptions about
artists, patrons, and regional history abound on ceramic vessels. These works function not only as prestige items, but also as textual sources produced by
Ik’ polity elites. This paper uses recent archaeological discoveries from the Petén Lakes region and contemporary methodologies to consider Ik’ polity
artistic practices and ideology.
Leitermann, Garrett [267] see Arakawa, Fumiyasu
Leitermann, Garrett (New Mexico State University)
[287]              Improving Public Archaeology through Educational Psychology and Pedagogy
Public archaeology is the means by which we as archaeologists demonstrate the value of our findings and research to our primary benefactors and
supporters, the public. Public archaeology has been an increasingly important field within the realm of archaeology in recent decades with a constant
desire and need for establishing new and effective ways of engaging the public and sharing with them the benefits of archaeological work. Recent efforts to
improve the outreach programs at the University Museum at Kent Hall of New Mexico State University provides a case study of how archaeology can be
taught and its value demonstrated to primary school age students. Whilst generating new ideas for outreach programs, the efforts at the University
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              249
Museum have also taken into account the fundamentals of the psychology of teaching and the pedagogy employed at different stages of cognitive
development. The subsequent results at the University Museum can demonstrate how being familiar with the fundamentals of educational psychology as
well as age appropriate teaching methods can be beneficial to the efforts of archaeologists engaging primary school age students.
Lekson, Stephen (University of Colorado) and Catherine Cameron (University of Colorado)
[53]             Obsidian in the Southwest
Payson Sheets has often been on the cutting/bleeding edge of obsidian research. We review current obsidian studies in the Southwest, as a proxy for
social/economic interaction. We comment on confirmed or tentative sightings of Mexican obsidian in and around the region, also as a proxy for
social/economic interaction.
[104]            Discussant
Lema, Verónica [62] see Jolie, Edward
Lemaitre, Serge [131] see Arsenault, Daniel
Lemke, Ashley (University of Michigan) and John O'Shea (University of Michigan )
[55]             Diving into Environmental Change: Underwater Archaeology of a Holocene Refugium in the Great Lakes
While many paleoenvironmental methods have achieved extraordinary resolution, regional reconstructions based on these methods are rarely as accurate
or as refined as often assumed. Data points are typically few and far between, and are interpolated over a heterogeneous landscape; concealing significant
variability. These problems are particularly acute in the Great Lakes region, where fluctuating lake levels and environmental changes during the early
Holocene were diverse and punctuated. Recent underwater research on the Alpena-Amberley Ridge (AAR), a submerged land bridge cutting across Lake
Huron which was dry land 9,000 years ago, is providing a picture of contemporary variability in paleoenvironments within the Great Lakes. Results indicate
that the AAR was a refugium for Pleistocene adapted plants and animals and was vastly different from surrounding mainland. This refugium provided a
unique niche for hunter-gatherer exploitation; evidenced by caribou hunting structures and lithic artifacts. The preservation offered underwater has aided
chronology building, environmental reconstruction, and archaeological research for a time period poorly known on land. The results emphasize the need to
consider the heterogeneous character of local conditions when building regional environmental models. Research on the AAR, therefore, provides
valuable insights into the nature of human adaptability to fluctuating and unique environments.
[249]            Discussant
Lemoine, Luis [220] see Antczak, Andrzej
lemonnier, Eva [96] see Nondédéo, Philippe
Lennon, Mary (AECOM), Thomas Kutys (AECOM, Burlington NJ) and Amy King (AECOM, Burlington NJ)
[36]             Another Pint! Beer & Soda Bottles in Victorian Philadelphia: A Spatial Analysis
Beer and soda, typical beverages found in the lives of Victorian Americans; the remnants of their proliferate use, a plethora of bottles found at historic
archaeological sites across the county. While often overlooked, these bottles, offer the potential to illuminate the landscape of small businesses, domestic
residences, and the booming Industrial Revolution. Recent excavations by AECOM, sponsored by PennDOT, within the I-95 corridor of the Kensington
neighborhood of Philadelphia have unearthed several nineteenth century glass works, domestic dwellings, and small businesses, along with thousands of
beer and soda bottles. This poster analyzes the spatial relationship of these artifacts to each other, their place of manufacture, and point of distribution
using R and GIS; resulting in a visualization of the radius of distribution to local bars, taverns, and residences. Through this analysis, we present a broader
picture of material culture in nineteenth century Philadelphia, offer conclusions on the patterns presented, and the potential to tighten critical date ranges
for archaeological collections.
Lentino, Miguel [100] see Antczak, Konrad
Lentz, David [32] see Slotten, Venicia
Lentz, David (University of Cincinnati)
[162]            Irrigation Systems and Other Forms of Intensive Agriculture at the Ancient Maya City of Tikal
In addition to an extensive short fallow system and the intensive cultivation of dooryard gardens and orchards that probably produced a major portion of the
food supply at Tikal, other forms of primary food production were being utilized, as well. Significantly, the Maya seem to have developed intensive hydraulic
agriculture in the lands south of the Perdido Reservoir. Stratigraphic profiles, δ13C data, and other forms of archaeological evidence clearly indicate that
maize was being cultivated directly below the reservoir. Furthermore, it seems pausable that the areas to the southeast of the Corriental Reservoir could
have been managed in the same way. Corriental Reservoir had a switching station at the southeast end that could easily have facilitated irrigation of the
fields below. The area to the east of the Tikal Reservoir was another likely location where irrigated agriculture might have taken place. With the input of
water from the reservoirs, these areas could potentially have been double-cropped, allowing more than one harvest per year. Bajo margins also were likely
areas of significant food production. Along with maize, three species of beans, two species of squash, several species of root crops, cotton, and numerous
orchard species, including cacao, were actively cultivated.
[96]             Discussant
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               250
Lenz, Brett [114] see Kuntz, Aaron
Leon, Alysia (Southern Illinois University of Carbondale)
[283]             The Enigmatic Structure at Panquilma on the Central Coast of Peru: Site of Funerary Bundle Preparation or Ancestor Cult?
During the summer of 2015, a puzzling structure was excavated in the cemetery at Panquilma, a major Ychsma settlement on the Peruvian central coast.
Upon first glance this structure appeared to have a layout of a household structure but was located near the outskirts of the cemetery, far from the
residential center of the site. A wide array of unusual items such as an abundance of metal fragments, colorful bird feathers, orpiment, an arsenic-bearing
yellowish mineral used as a pigment, and lithic artifacts as well as Spondylus and Nectandra seed beads were discovered within this building suggesting
an important occupation. Was this structure used in the preparation and care of the funerary bundles? Did it house an important figure in both their life and
death? Or did it serve as a workshop for preparing ritual items? In an effort to ascertain the significance of this structure, this paper examines the
aforementioned remains as well as its relative location and the results from portable X-ray Fluorescence (PXRF) analyses of some of the excavated
remains.
Leon Estrada, Xochitl (Universidad Nacional Autonóma de México/Universidad Veracruzana)
[216]             Paisaje Cultural en Los Tuxtlas, Veracruz. Nuevas Perspectivas e Interpretaciones
En esta ponencia se presentan datos e interpretaciones derivados del Proyecto Arqueológico Paisaje Cultural en Los Tuxtlas Veracruz, llevado a cabo
entre el 2013 y el 2015, en el cual se examinaron sitios arqueológicos ubicados en la Sierra de Los Tuxtlas, Veracruz.
La información recabada permitió hacer ajustes en la cronología de la región, un registro detallado de algunos sitios anteriormente analizados y una mayor
comprensión de la relación de los asentamientos humanos con el paisaje natural, con lo cual se obtuvieron nuevas perspectivas e interpretaciones de la
historia cultural de Los Tuxtlas.
Leonard, Daniel (BCR Consulting LLC) and Jeffrey Vadala (University of Florida)
[270]             The Emergence of Ecological Knowledge in the Ancient Maya Yalahau
This paper explores how the ancient Maya of the Yalahau region generated and used ecological knowledge of their unique wetland environment in the
Preclassic Period. We approach ecological knowledge generation as a process that arises within the context of observable seasonal environmental events
and changing and evolving pragmatic goals. Using paleoenvironmental reconstructions, we isolate the key seasonal events that would parametrically
structure how environmental capacities could be apprehended and understood for agricultural use. We then analyze how these capacities would have
changed within the context of ancient Maya social and ecological tendencies that affect the ecological environment as well as the development of Maya
society within the context of these wetland landscapes. When viewed as a dynamic feedback loop, the interplay of environmental and social capacities and
tendencies acted to continually shape and transform ecological knowledge in the Yalahau.
Leonardt, Sabrina [94] see Rizzo, Florencia
LEPLONGEON, Alice (University of Cambridge (UK) - Mcdonald Institute for Archaeological Research), Erella Hovers (Hebrew University of
Jerusalem (Israel) - Institut) and David Pleurdeau (Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle (Paris) - UMR)
[22]              Variability in the Middle Stone Age of the Horn of Africa: A Technical Tradition of Southeastern Ethiopia
The Middle Stone Age (MSA) is traditionally defined by flake, point, and elongated blank production associated with retouched tools (e.g., scrapers and
retouched points). However, a great cultural variability is observed, whether it is linked with spatial (e.g., Brandt 1986, Clark 1988), or temporal (Early vs
Late MSA, e.g. Douze 2011) variability. Here, we present results from a comparative analysis of the lithic assemblages from Porc-Epic Cave (e.g., Clark
and Williamson 1984, Pleurdeau, 2005) and Goda Buticha (Assefa et al. 2014, Leplongeon 2014, Pleurdeau et al. 2014, Tribolo et al. In prep.), both
located in southeastern Ethiopia. They have yielded long stratigraphic sequences including Late Pleistocene levels. The results highlight variability at the
assemblage level, counterbalanced by similarities between the assemblages, which were interpreted as reflecting the same technical tradition, attributed to
the MSA. It is, however, distinct from other MSA industries and represents another example of the lithic variability in the region. Moreover, a mid-Holocene
level at Goda Buticha has yielded an assemblage with unexpected MSA-like features, questioning the relevance of the use of this terminology (MSA/LSA)
in the region. This high lithic variability during the Late Pleistocene has implications when comparing the Horn of Africa with adjacent regions.
Leppard, Thomas (Rutgers) and Scott Fitzpatrick (University of Oregon)
[262]             A Mentality for Monumentality? Monumental Architecture and Hierarchical Social Organization on Subtropical and Tropical Islands
The appearance of megaliths, monumental architecture, large-scale earthworks, and sculpture in many prehistoric island societies in the Pacific and
Mediterranean is conspicuously absent from the insular Caribbean. From the latte stones, columnar basalt complexes, artificial islands, Yapese stone
money, Easter Island moai, marae, and earthworks found across Micronesia and Polynesia to the talayots, taulas, sesi, and Maltese ‘temples’ of the
Mediterranean, small and sometimes remote islands lacking state-level social organization in both contexts seem to have been homes for traditions of
megalithic building and monumental display. Why these did not manifest themselves in the Caribbean, a region similar in size to the Mediterranean and
surrounded by many continental cases of highly complex and monumentalizing societies? In this paper, we explore insular monumentalism as potentially
indicative of patterning in the social organization which necessarily underlies it, and consider why two of the world’s major small-island environments—but
not a third—might have tended to promote strategies of significant competitive emulation and conspicuous display. In doing so we tentatively focus on
demographic trajectories and thresholds in the context of insular resource-poverty and environmental fragility, in conjunction with other factors such as
geological composition and distribution.
[296]             Chair
Leppard, Thomas [296] see Cherry, John
Lerner, Harry (Université Laval)
[214]             Where the Conventional and Unconventional Meet: Marrying Tradition and Innovation in Lithic Use-wear Analysis
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                251
The majority of lithic use-wear research has been geared towards the development of newer more quantitatively precise methods involving evermore
sophisticated forms of microscopy. As vital as such efforts are, there is still a place in today’s interdisciplinary world for more traditional approaches when
coupled with new ideas. This presentation will look at the results of a GIS analysis of experimental use-wear traces from images generated using
conventional incident light microscopy. Specifically, the role of intra-raw material type variability in the formation of use-wear accrual patterns on
experimental tools made from Yellow Silicified Wood and Morrison Undifferentiated Gray Chert, two of the raw materials used during the Late Archaic of
northwestern New Mexico, will be examined.
Lerner, Shereen (Mesa College) and Rachel Most (University of Virginia)
[287]             How Archaeology Informs the Present and Why It Matters for the Future
Don Henson (2012) wrote “What archaeology has to offer is a powerful contribution to the quality of life of people.” He states that quality of life has three
critical threads: social inclusion (people), environmental protection (place), sustainable development (future). Despite its popularity, we believe archaeology
may be one of the most misunderstood disciplines. It is not about dinosaurs and skeletons or glorifying past achievements. It is an essential scientific
discipline because it can teach us how humans adapted to challenges similar to those we encounter in today’s world. Climate change, subsistence,
overpopulation, natural disasters, political upheaval, and collapse are all part of the human experience and have occurred many times over for thousands
of years. Archaeology is one of the few disciplines that can study these issues extended periods of time. In higher education, we see an increase in
interdisciplinary studies that include anthropology, sustainability, global studies, gender studies, etc. We must ensure that archaeology does not “get lost”
and help students see the importance of connecting the past to the present. To do this, we must make clear the relevance of archaeology.
Lertcharnrit, Thanik [19] see Hanson, Sydney
Lesure, Richard (UCLA), Greg Schachner (UCLA), Kate Bishop (UCLA), Brittany Jackson (UCLA) and Reuven Sinensky (UCLA)
[178]             The Scale of Formative Transitions in the Americas: Inferences Based on the Texture and Timing of Demographic Changes
This paper examines the large-scale texture and timing of demographic transitions associated with the development of settled agricultural life in the
Americas. Based on previous work concerning the Neolithic Demographic Transition (NDT) worldwide, we draw on two sources of published data (skeletal
remains and surface survey) to trace Formative-era population growth rates across a huge region, including the U.S. southwest, Mesoamerica, Central
America, and the Andes. The goal is to assess the pattern and scale of demographic changes. Do individual regions display similar trajectories but with
variable timing, suggesting that they are basically independent of each other? Or, instead, are there large-scale patterns suggesting a role for historical
linkages among regions? For instance, do the Andes and Mesoamerica each stand out as internally coherent and distinct from surrounding areas? Is the
gradient of adoption of pottery from coastal Ecuador (c. 3500 B.C.) to Mesoamerica (c. 1900 B.C.) associated with or independent of the Neolithic
Demographic Transition? Do developments proposed for particular areas—such as the emergence of more productive varieties of maize in Mesoamerica
around 1000 B.C.—play detectable roles beyond the area(s) for which they were originally proposed?
Letham, Bryn [132] see Martindale, Andrew
Lethbridge, Emily [261] see Strawhacker, Colleen
Leveillee, Alan [42] see Waller, Joseph
Leventhal, Richard [54] see Diserens, Kasey
Levi, Laura (The University of Texas at San Antonio) and Sarah Boudreaux (The University of Texas at San Antonio)
[27]              Good Neighbors: Investigating Maya Neighborhood Organization in Northern Belize
Socio-spatial constructs that loosely translate as “neighborhoods” are found within many indigenous Mesoamerican communities. Unfortunately, the
phenomenon receives less attention and commentary by observers of contemporary lowland Maya place-making. Nevertheless, archaeologists have long
suspected that ancient lowland communities possessed multiple spatial subdivisions; and, at long last, neighborhood archaeology would seem to be a
growing focus of research. To date, however, the physical delineation of neighborhoods seldom looks beyond such basic issues as residential proximity
and topography. In this paper, we hope to expand research protocols through consideration of an array of supra-household socio-political affiliations that
fixed people to specific places within the ancient Maya community. Using data from the sites of San Estevan and Wari Camp (in northeastern and
northwestern Belize, respectively), we argue that neighborhoods varied functionally, structurally, and spatially. Not surprisingly, different kinds of
neighborhoods produced markedly different kinds of neighbors.
Levin, Maureece (Stanford University), Molly Shelton (University of Oregon) and William Ayres (University of Oregon)
[125]             On Swiddening and Pigs: The Management of Micronesian Agroforests
Agroforestry, or the growing of tree crops, is a long-standing and key food production practice throughout much of the world. As with all systems of food
production, the way that humans manage agroforests has a profound impact on their composition as well as their sustainability. For over 2,000 years,
eastern Micronesians have relied largely on tree crop production, vegeculture, and fishing for subsistence. In this study, we focus on late prehistoric
manipulation of floral environments on the eastern Micronesian high island of Pohnpei, and the ways in which the management of food production systems
has shifted with social and historical changes. Specifically, using a combination of macrocharcoal quantification and phytolith analysis, we show that over
the past 700 years, Pohnpeians have managed their environments using periodic swiddening, and that the introduction of pigs in the historic period
constitutes a notable environmental disruption. We incorporate Pohnpei’s ethnographic and historical record as an important component of our
interpretation of the paleoethnobotanical assemblage.
Levine, Marc (University of Oklahoma)
[58]              The Making of a Mesoamerican Blockbuster: Maya: Hidden Worlds Revealed
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                252
This paper draws on a case study of the making of Maya: Hidden Worlds Revealed, a “blockbuster” traveling exhibit, to examine issues related to the
business, development, and curation of museum exhibits featuring Mesoamerican culture and history. On the business side, museums face challenges in
funding exhibits, managing risk, and ensuring return on investment. Development efforts struggle to deliver exhibits in tune with the public’s changing
tastes without sacrificing institutional goals to present high quality educational experiences that effectively communicate science to the public. Finally, the
shift from curator-led to team-oriented curation has led to a host of positive outcomes.
[58]             Chair
Levy, Janet (UNC at Charlotte)
[60]             Feminism, Gender, and Heterarchy
When archaeologists, largely led by Carole Crumley, began applying the concept of heterarchy to prehistoric contexts, the focus was on social organization
writ large. We generally used heterarchy to debate, illuminate, and/or clarify models of non-egalitarianism, stratification, and hierarchy. The concept seems
to have come out of analyses of twentieth century political systems. Some archaeological scholars of heterarchy have diversified into discussions of other
aspects of human experience, such as landscape. In the past, I have tried to apply the concept to analysis of symbolism and also to gender. Over time, I
have come to understand heterarchy as a potentially feminist concept. Here, I expand on this understanding and provide some brief examples of how
heterarchy illuminates our study of gender roles and values in past human social groups. Examples come from western European and southeastern U.S.
prehistory.
Levy, Jessica, Luis Alberto Peña, Lucía Valenzuela , Erika Quispe and Teobalda Inés Ramos
[63]             Funerary Bundles from the Storeroom: Conservation Choices and Research Opportunities in Alejandro Pezzia’s Salvage Collections.
Until recently, most textile collections from Peru’s Middle Horizon were the product of looting operations. Fine tunics and headdress elements abound in
museum collections, but their relationship to a deceased individual and full textile assemblage is unknown. As a result, items classified as “Wari” have been
disconnected from the complex social identities and relationships that they once influenced in life, or reconfigured after death.
Several mortuary contexts with unknown provenience have been located by the staff of the Museo Regional de Ica “Adolfo Bermúdez Jenkins,” product of
salvage efforts undertaken by Alejandro Pezzia during the 1960s and 1970s. Two small bundles were documented and received preliminary conservation
treatments as part of final projects in the “2015 Practicum in Analysis and Conservation of Organic and Textile Artifacts.” Under the direction of instructor
Luis Alberto Peña, two Peruvian teams worked on a conservative approach to retain bundle integrity while providing support. We recovered a surprising
quantity of information, including site provenience. Features and contextual relationships observed enhance the significance of other museum collections
and may be compared to intact tomb contexts documented in more recent archaeological excavations in the central and southern Andes.
Levy, Jessica [63] see Thompson, Katlynn
Lewarch, Dennis (Suquamish Tribe) and Stephanie Trudel (Suquamish Tribe)
[29]             The Suquamish Tribe Approach to Incorporate Tribal Historic Preservation into School Curricula
The Suquamish Tribe of the Port Madison Indian Reservation in Western Washington promotes incorporation of tribal history, culture, and language into
school curricula. Staff members in the Archaeology and Historic Preservation Program participate in curriculum development and make presentations in
the North Kitsap School District and at the Suquamish Tribe’s own Chief Kitsap Academy Middle and High School. Tribal archaeologists contribute to the
classroom experience in a variety of ways to bring to life the rich cultural traditions of the Suquamish People. We summarize efforts to incorporate
archaeological and ethnographic data into marine biology, language, and social studies classes through demonstrations of traditional fishing technology,
analyses of archaeological shellfish and fish assemblages from shell midden sites, summaries of traditional ecological knowledge related to fishing,
hunting, plant gathering, and shellfish gathering, and discussions of traditional place names given by Suquamish elders. Archaeologists also serve as
mentors to Chief Kitsap Academy students, providing opportunities for students to explore career paths in tribal historic preservation.
[203]            Discussant
Lewis, Patrick
[16]             Crossing Boundaries: Lubbock Lake Landmark as a Laboratory for the Study of Vertebrate Evolution
The unique characteristics of the Lubbock Lake Landmark offer a rare opportunity to ask questions about how vertebrates respond to changes in the
environment. In order to address such questions in the fossil record several qualities are required, including a continuous sequence of fossils, reliable
dates for the stratigraphic layers, large sample sizes of well preserved and homogenous skeletal elements, and a detailed understanding of the
environmental conditions associated with each stratigraphic level. A locality possessing such qualities allows for skeletal anatomy to be placed in
environmental context and for hypotheses about the interaction of changing environmental conditions and bone anatomy to be addressed. Dr. Eileen
Johnson recognized early that these conditions were present at the Lubbock Lake Landmark and began exploring the impact of the changing conditions at
the end of the last ice age on the vertebrates preserved there. She has examined such changes at the level of the fauna, the taxon, and the character. In
her work, she has shown how muskrat dentition changed in response to the warming, drying conditions of the Holocene, and how the bison of the southern
High Plains decreased body size in response to the changing grasslands.
Lewis, Cecil (University of Oklahoma) and Christina Warinner (University of Oklahoma)
[62]             A Biocultural Assessment of Gene Flow, the Andes and the Himalayas
Anthropological population geneticists often attempt to explain the pattern and distribution of human genetic variation globally. Central to this pursuit is
understanding the degree to which cultural, biological, and geographic variation impact migration of people, and the genetic traits (alleles) they bear. Gene
flow, the transfer of alleles from one population to another, flows in the path of least resistance. All other things being equal, this means that topology
creates resistance, and we would expect high altitude landscapes to provide barriers to gene flow. But this idealized model is frequently rejected. High
altitude environments can also provide incentives for migration and gene flow. Synthesizing our work from the Andes and Himalayas, we discuss the
biocultural landscape for the initial migration and the subsequent interaction of ancient peoples. We find there are high-elevation landscapes being peopled
as early as there is evidence of people in adjacent lower-elevation regions, and once peopled, patterns of gene flow becomes a complex interplay of
cultural and physical adaptation.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               253
Lewis, Patrick [148] see Brown, James
Lewis, Jennifer (Simon Fraser University)
[221]             The Duality of Female Archetypes in Facilitating Fieldwork: Case Studies in Arizona and Jordan
Polarizing female stereotypes are nothing new: Madonna/whore, “career woman”/“stay at home mum,” “girly/tomboy,” and others. Though modern feminist
movements have opened many doors to removing the limitations applied to these stereotypes, women may still find themselves assuming these roles in
order to appear more familiar, less threatening, and more trustworthy in order to facilitate their field work.
My research in both Arizona and Jordan requires that I assume different female roles: demure and passive in Arizona, and open and active in Jordan.
These paradoxical positions maximize my access as a researcher in both places and, from my perspective, afford me a more varied skillset with which to
undertake my research. This paper presents these apparently disparate roles and examines whether an individual them perpetuates, exploits, or simply
recognizes the gender-based realities that researchers employ in their fieldwork.
LHeureux, Gabriela (National Scientific and Technical Research Council (CONICET)), Juan Bautista Belardi (UNPA (Universidad Nacional de la
Patagonia Austral) and Flavia Carballo Marina (UNPA (Universidad Nacional de la Patagonia Austral)
[207]             New Data on Hunter Gatherer Coastal Use at the Southern Tip of the Americas during the Late Holocene: Cabo Virgenes 24 (Patagonia,
                  Argentina)
Cabo Virgenes 24 (CV 24) is an archaeological site located at the southeastern end of continental Patagonia, Argentina. The site rests on an erotional
beach which formation started in the Middle Holocene. The archaeological background shows that inland hunter-gatherers populations began to use this
coastal space since 2,000 years B.P. The faunal record of CV 24 exposes a low density and high richness of marine and coastal faunal species. There is
an emphasis on pinnipeds exploitation (Arctocephalus australis and Otaria flavescens) followed by seabirds (Phalacrocorax sp., Spheniscus magellanicus
and Aptenodytes patagonica), and a lesser use of terrestrial mammals like the guanaco (Lama guanicoe). Lithic artifacts were mainly made on locally
available raw material (basalt and dacite) and tool types (mostly side scrapers and projectile points) are the ones already registered in the area. An
important expedient component that is in accordance to inland guanaco hunters is suggested. In a regional context, the archaeological record of CV 24
reaffirms the observed trends related to the sporadic and marginal use of Cabo Virgenes area by hunter-gatherer inland populations since the Late
Holocene until the European contact.
Li, Xiaofei [8] see Smith, April
Li, Yuqi (Washington University in St. Louis) and Xin Wang (Cultural Resource Management Office of Hejing Coun)
[173]             Bronze Age to Early Iron Age Pastoralist Settlements in Xinjiang, China
The period from the Bronze Age (2500–900 B.C.E.) to Early Iron Age (900–200 B.C.E.) witnessed the emergence and flourish of some massive pastoralist
settlements along the Tian-Shan Mountains in Xinjiang, China. Specifically, these large-scale settlements mainly cluster in three regions known as Balikun,
Wenquan, and Hejing, located in the eastern, western, and middle Tian-Shan Mountains, respectively. Recent investigation of pastoralist settlement
remains in these three regions offers a wealth of information about their ancient residents in terms of economy, material culture, architecture, trade and
exchange relationships, and social organization. This paper synthetize current research on these settlements with an emphasis on presenting new survey
data from MGK, a large prehistoric settlement in Hejing County, Xinjiang.
Li, Xiuzhen (Emperor Qin Shihuang's Mausoleum Site Museum), Andrew Bevan (Institute of Archaeology, University College Londo), Marcos
Martinón-Torres (Institute of Archaeology, University College Londo), Yin Xia (Emperor Qin Shihuang's Mausoleum Site Museum, Xi'a) and Kun
Zhao (Emperor Qin Shihuang's Mausoleum Site Museum, Xi'a)
[173]             Who Made the China’s Terracotta Warriors and How?—Spatial Interpretation on Marking Evidence
A striking feature of Qin material culture (770–210 B.C.) in ancient China is the frequency with which it preserves stamped, incised, or painted marks with a
variety of Chinese characters, numerals, or symbols. In a general sense, such repeated mark-making was an administrative strategy that enabled Qin
administrators to mobilise people, raw materials, and finished goods in vast bulk, subject to careful quality and quantity control, and archaeologically, this
strategy is nowhere more obvious than in the manufacturing feat constituted by Emperor Qin Shihuang’s mausoleum and his Terracotta Army. This study,
from a new perspective, considers the production marks associated with both the terracotta warriors and their accompanying bronze weapons. We
compare and contrast the marking practices on these two very different kinds of artefacts, devoting close attention to what this implies about workshop
organisation or the operational sequences behind their manufacture. We also assess the location of such signs on their parent objects as well as their
wider spatial distribution across the pit as a whole, ultimately with a view to understanding craft organisation and project logistics during this crucial early
phase of empire-building in China.
Liebmann, Matt [18] see Stack, Adam
Lieske, Rosemary (Vanderbilt University)
[234]             Trade and Tribute Routes among the Spanish and Pipil in Cuscatlan, El Salvador
In ancient societies political, ideological, and environmental factors played a role in determining settlement patterns and trade routes. The use of GIS-
based modeling approaches, such as least cost path analysis, provide us with a greater understanding of how ancient people moved and interacted in the
landscape and the possible trade routes that existed among them. In this study, I use network and least cost path analyses to reconstruct the network of
trade and communication routes surrounding early sixteenth century Ciudad Vieja. As the first Spanish villa in El Salvador, Ciudad Vieja (1528) was the
center of tribute and exchange for 52 known Pipil villages in the Cuscatlán region. Least cost path analysis and other GIS-based techniques help to identify
the best possible trade and exchange routes of staple goods and tribute among local settlements. Additionally, it will help us identify villages that served as
secondary and tertiary centers of exchange outside of Ciudad Vieja.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 254
Lightfoot, Kent (University of California, Berkeley), Edward Luby (San Francisco State University ), Matthew Russell (Environmental Science
Associates), Gabriel Sanchez (University of California, Berkeley ) and Thomas Wake (UCLA)
[132]             Monumentality in the Hunter-Gatherer-Fisher Landscapes of the Greater San Francisco Bay, California
This paper examines the construction of impressive mounded landscapes along the greater San Francisco Bay in Late Holocene and Historic times.The
authors address some of the theoretical and methodological issues involved in the investigation of extensive accretional shell mound complexes that were
built up over multiple centuries. In evaluating questions about how and why these monumental landscapes were constructed, they present recent findings
from the study of both large and small sized mounds from a discrete settlement cluster on the east shore of San Francisco Bay.
Lillios, Katina (University of Iowa), Joel D. Irish (Liverpool John Moores University ), Anna J. Waterman (Mount Mercy University) and Ana Maria
Silva (Department of Life Sciences, University of Coimbra)
[103]             Demographic and Cultural Dynamics of the Portuguese Estremadura in the 4th-3rd Millennia B.C.: A Multi-Proxy Approach
The cultural dynamics of the Late Neolithic-Copper Age of the Portuguese Estremadura have traditionally been viewed in purely socio-economic terms,
involving an increase in social differentiation and economic intensification. In this study, by using analyses of dental morphology and stable and radiogenic
isotopes from collective burial populations in the region, we contribute additional lines of evidence to this historical trajectory. In particular, we use this
biological evidence to elucidate demographic relationships within and between these late prehistoric communities, including bio-distance and mobility
patterns and dietary heterogeneity, and relate these to social practices and environmental constraints.
Lima Astudillo, Isaac [230] see von Nagy, Christopher
Lima Estudillo, Gabriel [230] see Pohl, Mary
Lima Hooven, Alex (Rhodes College), Jon Russ (Rhodes College) and David Dye (University of Memphis)
[6]               Organic Analysis of Residues from Noded Vessels from the Lower Mississippi Valley
Analysis of organic residues in ceramic vessels obtained from archaeological excavations has the potential to identify the substances Native Americans
stored in ceramic pots of various shapes, sizes, and designs. In this study, we analyzed residues extracted from a particular type of vessel that has unique
designs covering the outer surface. It was recently proposed that these noded pots were used specifically to process Datura for religious ceremonies.
Datura contains tropane alkaloids that have psychoactive properties that also make the plant dangerous if ingested; thus, the unique markings on the
external surfaces indicated that these pots were not to be used for other purposes. Two jars were analyzed non-destructively by ultrasonicating the whole
pots directly in a methanol:chloroform solvent mixture. The extracts were derivatized using BSFTA with 1 percent TMCS and analyzed using gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) and gas chromatography with flame ionization detection (GC-FID). Standard solutions of the compound
atropine, the most abundant alkaloid in many Datura species, were analyzed to determine the instrument LOD and MDL. Our results indicate that atropine
was below the detection limit but other alkaloids were identified.
Limberg, Caitlin [148] see Brown, James
LIMONDIN-LOZOUET, Nicole [237] see TESTÉ, Marc
Limp, W. Fredrick (University of Arkansas)
[261]             Digital Curation, Data and Replication Of Results—The Foundation for the Future of Archaeology
The first principle of the SAA’s Ethics states “The archaeological record …[including]... archaeological collections, records and reports, is irreplaceable. It
is the responsibility of all archaeologists to work for the long-term conservation and protection of the archaeological record...” As a profession, we’ve been
reasonably responsible as stewards of archaeological sites, but considerably less responsible when we think about digital records and reports. The long-
term and ready availability of the complete records of any archaeological activity is essential for the credibility of archaeology. A recent article in Science
reports that after redoing 100 major psychology experiments only 39 percent could be replicated. The ability of others to reproduce results is a central
tenant of modern research. In archaeology, we commonly destroy our object of study—it is only through careful reassessment of the data from our work
that we have any hope of a foundation that is not built on shifting sands. At the same time, the increasing use of high density survey and measurement in
the field means that we can move from our tradition of recording information—once removed from data—to recording (and preserving) data, making
preservation even more critical.
Lin, Kuei-chen (Institute of History and Philology, Academia Sinica)
[106]             The Development of Typology in Chinese Archaeology
This paper offers an overview of the development of typology in Chinese archaeology. In particular, we focus on how it has influenced and yet
distinguished itself from typologies developed in western disciplines—and especially on how Chinese archeologists have relied largely on objects’
appearances to define types. In this manner, they have eagerly used typology in dating and defining archaeological cultures. The philosophy of
classification, by which such typologies have been established, has not only in large part determined the way researchers view an object’s function, but has
also guided their schemes of data collection. Most notably, Chinese archaeologists have used typology as a tool to conjecture about the “kinship” of and
evolutionary relationships among archaeological cultures or their affiliations. This analogy to biological classification has crowded out other ways of
categorization and presented difficulties, reminiscent of cultural diffusionism. The practice of typology in Chinese archaeology appears to be a supplement
to the Chinese idea of history. This has also hidden the fact that types can be constructed in diverse ways, depending on a researcher’s purposes, and
social groups or relations inferred thereby represent only a single dimension of the cultures we study.
[106]             Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              255
Lin, Yi-Ling
[106]            Bone Craft Product and Economies in the Late Shang Period at Anyang, China
This paper will discuss recent analysis of worked animal bone discovered at the late Shang Xinanzhuang site, and the manufacture strategies and raw
materials manipulations within different locations in Anyang, Henan. Xinanzhuang is considered to be associated with the industrial-scale boneworkshop
at Tiesanlu site because of the close proximity between the two sites. Previous studies on bone artifacts from Tiesanlu provide some understanding of
craft production systems during the late Shang Period. Applying micro-wear analysis and statistical methods to bone artifacts from Xinanzhuang can
provide new data for studying bone cutting strategies among different areas of the workshop and help understand bone craft production and economies
during the late Shang Period.
Lindberg, Cathy [165] see Walker, Jeff
Linderholm, Anna (Palaeo-BARN, University of Oxford), Ardern Hulme-Beaman (University of Aberdeen), Allowen Evin (University of Aberdeen),
Keith Dobney (University of Aberdeen) and Greger Larson (University of Oxford)
[176]            Deciphering Dog Domestication: A Combined Ancient DNA and Geometric Morphometric Approach
Research into animal domestication has now broadly established the geographic and temporal origins of the major livestock species, but has failed to do
so for dogs. We will apply ancient DNA (aDNA) and geometric morphometric (GM) techniques to archaeological canid remains, of which we have
examined ~4000 specimens across the globe through multiple time periods. Using this multifaceted approach, we expect population level distinctions
revealed by aDNA analyses to be mirrored by GM analyses. This allows results of one technique to be used as a proxy for the other if both datasets cannot
be retrieved from the same specimen. We hope to identify multiple morphological groups from Pleistocene wolves that may represent either natural
ecomorphs or early domestication phases. By examining the genetic signature associated with these groups, we hope to identify which group(s)
contributed to dogs. Further, by identifying genetic signatures associated with these groups we will identify likely locations for early domestication events.
These results will be tested through time by assessing the degree of admixture within each geographical population revealed by the aDNA data. Our
results should help reveal the earliest locations of dog domestication and the complexity of modern dog morphological and genetic variability.
Lindley, Tiffany (The University of Texas at San Antonio)
[273]            Maya Non-Elite Hinterland Household Responses to Terminal Classic Transformations
My research examines the responses of Maya hinterland households to Terminal Classic (A.D. 780–900) socioeconomic transformations. My fieldwork
focuses on Floodplain North, one of five settlement clusters in the Rancho San Lorenzo Survey Area in Belize’s Mopan Valley. While adjoining settlement
clusters have been intensively studied, my excavations are the first at Floodplain North. To date, I have completed 25 test excavations, sampling all of the
mounds in the settlement cluster. Preliminary analysis indicates four households were occupied in the Early Postclassic (A.D. 900–1200). This is unusual
in the Mopan Valley, as almost no other hinterland communities survived the Terminal Classic collapse. My research examines the resiliency of this
settlement cluster in the wake of large-scale sociopolitical transformations. Yaeger (2000) concluded that the San Lorenzo cluster experienced an 85
percent population decrease from the Late-Terminal Classic periods and was abandoned during the Terminal Classic. My excavations demonstrate that
some people chose to remain at the adjacent Floodplain North cluster. By examining the Terminal Classic assemblages and topographic locations of
households that showed continued occupation into the Postclassic, I suggest residents of Floodplain North, motivated by strategies promoting social
stability and resilience, actively chose to remain in the Mopan Valley.
Lindquist, Shayna (University of Vermont)
[216]            The Formative and Classic Period Obsidian of Matacanela
Obsidian studies are capable of articulating spatial-temporal and economic trends at particular sites with those at regional and interregional scales. Recent
obsidian data acquired through stratigraphic excavations at the site of Matacanela, centrally located within the Tuxtla Mountains, reaffirm patterning
previously identified through systematic survey and further enable the temporal refinement of lithic technological shifts throughout the settlement’s
sequence. This paper examines the site’s use of obsidian spanning the Formative and Classic periods, and introduces a preliminary framework for
understanding Matacanela’s role in local, regional, and interregional lithic economic networks that connected Gulf lowland consumers to source regions.
Lindsay, Audrey (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center), Carolyn E. Boyd (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education
Center), Victoria L. Roberts (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center), Jerod L. Roberts (Shumla Archaeological Research &
Education Center) and Timothy J. Murphy IV (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center)
[131]            Taking a Byte out of Rattlesnake: An Overview of the Rattlesnake Canyon Project
The Rattlesnake Canyon mural represents one of the most well-preserved and compositionally intricate rock art murals in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands,
and perhaps the world. Deposited gravels from a major flood episode in June 2014, however, raised the canyon floor approximately 10 feet, enabling future
floods to destroy the fragile panel. The Rattlesnake Canyon Project is an emergency collaborative effort among Texas Tech University, the National Park
Service, and Shumla to document this invaluable cultural treasure before it is lost. Documentation and analysis of this mural includes: 3D modeling and
other advanced photographic techniques engaging color management, digital field microscopy to examine paint layer stratigraphy, production of graphic
databases for the 269 figures comprising the mural, elemental analyses of the pigments using pXRF, and the collection of detailed attribute data for each of
the figures. This paper provides a brief overview of the Rattlesnake Canyon Project and sets the stage for subsequent Shumla presentations in this
symposium.
Linford, Samantha (The University of Colorado Boulder)
[67]             The Conceptual Metaphor Expanded: A Visual Study of Whole Vessels in the Mesa Verde Region
Previous research into the conceptual foundations of the Mesa Verde style has found that ceramic imagery is conceptualized as textile designs and is
representative of a worldview grounded in container imagery (Ortman 2000). However, these conclusions derive from patterns observable on sherds. In
this study, I examine designs on whole vessels using the same framework to determine whether the same worldview of textiles and ceramic imagery is
seen in a complete context. Examining design constraints on vessel forms is addressed in a more complete manner using whole vessels. This study
serves to highlight the importance of further research building upon the inclusion of scientific research and conceptualization of human behavior in
archaeology through material studies such as ceramics.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                256
Link, Karl [224] see Bouwman, Abigail
Lints, Andrew (University of Alberta), John Ives (University of Alberta) and Kristine Fedyniak (Royal Alberta Museum)
[190]            Little Pots, Big Implications: Analysis of Devils Lake Sourisford Ritual Pottery Vessels
With an estimated temporal range spanning from 900 to 1400 A.D., the Devils Lake Sourisford (DLS) pottery tradition has been viewed as a northern
expression of Mississippian cultural influence within the northernmost Great Plains. Owing to the recovery of these vessels in direct association with human
remains and the paucity of available vessels for analyses, understanding this phenomenon has posed a complicated challenge for archaeologists.
However, advancements in pottery analyses have provided the opportunity to extract data previously unavailable. Submission of a single DLS vessel from
Saskatchewan for multiple pottery analyses including carbonized food residues, D-Stretch Rock Art image analysis, high definition photography, and
portable XRF scanning has provided incredible insight towards the design, creation, and use of DLS pottery for ritual activities. Combination of these
analyses has concluded that this ceremonial item was treated with a red ochre design and that both maize, and wild rice, contributed to the items prepared
within the vessel. Further comparison to three more additional ritual vessels resulted in the identification of ritual trends within the DLS tradition.
[190]            Chair
Lipo, Carl [110] see McElhoes, Jennifer
Lippert, Dorothy (National Museum of Natural History)
[202]            Discussant
Lippi, Ronald (University of Wisconsin) and Alejandra Gudino (University of Missouri)
[57]             Cultural Implications of Neutron Activation Analysis of Ceramics from Palmitopamba, Ecuador
The cloud forest site of Palmitopamba in northwestern Ecuador was occupied for centuries by the Yumbos prior to the arrival of Incas around 1500.
Instrumental neutron activation analysis has been performed on ceramics we have excavated there and which represent those two groups, on a third
pottery complex widely identified in Ecuador as Cosanga or Panzaleo, and on raw clay samples from the vicinity of Palmitopamba. The results of some 140
analyses are presented. These imply that the Inca pottery at the site was locally made by Yumbo artisans but that the Cosanga pottery is intrusive. We
expand upon these and other interpretations to address the nature of the Palmitopamba site and the anomalous relationship that existed between the
Yumbos and Incas in the final years of the Inca Empire at its northern periphery.
Lippitt, Christopher [64] see Kirk, Scott
Lira-Lopez, Yamile
[216]            Avances y perspectivas de la arqueología del Centro de Veracruz. Región de las Grandes Montañas.
A pesar de lo escarpado del terreno, entre montañas y valles, se asentaron grupos humanos en distintos periodos cronológicos desde el Preclásico hasta
la Colonia. Algunos de esos valles permitieron la comunicación entre los poblados cercanos, otros, entre regiones geográficas más distantes como la
Costa del Golfo, el Altiplano Central y la región oaxaqueña, evidenciando presencia o influencia olmeca, teotihuacana, nahua y costeñas, en los sitios
hasta ahora conocidos. Por estar en un punto intermedio entre diversas regiones geográficas y culturales debe de ser estudiada con mayor intensidad y
profundidad pues la comunicación en tiempos prehispánicos jugó un papel primordial en el comercio e intercambio de bienes e ideas, conquistas, y en
general en el desarrollo de las sociedades antiguas. Lo que se conoce hasta el momento es gracias a viajeros, cronistas, inspecciones, rescates del
Centro-INAH Veracruz, y a las investigaciones sistemáticas del proyecto Arqueología del valle de Maltrata. Las perspectivas de estudio deben estar
encaminadas hacia análisis de la organización social, política, comercial, religiosa más preciso y a proyectos sistemáticos que permitan ampliar el
universo actual de estudio.
Liss, Brady (University of California, San Diego) and Thomas Levy (University of California, San Diego)
[199]            Waste Not, Want Not: Exploring the Archaeological Significance of a Copper Production Waste Mound at Khirbat al-Jariya, Faynan, Jordan
Recent excavations by the Edom Lowlands Regional Archaeology Project at Khirbat al-Jariya (KAJ), an Iron Age (ca. 1200–586 B.C.E.) copper smelting
center in Jordan’s Faynan region, aimed to explore the site’s rich metallurgical history. KAJ is characterized by architectural features and large slag
(smelting waste byproduct) mounds visible on the surface, attesting to its significance as a copper production site. These renewed excavations investigated
the abundant metallurgical remains by probing into one such slag mound. This small sounding, a 1 x 1 meter sample excavated to bedrock, provided a
complete picture of smelting activity over the site’s history. Furthermore, excavators collected slag samples from stratigraphically controlled contexts within
the probe and other slag mounds. These samples were subsequently subjected to elemental analysis by X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) to supplement the
archaeological record. By combining XRF results with the chronological framework provided by archaeological excavation, it’s possible to diachronically
compare elemental concentrations within the slag samples. Together, the excavated material and analytical results (here also building on findings from the
2006 excavations) provide the necessary foundations to reconstruct the metallurgical narrative of KAJ. Thus, this paper presents the results of recent field
and laboratory work along with their implications concerning copper production at KAJ.
Litschi, Melissa (Southern Illinois University, Carbondale) and Kayeleigh Sharp (Southern Illinois University, Carbondale)
[205]            Portable XRF Analysis of Anthropogenic Soils from the North Coast of Peru: A Comparative Study of Sample Preparation Methods
The increasing use of portable x-ray fluorescence (pXRF) spectrometers in compositional studies of archaeological materials has led to an ongoing debate
over proper use of this equipment, including procedures for sample preparation and homogenization. Due to the diverse nature of archaeological materials,
sample preparation methods should be tailored to specific research questions and material types.
This study examines the impacts of different sample preparation methods on pXRF analysis of anthropogenic soils to obtain a multi-elemental
characterization of living surfaces for activity-area analysis. Here, we present a comparative analysis of 150 prepared and unprepared soil samples,
including floor scrapings and feature contents, from the Songoy-Cojal site complex on the north coast of Peru. Sample preparation includes grinding and
sieving (2 mm screen) of the soils to create a homogenized sample. The results of this comparative study will illuminate the strengths and weaknesses of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                257
different sample preparation procedures for future pXRF analysis of soils at this site and elsewhere in the region.
Little, Maran [133] see Colaninno, Carol
Littman, Robert [224] see Silverstein, Jay
Liu, Jiun-Yu (PhD student of the University of Washington)
[106]            Trade Diaspora in Prehistoric Eastern Taiwan
The origin and expansion of Austronesian, a language group disperses from Easter Island to Madagascar, is a long-term discussed issue in Taiwan and
southeast Asia. For the movement of people and materials, the migrationist models have dominated the explanatory frameworks in the south China Sea, a
broader area of my proposed research region. In this proposed research the concept of trade diaspora is applied to examine the possibility of frequent
bidirectional movement of materials and people between eastern Taiwan and northern Luzon in the Philippines. I hypothesis the bidirectional movement
may have persisted for at least a thousand and three hundred years from 2,300 B.P. to 1,000 B.P., and this proposed research is to explore the interaction
and bi-directional influences between trade diasporic communities and local host communities in eastern Taiwan and northern Luzon. The primary
archaeological materials utilized for this study are the ceramic assemblages, burial practices, and settlement patterns. All the data above will be tested to
support the hypothesis that local interactions are more complex and less unidirectional than previous studies have reported and will test the trade diasporic
model as a suitable framework to examine human interaction and its influence to society in eastern Taiwan.
Liu, Haiwang [120] see Storozum, Michael
Liu, Chin-hsin (California State University Northridge)
[252]            Environmental Fluctuation in Neolithic Coastal Central Thailand: A Human Story
As a continuously occupied Neolithic (~2,000–1,500 B.C.) site in coastal central Thailand, Khok Phanom Di yielded abundant artifacts and biological
remains providing detailed insights to its environmental patterns and human biology. Core studies and faunal diversity analyses suggested the existence of
an episode of receding coastal margin between 1,750 and 1,650 B.C., exposing marsh and freshwater areas that were previously inaccessible. The
transition from a marine/estuarine site to a lacustrine-based environment was associated with a suite of technical and demographic changes that shaped
our understanding of human history in southeast Asia. This study investigates how human diet was impacted by the environmental fluctuation, using
carbon and nitrogen stable isotope signals from bone collagen. Valid data from 26 skeletal individuals demonstrate that for those buried during the
lacustrine period, a change of protein sources from mainly marine-based to a wider spectrum terrestrial-marine mix is evident while no marked change
occurred to the marine protein sources. This pattern is attributable to easier access to the interior terrestrial resources during the lacustrine phase and the
continuous exploitation of near-shore shellfish throughout the occupation. The isotopic data are placed in the osteological and archaeological contexts to
articulate a nuanced lifeway of the people.
Livesay, Alison (University of Oklahoma)
[289]            Stone and Bone: Examining Social Memory through Continuity and Discontinuity in the Mimbres Region
Groups in the past used social memory for various social negotiations, which can include maintaining and legitimizing power, access to resources, and
monumental construction. But how is memory maintained, created, or recreated in the daily practices of a group or groups going through social and
material transitions? How does that translate to real social power? In this spirit, I explore the creation, inscription, and possible contestation of social
memory in the Mimbres region of southwest New Mexico using the mortuary, domestic, and ritual architecture, and ceramic practices from a number of
sites. I examine these material classes in regards to the relative continuity or discontinuity of the then present to the past during the dynamic period known
as the Pithouse to Pueblo Transition (A.D. 900–1050). This comprehensive study adds to the recent discussion of the social landscape and corporate
group influence in a cultural region that does not demonstrate vertical hierarchy in the burial record.
Livingood, Patrick (University of Oklahoma)
[39]             GIS Dataset for Making Better and More Attractive Maps of U.S. Rivers
Waterways are one of the most common elements of archaeological maps. However, most GIS layers of waterways contain either too many or too few
features at a given scale and don’t have any associated data for efficiently including or excluding features. Further, most commonly available rivers
datasets contain modern features such as manmade lakes, which are anachronistic for premodern maps. A little known but freely available dataset known
as NHDPlus makes it possible to create better archaeological basemaps and this author has created an easy to use distillation of these data specifically for
easy use in premodern map making.
Livingood, Patrick [69] see Eiselt, B. Sunday
Llamas, Bastien (University of Adelaide), Alan Cooper (University of Adelaide) and Wolfgang Haak (University of Adelaide and Max Planck
Institute fo)
[276]            Ancient Mitochondrial DNA Provides High-Resolution Timescale of the Peopling of the Americas
Archaeological evidence indicates human presence as far as southern Chile and Argentina by 14.6-14.0 kya (thousand years ago), shortly after the
Pleistocene ice sheets blocking access from eastern Beringia began to retreat. Genetic estimates of the timing and route of entry have been constrained by
the lack of suitable calibration points and low genetic diversity of Native Americans. We sequenced 92 whole mitochondrial genomes from precolumbian
South American skeletons dating from 8.6-0.5 kya, allowing a detailed, temporally calibrated reconstruction of the peopling of the Americas. The data
suggest a small population entered the Americas via a coastal route around 16 kya, having been isolated in eastern Beringia for ~3-10 ky after separation
from eastern Siberian populations. Following a rapid movement throughout the Americas, limited gene flow in South America resulted in marked
phylogeographic structure, which persisted through time. Finally, European colonization caused a high extinction rate of precolumbian lineages, with all the
ancient haplotypes detected in this study being absent from modern datasets.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              258
[276]            Chair
Llobera, Marcos
[174]            Discussant
Lloyd-Smith, Lindsay [295] see Krigbaum, John
LoBiondo, Matthew [284] see Lobiondo, Matthew
Lobiondo, Matthew (Monmouth University), John Dysart (Kerns CRM Consultants), Matthew LoBiondo (Monmouth University) and Richard Veit
(Monmouth University)
[284]            Reexamining the Dating and Importance of Pipe stems at the Clark-Watson Site in Perth Amboy, New Jersey
Pipe stems are a staple in Historical Archaeology. Their study can provide considerable insight into the lives of the people who used them. In addition to
the cultural importance of pipe stems, these artifacts are frequently used to date historic sites. Working with a collection of over 2,000, seventeenth and
eighteenth century pipe stems from the Clark-Watson site in Perth Amboy, New Jersey, we reexamine the notion of a communal tavern pipe through
experimental archaeology techniques. In addition, we will compare multiple accepted pipe stem dating methods, while also testing new methods, in an
attempt to provide significantly more accurate dates that will aid in the interpretation of future archaeological test
Lobo, Jose
[171]            Discussant
Locascio, William (Florida Gulf Coast University) and Sarah Taylor (University of South Florida)
[6]               Exploring the Social Affects of Hurricane Recovery in Colonial St. Augustine
Data gathered during two seasons of excavation of a Minorcan household in St. Augustine, FL, are examined for patterns that reflect how recovery from
the hurricane that hit the city on October 5, 1811, affected social systems and relations within the city’s communities. Johnson (2005) has argued that
recovery from the disaster created strong bonds among members of the communities and acted to level social inequality within them. Schwartz (2005),
however, notes that during the colonial period post-disaster relief in the Caribbean islands increased social inequality, in part because decisions about who
got what tended to favor certain groups over others. We consider these models in our investigation of remains of the Pablo Sabate household and
historical information on colonial St. Augustine to determine if our data can contribute to broader understanding of how response to disasters is organized
and affects communities at the local level.
Lock, Gary [60] see Ralston, Ian
Lock, Gary
[174]            Discussant
Locker, Angelina (The University of Texas at Austin) and Fred Valdez, Jr. (The University of Texas at Austin)
[130]            Late Classic to Terminal Classic Maya Transitions: Modeling from NW Belize
The Late Classic (A.D. 600–800) to Terminal Classic (A.D. 800–900) of NW Belize reveals a change in material culture, settlements, and social-political
manifestations. Detailed here are some of the changes observed for the transition from the Late Classic to the Terminal Classic. Changes in material
culture are described as are apparent choices in settlement locales between the two temporal phases. The interplay between material culture, settlements,
and social-political organization are posited given available data and analysis. The prospect of utilizing other scientific (archaeometry) techniques are
suggested as mechanisms for better defining the nature of temporal transitions as reflected in choices of material culture, settlements, etc. A model for
explaining the changes and difference between the Late Classic and Terminal Classic Maya is presented as a testable hypothesis.
Lockhart, Jami J. [225] see Mitchem, Jeffrey
Lofaro, Ellen (University of Florida), Jorge Luis Soto Maguino (Dirección Desconcentrada de Cultura de Ayacucho) and John Krigbaum
(University of Florida)
[134]            Lamb of God: Caprine use in a Jesuit Church in Early Colonial Ayacucho, Peru
Known as La Iglesia de la Compañía de Jesus de Huamanga, the earliest Jesuit church in Ayacucho, Peru, was built in 1605 directly off the main plaza.
While famous for its baroque art, this standing church with a practicing congregation is in need of extensive renovations. As one of the first steps in a
planned future restoration project, archaeological salvage was conducted in 2008, and uncovered human and faunal remains underneath the church floor,
which were associated with various ceramic, glass, metal, and leather artifacts. This presentation explores the significance of the faunal assemblage
recovered from the church and church grounds, including the animal remains associated with human burials, as well as the faunal remains from the church
storage areas. Faunal distribution and context is reviewed and isotopic data presented for the assemblage and is placed in context. For example, carbon
and nitrogen isotope values will inform aspects of diet and provisioning, while strontium and lead isotope ratios will inform faunal mobility. Findings will be
comparatively evaluated with corresponding faunal data from early historic Peru.
Loffler, German
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   259
[255]              This Concoction Is Hot, But My Hand Is Not!: A Possible Function of Annular Rings on P’uku-Like Vessels in the Central Coast of Peru
                   during the Late Intermediate Period and a Conjectural Link to Andean Traditional Medicine
In this paper, I explore the possible function of the annular rings on p’uku-like ceramic vessels from the central coast of Peru during the Late Intermediate
Period. I argue that this part of the vessel is not decorative as others have suggested for modern contexts. Instead, I hypothesize that the annular ring at
the bottom of the p’uku-like vessel’s function was to buffer the hand from heat. Alternatively, the annular ring might have aided in adding stability to
standing vessels in shaky grounds—the central coast of Peru is prone to frequent seismic activity. I develop a methodology to test such scenarios and test
it on replicated p’uku-like vessels. Tests confirm that the annual ring efficiently prevents the consumer form burning their hands while holding a hot-content
vessel. Also, to a lesser degree, the annular ring aid the vessel from spilling over when free standing. Possible hot-content for the vessels include (a)
medicinal remedies, (b) hot foods, and/or (c) hot beverages—these possibilities however, at the moment, are conjuncture; they remain to be demonstrated
by residue analysis of the vessels themselves.
[255]              Chair
Loftis, Kathy, Alex Cherkinsky (Center for Applied Isotope Studies) and Robert Speakman (Center for Applied Isotope Studies)
[39]               Assessing the Effectiveness of XAD-2 Resin as Pre-Treatment Method for AMS 14C Dating
The ability to generate accurate and reliable radiocarbon dates for bone is of great importance in archaeology. Radiocarbon measurements are routinely
performed on hydrolyzed bone extract, which may contain exogenous organic matter. The presence of exogenous organic matter may then affect the
accuracy of the estimated radiocarbon dates. Several pre-treatment methods have been previously developed to minimize contamination from exogenous
sources of organic carbon. Here, we assess the effectiveness of one of these methods, the chemical purification of collagen by XAD resin.
Logan, Amanda [177] see Stahl, Ann
Logan, Amanda (Northwestern University)
[177]              Chair
Loger, Michele (Cardno/UF)
[164]              Searching for Shell Mounds in Southwest Florida: An Automated Approach
This paper will explore using automated Object Based Image Analysis (OBIA) to search for archaeological shell mound sites in thick mangrove forest. This
is accomplished by combining available data from multiple remote sensing sources, integrating them using several software programs, and training the
computer to search for a particular set of parameters—including height (LIDAR) and spectral qualities (Color Near-infrared). The newest software programs
will be reviewed, as well as the source and quality of remote sensing data. The challenges, achievements, and pitfalls of the methods employed will be
discussed. In addition, the effectivity of the automated process will be compared to manual identification of possible site locations based on ground-truthed
data.
Lohr, Christian [95] see Gronenborn, Detlef
Lohse, Jon (Coastal Environments, Inc.)
[55]               Preceramic Mesoamerica: Chronology, Culture, and Climate
Recent and ongoing investigations in Mesoamerica are showing how different regions followed different developmental trajectories leading up to the
adoption of ceramic technologies and sedentary lifestyles. This threshold, which typically defines the end of the Archaic Period, was reached at different
points in time anywhere between about 1800 and 900 B.C. These multiple preceramic adaptations seemingly imply that Mesoamerican cultural diversity
that marks Formative and later periods had its basis in Archaic and perhaps even Paleoindian periods. This study provides an overview of Mesoamerican
preceramic periods, based on an evaluation of available radiocarbon records, and compares these records against available late Quaternary environmental
and climate data. We evaluate the timing and nature of preceramic culture change, and consider whether significant environmental factors or events can
be recognized that may have accounted for punctuated preceramic responses, either across Mesoamerica or specific to particular regions.
[55]               Chair
Lohse, Jon [55] see Lawrence, Ken
Long, Shelbi [112] see Nolan, Kevin
Lonneville, Britt [121] see Verlee, Jotka
Lonneville, Britt (Ghent University), Cornelis Stal (Ghent University), Edy Barrios (CUDEP – USAC), Antolin Velasquez Lopez (Universidad de
San Carlos de Guatemala) and Philippe De Maeyer (Ghent University)
[212]              Ranking Estimation of Maya Archaeological Sites using Topographic Parameters
The position of an archaeological site in a transport network is a critical parameter for its prosperity. Large collections of alien relics were excavated on
various sites of the Copán region, indicating the importance of inter-site relations and trading. The importance of a particular site accordingly influenced the
political, social, and religious life of its surrounding sites. In order to evaluate the theoretical rate of prosperity in comparison with other sites in a region, a
reconstruction of the transport routes is required. In this study, a series of candidate routes between sites are estimated using topographic parameters. The
resulting routes are ranked based on their potential use, implicitly qualifying the nodes within the network and thus the prosperity of archaeological sites. It
is assumed that the routes are the result of an iterative process where the final routes represent the most optimal path between sites, and that most
transport took place by canoe or by hiking. The track estimation is therefore based on the anisotropic analysis of a digital elevation model and compared
with a slope-based least cost algorithm.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              260
Looper, Matthew [272] see Munson, Jessica
Lopez, Patricio [139] see Loyola, Rodrigo
Lopez, Jose (Universidad de la República, Uruguay)
[263]            Where Does the Amazon End?
Manuals of American prehistory divided South America into bio geographical zones associated with archaeological traditions, and classify the basin of the
Río de la Plata as one marginal area of others with a more defined cultural profile. Systematic research and multidisciplinary projects have discussed the
boundaries of those units of archaeological and cultural analysis, as well as theoretical principles which held it.
The basin of the Río de la Plata was associated with the "Pampa" cultural tradition, by environmental similarities and in the hunter-gatherer mode of
production. However, the study of mounds called "Indians cerritos" forced to discuss some paradigms, such as the “pampean filiation” of lowland hunters.
The prehistory of the Paraná and Uruguay rivers shows similarities with the Amazonian populations, and episodes of dispersion of Arawak and Tupi
Guarani populations are well documented. The lowlands of the East of Uruguay and southern Brazil constitute a unique setting for the comparative study of
key aspects, as anthropogenic structures on Earth and its ecological, economic, and social implications.
Rivers, river basins, and aquatic environments articulated a sphere of social interaction of long distance to the interior of the continent, crossing traditional
archaeological classification based in cultural eco types.
López, Andrea (Universidad San Francisco de Quito) and Florencio Delgado Espinoza (Universidad San Francisco de Quito)
[282]            Contributions to Understanding Demography and Settlement Patterns in the Valle del Quimi, Zamora-Chinchipe Province, Ecuador
Carvajal´s descriptions of the Upper Amazonian populations created controversies, given that little evidence was presented until recently, by the
archaeologists about the demography of the area. Only few studies in the Upper Amazonia region have contributed with data for the reconstruction of local
demography, given that most of the work has been enforced as contract archeology projects within the oil and mining industry, with specific questions on
mine and lack of regional scope. In the Valle del Quimi, a contract archeology project within the Mirador mining development has taken place since 2004.
At this moment, we have gathered sufficient data to reconstruct local settlement patterns and demography. Thus, in this paper, we present a regional
analysis of demography and settlement patterns of the Valle del Quimi, and the adjacent Zamora Valley.
López Bravo, Roberto [88] see Paris, Elizabeth
López Campeny , Sara [62] see Jolie, Edward
Lopez Corral, Aurelio [86] see Alcantara, Keitlyn
Lopez Corral, Aurelio (Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia), Mari Carmen Serra Puche (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México) and
Gabriel Vicencio Castellanos (Universidad de las Américas, Puebla)
[179]            Changes In Obsidian Supply during the Classic to Postclassic Transition in Prehispanic Puebla-Tlaxcala
The Puebla-Tlaxcala region witnessed several shifts in political and economic power during the Classic to Postclassic transition. This area played a pivotal
role in the development of cultural complexity following the demographic rearrangements that followed the fall of Teotihuacan as a pan-regional state
power. However, little research has been carried on understanding shifts in exchange networks, especially on the trade of obsidian materials. Using XRF-p
analysis, this paper seeks to provide new data on the economy of obsidian trade from the sites Xochitecatl-Cacaxtla, Cholula, Metepec, and Tepeticpac.
Here, we analyze shifts in obsidian procurement exchange webs and the implication on key resource access and control among local state entities.
López Corral, Aurelio [179] see Serra Puche, Mari Carmen
López Mestas Camberos, Martha Lorenza [101] see Mountjoy, Joseph
López Rodríguez, Raquel [32] see Fowler, William
Lopez Varela, Sandra (UNAM)
[10]             Alternative Mexico: A Mobile Application to Preserve Contemporary Heritage Values
“Alternative Mexico” is a mobile application drawing from the need to preserve and promote contemporary heritage resources that are of great value to its
citizens. After more than a century of infrastructure building and promotion of urban lifeways to become a modern country, the experience has resulted in
the appropriation of modern spaces and behaviors by Mexico’s citizens, with the inevitable creation of new heritage values. These new heritage resources
oppose the national definition of cultural heritage and are the main the main source of conflict during infrastructure planning and building. Since modern
resources are preserved mostly within the aesthetics of Mexican nationalism, federal institutions hardly intervene to preserve these alternative views of
what heritage means to society. “Alternative Mexico” records people’s contemporary heritage values, hoping to play an important role in articulating the
need for effective, sustainable and responsive preservation models contemplating all forms of heritage, creating a more agreeable partnership between
Mexico’s citizens and institutions.
Lopez-Hurtado, Enrique (IEP Instituto de Estudios Peruanos)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               261
[283]             Chair
López-Hurtado, Enrique [283] see Wang, Qiang
Lopiparo, Jeanne (Rhodes College)
[179]             Making and Breaking: Domestic Craft Production, Fragmentation, and Enchainment at Classic Period Chinikihá, Mexico and Currusté,
                  Honduras
This paper examines the role of domestic craft production and the fragmentation and interment of locally made goods in the reproduction of social identities
and networks of social relations at two Late to Terminal Classic (600–900 A.D.) sites, Chinikihá in the Western Maya Lowlands of Chiapas, Mexico and
Currusté in the Ulúa Valley, Honduras. The life histories of the products of small-scale, household-based industries were intimately tied to the life histories
of their producers, enchaining the living to the dead through mortuary practices in which fragments of those products were interred with their makers.
Lordkipanidze, David [87] see Coil, Reed
Loren, Diana (Peabody Museum, Harvard University)
[18]              Sound, Health, and Spirituality in the Colonial Lower Mississippi Valley
Wellness and spirituality are rooted in the body. Bodies and material culture are intertwined through practices of healing; ways to navigate bodily and
spiritual health in daily life. In colonial Lower Mississippi Valley, European-introduced diseases and new forms of material culture greatly impacted Native
American communities and their practices of healing. Some of these stories are familiar to us: the changes brought about by access to new materials, new
tools, and new kinds of clothing. Yet, during this period of stress, how were new and familiar forms of material culture used by those seeking relief and
providing care? In particular, how was spirituality expressed in healing practices that was so closely tied to sound, movement, and performance? Here, I
consider how bells, beads, and other items of adornment were worn on the body in embodied practices related to health and well-being.
[51]              Discussant
[18]              Chair
Lorenz, Samantha [294] see Saldana, Melanie
Lorenz, Samantha, Naomi Marks (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory) and James Brady (California State University, Los Angeles)
[294]             Geographic Origins of Child Sacrifices: Radiogenic Strontium Isotope Analyses from Midnight Terror Cave, Belize
Midnight Terror Cave, located in the Cayo district in Belize, has produced the largest skeletal assemblage reported from a Maya cave. Large-scale
modification of the cave for public gatherings indicates that the space was used ritualistically; most of the individuals recovered are believed to be human
sacrifices. The assemblage size permitted us to select a relatively large sample of permanent lower first molars from juveniles for radiogenic strontium
isotope analyses. Juveniles were the only age subset tested in order to have a sample large enough to draw conclusions about the geographic origins of
these individuals. Strontium isotope ratios (87Sr/86Sr) were measured by thermal ionization mass spectrometry (ThermoFisher Triton TIMS) at Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory. Tooth enamel samples were analyzed along with samples of bone from local fauna and soil samples collected from within
the cave. Strontium isotopic ratios of the tooth enamel samples ranged from 0.707929 to 0.709296 ± 0.000030. These values are consistent with the
range of variation in the northern and southern lowlands of the Maya region observed by Hodell et al., 2004. Future work will test adult males and females
as well as infants to determine if recruitment practices differed by age and sex.
Lothrop, Jonathan (New York State Museum) and Arthur Spiess (Maine Historic Preservation Commission)
[218]             The New England-Maritimes: Environments and Human Lifeways from the Late Pleistocene into Early Holocene
The New England-Maritimes (NEM) region in northeastern North America is noted for clear environmental signals of the Younger Dryas climatic reversal
(circa 12,900–11,600 Cal B.P.), followed by an abrupt transition to a warmer and more dry early Holocene climate. In this paper, we first review evidence
for changes in paleoenvironments and animal populations that accompanied these climatic transitions in the NEM. We then examine archaeological
evidence for early human occupations in the region, focusing on (1) variation in settlement and technology, (2) the timing of changes in these phenomena,
and (3) possible links with climatic and environmental shifts from the late Pleistocene into the early Holocene.
Loubser, Johannes (Stratum Unlimited, LLC)
[175]             Betwixt and Between: Petroglyph Boulders on Liminal Locations in the Southeastern Mountains
As far as can be ascertained, all documented petroglyph boulders in northern Georgia and western North Carolina occur next-to old Indian overland trails
or certain river corridors, specifically at transition points on the landscape. Moreover, these transition points occur between sites with mounds and town
houses at one end and certain mountain tops at the other. Whereas a few Cherokee accounts explicitly mention petroglyph boulders at such locales, the
placement of some others can be inferred indirectly by comparing locations with traditional accounts. Based on interpretations of documented Cherokee
accounts and re-occurring pecked depictions on the boulders, it is proposed that petroglyphs at transition points refer to certain transitional junctures in
Indian’s lives.
Loucks, Jordon (University at Albany)
[90]              Drive the Spike and Dig the Ditch: Ethnicity, Racism, and the Economic Development of New York State
This study aims to evaluate the efficacy of archaeological study in the identification of ethnic boundaries in nineteenth-century contexts along the railroads
and canals of New York State. The connections between ethnic boundaries, imposed racialized groups, and economic status have been discussed at
length in archaeology. By illustrating the economic development of the state using ArcGIS, the regional growth of access to market and class separation
can be linked to the development of racist attitudes and ethnic divisions visually. The ultimate goal of this project is to generate a map to diachronically
illustrate the possibility for archaeological study to produce data that reasonably shows economic and social difference to support ethnic identification if it at
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              262
all possible. The model produced by this project should contribute to discussions on ethnic identification and the archaeology of racism by providing a base
layer of possibility of archaeological difference between supposed ethnic groups in rural contexts across the state.
Loughlin, Michael [264] see Pool, Christopher
Louise, Purdue [96] see Cyril, Castanet
Love, Sarah (Georgia State University)
[140]             A Cross Comparison in 3D Modeling: The Potential for a Multidisciplinary Approach to Digital Collections
Previous research on the 3D digitization of fossil cast collections using photogrammetric reconstruction has indicated that a negligible margin of error exists
when comparing 3D digital measurements to those obtained by precision instruments. The ability to collect both quantitative and qualitative data using low
cost, time efficient digitization methods presents multiple possibilities for digital curation and open-source data access in addition to mitigating potential
risks to the archaeological record. Successful digitization and accurate measurement of prior collections provides additional opportunities to expand these
methods and test the applicability to other archaeological materials and historic structures. By performing a cross comparison of a variety of materials and
structures, this paper expands prior research to determine the potential for accurate 3D measurement of various cultural resources when compared to their
associated methods of physical measurement. Using digital measurement methods, in case studies where a similar negligible margin of error exists when
compared to precision instrument measurements, there is significant potential for the creation of multidisciplinary digital databases accessible to a wide
array of researchers.
Loven, Jeremy (Eastern New Mexico University) and Kye Miller (PaleoWest Archaeology)
[239]             Understanding Depositional Processes: A Contextual Analysis of Lagomorph Remains from Aztec and Salmon Ruins
On numerous projects, faunal analysts have speculated to the amount of rabbit (Lagomorph) remains deposited by human-related processes. Previous
studies have failed to fully investigate potential differences in the treatment of Lagomorph remains between cultural and natural deposits. This project
investigates evidence of human processing of Lagomorph remains from two Pueblo II/III Great Houses in the Middle San Juan region of northwestern New
Mexico: Aztec and Salmon Ruins. The primary research question of the project is: “Does a noticeable and significant difference exist in the presence and
condition of rabbit remains between natural and cultural deposits in large Pueblo II/III Great Houses?” Aztec and Salmon Ruins provide an appropriate
medium to test the current research question because of the depositional histories of the sites.
Lovett, Bobbie [31] see Pozorski, Shelia
Lovis, William [30] see Steponaitis, Vincas
Lowe, John (Texas Parks and Wildlife)
[71]              Discussant
Lowery, Darrin
[21]              Are We Looking to Discover the First Americans or the First Successful Americans?
With respect to the peopling of the New World, recent research has focused on linking genetics with the archaeological record. Given historical analogies,
there were probably multiple accidental or intentional settlement attempts or migrations into the Americas, which ultimately failed. These failures would
have left an archaeological record, but no "legacy" genetic signature among the successful New World settlers. The lecture will address this issue based
on recent research at several possible archaeological sites in the Chesapeake Bay region.
Lowman, Christopher
[251]             Old Lumber is Missing: Artifacts from Stanford's Chinese Communities
As development in Silicon Valley fills what appears to be empty land, it is crucial to question how land became "empty." In the absence of memorials, other
physical traces must be considered as legacies. This is the case with the Chinese employees who lived and worked at what became Stanford University,
itself made possible by Chinese workers on the Transcontinental Railroad. Living on the campus at the turn of the twentieth century, the Chinese
employees impacted the development of agriculture, horticulture, and infrastructure, from growing and selling crops to the construction of roads and
buildings and the creation of businesses that lasted many decades. Following their departure from campus, the houses where they lived were abruptly torn
down and the sites abandoned. However, the landscape itself is not unmarked: traces are visible through a combination of landscape analysis,
examination of artifacts, and archival documents. These physical traces as reminders of the Chinese diaspora and the lives of the people who experienced
it and their presence and influence on the landscape.
Lowry, Sarah [8] see Gale, Sara
Loyola, Rodrigo, Isabel Cartajena (Departamento Antropología, Universidad de Chile), Lautaro Nuñez (IIAM, Universidad Católica del Norte),
Carlos Aschero (CONICET. Instituto de Arqueología y Museo (IAM), F) and Patricio Lopez (Departamento Antropología, Universidad de Chile)
[139]             Lithic Technology and the use of Space during the Late Pleistocene-Early Holocene Transition in Imilac and Punta Negra Basins, Atacama
                  Desert (24,5°S)
Despite its extreme aridity, the Atacama Desert (18-25ºS) was not a biogeographical barrier during the period concerned with the early peopling of the area
and of other regions in South America (12.6 ka). The Imilac and Punta Negra (24ºS) high altitude basins, located in the Precordillera of the Andes (3,000
masl), are among the few micro-regions of the Atacama Desert which were continually occupied during the Late Pleistocene to Early Holocene transition
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              263
(12.6-10.2 ka). Results from the analyses of lithic assemblages recovered from archaeological sites and from raw material sources, are considered to
support an early colonization model mainly centered on the procurement, transport, and technical management of lithic resources. Other lines of evidence
such as isotopic, spatial (GIS), and water salinity analyses were also considered. Changes in technological strategies, mobility, and settlements were
identified and discussed in frame of different human occupations phases. A cumulative process of landscape and resource distribution learning can be
considered as key-factor in the changes observed in technology and spatial organization.
Lozada, Maria (University of Chicago)
[99]              Indigenous Anatomies
Bioarchaeological research in the Andes has shed important light on Andean lifestyles in the past. From identifying diseases such as tuberculosis and
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, to analyzing migrations, dietary patterns, and interpersonal violence, bioarchaeology has demonstrated a unique capacity to
evaluate certain categories of human behavior not accessible through other forms of analysis. For the purposes of interpreting the past, bioarchaeologists
broadly view the body as a complex amalgam of both biological and cultural attributes; however, an emic understanding of the body itself is just beginning
to emerge in Andean studies. In this paper, I will review the corpus of bioarchaeological research that deals specifically with manipulations of the living and
dead body, specifically as it relates to broader theoretical trends regarding ontologies of the body. Based on these studies, I propose a more contextualized
interpretation of the body based on perspectives from the indigenous worldview, as opposed to a strictly Cartesian model.
[99]              Chair
Lozano, Sergi (IPHES), Luce Prignano (Universitat de Barcelona), Magdalena Gómez-Puche (-) and Javier Fernández-López de Pablo (IPHES)
[72]              Early Holocene Socio-Ecological Dynamics in the Iberian Peninsula: A Network Approach
Late Glacial and Early Holocene environmental changes affected different domains of human demography, settlement, and subsistence patterns. The
variable spatial patterning produced by the prehistoric hunter-gatherers archaeological record, from local bands to larger regional groups, demands new
approaches for analysing the multi-scalar nature of human-environmental interactions.
In this paper, we present the preliminary results of a long-term research program aimed to decipher the relationship between demographic dynamics and
cultural transmission in the Iberian Peninsula from the Late Magdalenian to the end of the Late Mesolithic. In particular, we will study the effect of the 8.2
cal B.P. cold event over the macro-regional structure of Mesolithic Iberian populations.
We will follow a two-steps methodology. First, we will compare spatial networks of archaeological sites before and after that climatic event, addressing
global structural features, local indicators, and mesoscopic configuration. Second, we will evaluate the interplay between the observed structural changes
and the evolution of cultural and demographic dynamics in the region.
Lozano Varela, Carlos (Manuel Lozano)
[14]              Análisis de Subsistencia y Selección de Recursos en Punta de Pájaro: Un Posible Yacimiento del Formativo Temprano en la Ciénaga del
                  Guajaro Atlántico
Esta investigación busca determinar la importancia de los recursos faunísticos para una población del Formativo Temprano en el norte de Colombia
(6000–1000 A.P). Los seres humanos que habitaron el sitio arqueológico de Punta de Pájaro en la Ciénaga del Guajaro Atlántico utilizaron una gran
variedad de recursos faunisticos para complementar una dieta a base de plantas. Contrario a lo que se planteo en la teoría arqueológica para el norte de
Colombia en los primeros años de investigación, este estudio muestra adaptaciones de los seres humanos a diferentes ambientes y hábitats. Las
implicancias de estos resultados sugiere que los seres humanos que habitaron esta región aseguraron variados recursos pesqueros y de fauna terrestre
disponibles posiblemente a lo largo de todo el año sin especializarse en un solo tipo de recurso.
Luby, Edward [132] see Lightfoot, Kent
Lucas, Virginia [24] see Osterholtz, Anna
Lucas, Leilani (University College London)
[189]             The Wild Side of Cyprus: An Integration of Archaeobotany and Zooarchaeology
Recent research from both the island and the mainland Near East has changed what we know of the timing and dynamics of the spread of agriculture to
Cyprus. The timing of the arrival of the initial explorers and colonists by late Pre-Pottery Neolithic A cultures of the mainland Levant, and the dynamics of
cultural developments in subsequent cultural phases is providing further support for the unique Cypriot prehistoric culture. One aspect that has long
characterised Cyprus in prehistory is the introduction and continual management and hunting of Mesopotamian Fallow deer. For the first time,
archaeobotanical data from the earliest colonists to the Late Bronze Age are compared alongside the faunal evidence to reveal a protracted transition to
full agricultural dependence in Cyprus with data revealing a pattern of fluctuating reliance on deer hunting, a protracted increase in reliance on cereal
agriculture, and a continued reliance on gathering of wild resources. The evidence from Cyprus is compared to the mainland Near East and a distinct
trajectory is demonstrated for the island.
Lucero, Lisa (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign)
[138]             The Contributions of Vernon Scarborough: Introductory Remarks
In this paper, I highlight Vern’s career path and contributions, particularly his work on water management and sustainability, and how his other interests,
such as dual economy and heterarchy, tie in with the former. I will also focus on how his interdisciplinary approaches have paved the way for applied
anthropology on an international level and with global implications.
[138]             Chair
Lucero, Gustavo [139] see Franco, Nora
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  264
Ludwig, Larry [78] see Laluk, Nicholas
Lueth, Friedrich
[34]              Hopewell Culture and the Landscape—An Introduction to the Session
Sites and monuments of the Hopewell Culture are of high significance and outstanding universal value; embedded into the landscape they have been
intensively researched during the past years adding and applying geophysical surveys. New technology with multi-channel, vehicle towed magnetometers
allows large scale operations of the landscape and it becomes affordable to go beyond the known monuments into the landscape. This presentation
introduction will show some possibilities and discuss the starting point for an extended research agenda to be based on the following presentations.
[34]              Chair
Luhman, Hope (The Louis Berger Group, Inc.) and Eric Voigt (The Louis Berger Group, Inc.)
[243]             Four Decades of Consulting: A Contractor’s View
Louis Berger has engaged in cultural and heritage resource management since the early 1980s. This long legacy of project successes, pitfalls, surprises,
and minefields offers an interesting perspective of what works and what may not. As priorities and budgets rise and fall, new approaches meet with
acceptance or resistance, leading to project streamlining or increased bottlenecks. Using project examples drawn from each decade, this paper explores
consulting hits and misses and highlights the key lessons for better resource management in the future.
Lukas, Michael (The University of Georgia)
[146]             Geophysical Prospection at Caisteal Mac Tuathal in Perthshire, Scotland
Geophysical prospection utilizing ground penetrating radar (GPR) and magnetometry in association with a general packet radio service (GPRS)
topographical survey was conducted at Caisteal Mac Tuathal—an unexcavated potential Iron Age hill fort on the northeastern terminus of Drummond Hill
near Kenmore, Perthshire, Scotland. Nestled above the rich archaeology of Loch Tay and Glen Lyon, Caisteal Mac Tuathal’s prominence in the local
topography, proximity to rich Iron Age landscapes, and its recurring presence within Scottish archaeological literature for over 100 years necessitates
further investigation to clarify the extent of its occupation and utility. These surveys permitted the identification of select areas for future informative studies.
Lukas, Dominik (Department of Anthropology, Stanford University)
[202]             Discussant
Luke, Christina M. [184] see Plekhov, Daniel
Lulewicz, Jacob (University of Georgia)
[98]              A Bayesian Radiocarbon Chronology for Southern Appalachia, A.D. 700–1400
Advances in radiometric dating and statistical analyses are having a substantial impact on the archaeology of eastern North America, especially through
the achievement of high precision intrasite chronologies. While detailed intrasite dynamics are invaluable to advancing understandings of rapid cultural
change, more refined and empirically constructed regional histories are also necessary. An integrated regional Bayesian chronology is presented for
southern Appalachia using extant radiometric data from northwestern Georgia, eastern Tennessee, and northeastern Alabama for the period between A.D.
700 and 1400. The purpose of the proposed chronological model is to help track the emergence of organizationally complex institutions across southern
Appalachia and to explore the spatial and temporal relationships between sub-regional loci of cultural transformation. This study contributes to debates
concerning the origins and timing of the adoption of Mississippian cultural traits in the region. More broadly, this study contributes to a multiscalar
perspective on the construction of regional social histories and to a comparative perspective on the tempo and rhythm of emergent institutional complexity.
Lulewicz, Isabelle (University of Georgia), Victor Thompson (University of Georgia), Thomas Pluckhahn (University of South Florida), Oindrilla
Das (University of Alabama) and Fred Andrus (University of Alabama)
[132]             From Habitat Exploitation to Monument Construction: Exploring the Nature of Shell Deposits at Crystal River and Roberts Island through
                  Stable Isotope Geochemistry
Debates centering on the monumental nature of shell mound sites have often failed to provide direct empirical evidence for interpretation of monument
construction and or simple midden accumulation. Our research in the Crystal River region illustrates the complexity of such sites. Through our research at
Crystal River and Roberts Island Shell Mound, we aim to offer better quantitative assessments of the temporality of shell deposit construction, Native
subsistence practices, and mobility patterns. We couple Bayesian analysis of radiocarbon dates with results from our study of oxygen isotope analysis from
C. virginica, which was then coupled with the absolute value of the δ18Owater values of surrounding habitats. Because these δ18Owater values vary
synchronously with salinity, assuming a relatively constant δ18Owater/salinity gradient since the time of site occupation, we assessed shifts in habitat
exploitation throughout the phases of occupation at both sites. Ultimately, midden accumulation occurred throughout the year in later phases of occupation
while oyster collected from mound deposits indicate collection in colder months of the year. The results indicate shifts in habitat exploitation and a contrast
in mound and midden season of collection and have allowed us to reimagine temporality of ritual and monumental construction in central Gulf Coast
Florida.
Lundstroem, Inge [84] see Witt, Kelsey
Lundstrom, Craig [13] see Ambrose, Stanley
Luo, Wugan [180] see Nan, Puheng
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                265
Luo, Wugan (University of Chinese Academy of Sciences), Qihuang Yang (Shaanxi Provincial Institute of Archaeology), William D. Gilstrap
(University of Missouri) and Michael D. Glascock (University of Missouri)
[180]             INAA and LA-ICP-MS Analysis of Painted Pottery from the Central Area of Yangshao Culture (ca. 5000–7000 B.P.), Northwest China
The Yangshao Culture (ca. 5000–7000 B.P.) is renowned in the archaeology of prehistoric China for its large quantities of high quality painted pottery.
Although the provinces of Shaanxi and Shanxi are rich in Yangshao material culture, scientific analysis has not often taken place in studies of the pottery
until now. Bulk chemical analysis by INAA indicates production of painted vessels occurred at multiple sites in both Shaanxi and Shanxi provinces.
Moreover, it is now apparent that several vessel types were being manufactured by individual producers in both Shaanxi and Shanxi provinces. With a
clear understanding that there were multiple places of production, LA-ICP-MS was used to investigate the kinds of raw materials used as paint for pottery
decoration. Results indicate that while painting technology is shared, not every site uses the same kinds of raw materials. This research focuses on the
combined results of INAA and LA-ICP-MS analyses of 60 painted ceramic vessels from five different sites dating to the early-middle and middle periods of
the Yangshao Culture. Combined bulk and micro-sampling chemical analytical techniques have provided new and significant insight into the locations of
pottery production and the kinds of choices potters made during the middle Yangshao Period.
Lupo, Karen [64] see Battillo, Jenna
Lupo, Karen (Southern Methodist University)
[69]              Just How Depressed were the Fremont?
Some of David Madsen’s earliest work centered on understanding variation in Fremont lifeway’s, especially subsistence. Current models of Fremont
subsistence continue to emphasize geographic and temporal variation in subsistence but also identify resource depression of large game resulting from
over-hunting and increases in population. In this paper, I present zooarchaeological data from 15 archeological sites on the eastern shore of Great Salt
Lake spanning the Fremont interval. These data do not show a reduction or the depression of large artiodactyls. Similarly, additional zooarchaeological
data from a large number of Fremont-age sites in the Great Salt Lake Desert do not show a change in the availability of large-sized artiodactyls. Changes
in the abundances of certain artiodactyls appear to be related to natural changes in vegetation resulting from climate change.
Lustig, Terry [262] see Klassen, Sarah
Lute, Sabrina [193] see VanderVeen, James
Luzzadder-Beach, Sheryl (Department of Geography and the Environment, University of Texas At Austin)
[262]             The Constraints and Conditions of Water Chemistry for Human Use of Maya Tropical Wetland Fields
A large wedge of our planet is tropical, and archaeology and natural science have long histories of tropical research. But we still know comparatively little
about human interactions in the tropics, while rates of land and water use change that expunge ecological and archaeological records are accelerating. In
this paper, we focus on evidence for ancient wetland management in the Maya World, especially around the evidence for water chemistry in multiple
watersheds of northern Belize. Here, we synthesize the findings of water chemistry around ancient Maya wetland fields of the Rio Bravo, the New River,
Booth’s River, Sierra de Agua, the Rio Hondo, and Freshwater Creek. We then will compare water chemistry with the other known environmental and
historical parameters of wetlands. Our main goal is to understand which suites of water chemistry would have helped or limited ancient Maya uses. We will
also consider what is intrinsically tropical about these variables’ relationships, recognizing the key lack of study on tropical wetlands.
[130]             Discussant
Luzzadder-Beach, Sheryl [130] see Aebersold, Luisa
Lyall, Victoria
[15]              Considering Form and Meaning in Maya Mural Painting
The French sociolinguist Roger Chartier argues that “form produces meaning”: the physical arrangement and presentation of a text will influence a reader’s
reception of it (2004). In other words, the process by which a reader assigns a text meaning, consciously or not, depends as much on the material or
physical form through which the text was published, distributed, and received as on its semantic content (Chartier 2004: 147). Elements such as format,
layout, scale, and color give a text status, constrain its reception, and/or control the reader’s understanding of it. This paper will consider Chartier’s premise
in relation to Maya mural painting: what relationship exists between form, meaning, and reception in the murals of northern Yucatan? I propose that
changes in form, size, scale, and color seen in murals produced during the Late Classic to Terminal Classic transition provide an opportunity to consider
the way in which peninsular communities responded to the political and cultural turmoil of the epoch. In particular, the rich assemblage of painted texts
from Ek’ Balam—capstones, calendrical murals, dynastic narratives—with their diverse formats offers a valuable point of departure.
Lyman, R. (University of Missouri Co)
[254]             Facade CRM: Protecting the Resource with Words Rather than Actions
In 1983, Tom King noted ethical responsibilities of American archaeologists to six entities could be in conflict. A 1997 SAA workshop concluded that
“stewardship” should be the “core or foundation” of all ethical principles, and recognized the broad socio-political context of modern archaeology. This
context has resulted in facade CRM—statements by federal land-holding agencies that they are the stewards of the archaeological record, yet that record
is knowingly destroyed by the agency and others. Criminal charges against SAA members who had stewardship foremost in mind exemplify that words do
not protect the resource, but actions can be costly.
Lynch, Robert [6] see Knutson, Jen
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 266
Lynch, Sally (McMaster University)
[118]            Are “Coastal Cajamarca” Vessels Local Imitations? Petrographic Analysis Of Ceramic Vessels from the Late Moche (A.D. 600–850)
                 Settlement "Huaca Colorada" in the Jequetepeque Valley, Peru
The site of Huaca Colorada, in the Jequetepeque Valley, on the north coast of Peru, is an ideal location to examine cultural interchange and technological
innovation from both a production and consumption perspective due to its occupation during the Middle Horizon (A.D. 600–1000). This period is marked by
sustained cultural interaction throughout the Peruvian Andes. Evidence for this interchange at Huaca Colorada is found in the mixing of a number of
different ceramic traditions within individual vessels, as well as in the inclusion of both traditional and foreign imports. In this paper, I will be presenting my
analysis of paste recipes in the Huaca Colorada assemblage to highlight potential instances of technological mixing. I will be examining “Coastal
Cajamarca” plates, a technological innovation linked to the spread of highland aesthetics and practices into coastal regions. A comparison of the geology of
the valley with the petrographic data will determine whether the mineral inclusions in Coastal Cajamarca vessels are present or absent in the
Jequetepeque. Furthermore, a comparison of paste recipes with traditional, locally produced vessels will highlight whether there are similarities in the
technological traditions between local coastal potters and producers of Coastal Cajamarca vessels.
Lynch, Julieta (Departamento Científico de Arqueología, Museo de La Plata, FCNyM, UNLP, CONICET) and Marco Antonio Giovannetti
(Universidad Nacional de La Plata)
[259]            Inca Landscapes in Midwest Catamarca (Argentina)
This paper will introduce the problem of Inca settlements and their relation with local populations in the midwestern sector of Catamarca, specifically in the
Hualfín and Quimivil valleys. This area has an early agricultural-ceramics occupation as seen in several archaeological sites with local patterns. When the
Inca arrived during the first half of the fifteenth century, several previous elements of landscape were transformed and others were incorporated. However,
the local population, with an apparent absence of military conflict, seemed to maintain some elements of their identity without major transformations. We
explore the different strategies implemented by the Inca to articulate the realities of local populations and landscapes as they incorporated new territories.
This reveals some differences with what happened in other regions, as the particularities of identity of different groups were taken into consideration as part
of imperial strategies. These issues are explored based on evidence from the archaeological sites of El Shincal, Hualfín Inka, Villavil, Villavil 2 y Quillay.
Lytle, Whitney (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[77]             Changes in Ritual Practice: A Diachronic Example from Xunantunich, Group D
The Mopan Valley Preclassic Project has been conducting research at Group D, Xunantunich, a Late Classic elite residential unit with an eastern ancestor
shrine. This research has significantly changed our understanding of the establishment and ritual re-use of this group. Recent investigations have revealed
Late/Terminal Preclassic constructions including a small courtyard platform and an early structure buried within the Late Classic ancestor shrine.
Thousands of ceramic sherds were encountered associated with the buried courtyard platform indicating a possible ritual function. In addition to this
problematic deposit, a similarly extensive Late Classic ceramic deposit was found within a room in the eastern ancestor shrine. The presence of these
enormous ceramic deposits is suggestive of ritual activities that might include feasting and/or termination activities. Though termination rituals are
commonly discussed within the Maya catalogue of ritualized acts, archaeologists have identified distinctions between these ceremonies that indicate they
are more complex and varied than the vague term of “termination” implies. In this paper, I discuss these two deposits in light of established criteria for
termination rituals and feasting activities and provide some preliminary thoughts of ritual practices and the re-use of this sacred place.
Lytle, Whitney [226] see Vara, Rachel
M Jensen, Anne [160] see Tackney, Justin
Mabres, Antonio [56] see Ghezzi, Ivan
MacDonald, Brandi Lee (McMaster University)
[13]             Perspectives on Ochre Provenance in British Columbia, Canada
Elemental characterization of ochre sources and artifacts from southern and central British Columbia has demonstrated the potential for, and the limitations
of, ochre provenance studies in this region. Using a combination of neutron activation analysis (NAA) and x-ray fluorescence (XRF), comparative elemental
analyses of ochre artifacts from archaeological sites and five geologic sources identified evidence of variability in ochre acquisition over space and time.
While the majority of ochre being used by hunter-gatherers was sourced locally, a small percentage was exotic, being traded or transported over longer-
distances. Results from this study illustrate the importance of scale for both the analysis and interpretation of geochemical data obtained from ochre. These
results also provide insight into the nature and intensity of short- and long-distance trade networks of ochre in British Columbia.
MacDonald, Sarah [114] see Yaquinto, Brian
MacDonald, Douglas (The University of Montana), Staffan Peterson (Yellowstone National Park) and Tobin Roop (Yellowstone National Park)
[208]            The Montana Yellowstone Archaeological Project
The Montana Yellowstone Archaeological Project (MYAP) is a cooperative effort of the University of Montana (UM), Yellowstone National Park, and the
Rocky Mountain Cooperative Ecosystem Study Unit of the National Park Service. Now in its ninth year, the MYAP engages undergraduate and graduate
students at every level of cultural resource management projects so they are prepared for careers in the field. In addition, UM facilitates the completion of
Yellowstone’s CRM responsibilities in a fiscally-prudent manner and generates research for UM faculty and students. In all respects, the MYAP is
beneficial to multiple players at the university and federal agency levels.
Macdonald, Danielle (University of Tulsa)
[214]            Replicating Surface Texture: Testing the Accuracy of Moulding Materials with Confocal Microscopy
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   267
The use of surface metrology microscopes and analytical processes is proliferating for the analysis of archaeology materials. Data collected from these
microscopes allows for reliable and reproducible measurements of surface texture. However, archaeological materials provide some unique challenges for
microscopic analysis; at times objects cannot be directly examined, whether these materials cannot leave a museum or are too large to observe under a
microscope. Because of these challenges, many researchers create moulds and casts of an artifact’s surface prior to measuring surface texture. The
replicate surface is assumed to be an accurate representation of the original surface texture; however, the reliability of different moulding materials is
currently unknown. This paper evaluates a range of common moulding materials using confocal microscopy to test the resolution, precision, and accuracy
of different moulding compounds for surface texture measurements of archaeological materials.
[214]             Chair
MacDonald, Sarah (Northern Arizona University)
[239]             A Zooarchaeological Analysis of Subsistence Stress at Elden Pueblo: A Final Report
This paper discusses zooarchaeological analysis conducted at Elden Pueblo in northern Arizona. As one of the last remaining Sinagua occupation sites in
the San Francisco Peaks region, the site’s abandonment during a cool and dry period suggests that the occupants may have left the area because of
resource shortages. I hypothesize that populations must change acquisition and processing strategies in order to adapt to these shortages. Evidence of
subsistence stress over time appears in archaeological faunal assemblages through a decrease in larger taxa, an increase in limb elements, and an
increase in fragmentary elements. A sample of the Elden Pueblo faunal assemblage based on occupation date can detect changes in resource acquisition
and processing strategies.
MacEachern, Scott (Bowdoin College) and David Wright (Seoul National University)
[177]             Fieldwork on Iron Age sites of the Benoué Valley, Cameroon, in 2014
Iron Age settlements in the Benoué River Valley around Garoua in northern Cameroon were dispersed across the landscape, taking advantage of different
eco-climatic zones to exploit a variety of natural resources. Fieldwork undertaken in 2014 located numerous mound sites in the area around Garoua, with
occupation histories spanning multiple centuries. In particular, the site of Langui Tcheboua displays evidence for rapid accumulation of sediments
approximately 700 years ago, which may have been a deliberate construction strategy that would have allowed the site inhabitants to plant both wetland
and dryland crops. A mortuary feature and material culture suggest cultural influences from the Lake Chad Basin to the north. Settlement of a terraced
agricultural site in the nearby Fali Mountain uplands occurs coeval to the occupation of Langui Tcheboua and potentially signifies agricultural diversification
and intensification. The evolution of dozens of seemingly independent but inter-dependent sites along the Middle Benoué River region corresponds to
similar political and social economies known elsewhere from precolonial western Africa.
MacFarland, Kathryn (School of Anthropology, University of Arizona)
[184]             GIS Models of an Iron Age Central Eurasian Macro-scale Religious Landscape
Scythian, Saka, and Xiongnu peoples lived in northern central Eurasia throughout the Iron Age (1,000–100 B.C.E.). Current research in this region has
revealed a variety of economic strategies employed by people who lived in this time period: agriculture, pastoral nomadism, and metallurgy. This project
seeks to fill gaps in current understanding of landscape utilization and consistent iconographic usage by attempting to identify and study processes driving
religious complexity utilizing a GIS-based approach to identify and study the structure of religious belief on a continental scale, or macro-scale landscape.
For our purposes, religion is defined as a structured system of beliefs and symbols that permeate their everyday lives. Thus, analysis of distinctive and
predominantly animal iconography on artifacts associated with the Scythian, Saka, and Xiongnu is a primary line of inquiry for identification of the way Iron
Age peoples in central Eurasia structured their lives. Two types of inter-related analyses are discussed. General statistical analysis identifies behavioral
patterns expressed in material culture; Integrated Distance Analysis (IDA) accounts for geographic and statistical proximity within complex datasets in pair-
wise comparisons of attribute categories. IDA explores and accounts for local variability, identifying which variable is most predictive of animal iconography.
Machado, Juliana (Universidade de São Paulo) and Nivaldo Peroni (Departamento de Ecologia e Zoologia (ECZ/UFSC), Un)
[135]             Paths and Plants: Territory and Mobility among the Laklãnõ/Xokleng in Brazil
The Laklãnõ Xokleng Indigenous people occupy a tropical forest area of the southern valley of Brazil, in Santa Catarina. Historically, they were
documented as a hunter-gatherer population with high mobility system who occupied and managed an extended and diverse territory, including high
plateaus, forested valleys, and coastal areas. Archaeologically it is still difficult to affirm if this documented mobility pattern is an (in)direct result of
European contact and reorganization of indigenous territories or a more ancient traditional social form. Despite its temporality, mobility was and is an
important aspect of Laklãnõ Xokleng life. In this paper, we will focus on the perception of mobility, its meanings and relation with territoriality among the
living Laklãnõ Xokleng. This population, since 1914, was forced to settle into a small, fixed, indigenous land by government policies. Although living in
stable villages, their territorial perceptions, environmental management, and cultural discourse is attached to various movement rhythms. In this paper, we
focus on their perception of territoriality and mobility during these contact and contemporaneous changes.
MacIntosh, Sarah (University of Nevada, Las Vegas), Levent Atici (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Sachihiro Omura (Japanese Institute of
Anatolian Archaeology)
[75]              The Relationships between Smallholders, their Textiles, and their Bone Tools: A Case Study at the Central Anatolian Site of Kaman-
                  Kalehӧyük
Textiles are rarely found in near eastern archaeological contexts due to the rarity of suitable environmental conditions for their preservation. Cuneiform
texts and limited artifactual evidence have therefore often been the main sources informing archaeologists of the technological processes involved in textile
production. Yet, scanty data exist specifically on textile-manufacturing tools made from bone, a readily available raw material, and the smallholders who
crafted these tools. This paper investigates the production of bone tools for textile-working during the Bronze Age (ca. 3000–1250 B.C.E.) at the central
Anatolian site of Kaman-Kalehӧyük. We probe how the production of textile-working bone tools was organized and whether this organization of production
was influenced by economic, sociocultural, and gender domains differentially. Furthermore, we seek to determine if the smallholders producing the bone
tools for textiles were full- or part-time specialists when their livelihoods were dependent on subsistence economies. Investigating the textile industry at
Kaman-Kalehӧyük through a distinctive case study of bone tools associated with textile working allows us to explore how hinterland sites impacted textile
trade networks during the development of complex societies.
[176]             Chair
Mackay, Alex [211] see Thompson, Jessica
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                268
MacKinnon, J. Jefferson [238] see Sills, E. Cory
MacLellan, Jessica (University of Arizona) and Takeshi Inomata (University of Arizona)
[53]             Households, Ritual, and the Origins of Social Complexity in the Maya Lowlands: A View From the Karinel Group, Ceibal, Guatemala
Payson Sheets’ work at Ceren has greatly influenced investigations of ancient Maya households at both Aguateca and Ceibal. Here, we focus on recent
excavations at the Karinel Group, a residential area at Ceibal. Due to its early foundation, Ceibal presents an opportunity to investigate multiple aspects of
the origins of ancient Maya society. We discuss the development of the patio group, the typical Maya arrangement of stone house platforms around an
open space, often rebuilt and reoccupied for generations. We also trace changes in the relationship between domestic ritual and public ceremony
throughout the Preclassic Period, and we address the role that ancestor veneration may have played in the emergence of social inequality. Because of
Ceibal’s location in southwestern Petén, Guatemala, the earliest occupation of the site differs greatly from other well-known, very early Maya sites, such as
Cuello and K’axob in Belize. Results from the Karinel Group suggest that a single model for the origins of social complexity cannot be applied across the
Maya region.
MacMinn-Barton, Margaret
[63]             Buried Museum Textiles from the Prehistoric Americas
The Arizona Museum of Natural History (AzMNH) has previously unexplored perishable materials, including 15 textile fragments of Peruvian, Mexican, and
Southwestern origin. I present the results of a technological analysis and description of the manufacture of these fragmentary remains. Although this is a
small sample for statistical research, it is sufficient for descriptive purposes. As these textiles have not received prior exposure, they should be described
and presented. Taken together, they constitute a body of information useful for interpretation and comparative study. Provenance is undocumented;
observations and interpretations about distribution is suggested in the context of current views about local cultures.
MacNeill, William [267] see Nossa, Eraina
Macrae, Scott (University of Florida)
[262]            A Comparative Approach to Understanding Ancient Agriculture Complexity in the Tropics
Archaeologists have continuously struggled with understanding the complexity exhibited within relic agricultural practices. In this paper, we will explore a
comparative approach to addressing this dilemma using cases studies from the charter states of southeast Asia (C.E. 800–1400) and the classic Maya
kingdoms of Mesoamerica (C.E. 250–900). Special emphasis is placed upon the use of intensive practices and their resiliency within the agricultural
strategy. Comparing the similarities and differences in ancient agricultural strategies across these tropical societies provides important insights in how
archaeologists can interpret these systems. This is especially significant when considering new methods of analysis and differential presence evidence in
these areas across the tropics. The comparative approach can offer new ideas into how these complex agricultural systems functioned in the past and
contributed to the rise, peak, and eventual decline of these ancient tropical states.
[262]            Chair
Macri, Martha [272] see Munson, Jessica
MacWilliams, A.C. [168] see Hard, Robert
Madella, Marco [125] see Lancelotti, Carla
Madrid González, Mariela Viridiana (Universidad Veracruzana)
[136]            Paisaje religioso: Adoratorios y eventos cívicos
El paisaje dentro de los ámbitos de la arqueología, advierten en primera instancia que el paisaje en sí, no es un sinónimo del medio ambiente. Los
paisajes son sintéticos; los sistemas culturales estructuran y organizan las interacciones entre la gente y su medio ambiente; según Cosgrove (1985).
En este sentido el paisaje es el escenario para todas las actividades de una comunidad, como consecuencia de esto tenemos que el mismo se encuentra
en constante cambio. En un contexto cultural arqueológico concreto, el paisaje es un registro material de patrones de conducta dentro de un entorno
específico, y es también una construcción simbólica (Cosgrove 1985). Analíticamente el estudio de paisaje nos permite incluir y relacionar una variedad de
asentamientos que mantienen interacciones culturales al formar parte de un mismo escenario cuyos aspectos van desde aspectos tecnológicos, patrones,
hasta aspectos religiosos, sagrados y rituales.
Entre las diversas estructuras que fueron construidas por los antiguos pobladores mesoamericanos, son los adoratorios las que se están ligadas a
aspectos de cosmovisión, ya que cuando escuchamos referirse a un “adoratorio” de manera inmediata pensamos en aquellas estructuras pequeñas, las
cuáles, pensamos fueron los lugares en los cuales se rendían culto y/o sacrificios a los dioses.
Madsen, David
[69]             Discussant
Madsen, Mark (University of Washington) and Carl Lipo (Binghamton University)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             269
[272]            Measuring Cultural Relatedness Using Multiple Seriation Ordering Algorithms
Seriation is a long-standing archaeological method for relative dating that has proven effective in probing regional-scale patterns of inheritance, social
networks, and cultural contact in their full spatiotemporal context. The orderings produced by seriation are produced by the continuity of class distributions
and unimodality of class frequencies, properties that are related to social learning and transmission models studied by evolutionary archaeologists. Linking
seriation to social learning and transmission enables one to consider ordering principles beyond the classic unimodal curve. Unimodality is a highly visible
property that can be used to probe and measure the relationships between assemblages, and it was especially useful when seriation was accomplished
with simple algorithms and manual effort. With modern algorithms and computing power, multiple ordering principles can be employed to better understand
the spatiotemporal relations between assemblages. Ultimately, the expansion of seriation to additional ordering algorithms allows us an ability to more
thoroughly explore underlying models of cultural contact, social networks, and modes of social learning. In this paper, we review our progress to date in
extending seriation to multiple ordering algorithms, with examples from eastern North America and Oceania.
Maeir, Aren [134] see Arnold, Elizabeth
Maezumi, Shira [263] see Iriarte, Jose
Magaloni-Kerpel, Diana [121] see ONeil, Megan
Magnani, Matthew (Harvard University) and Natalia Magnani (University of Cambridge)
[54]             Sámi Boat Building in a Cultural Revitalization Context: Unifying Community and Anthropological Goals
The arctic indigenous people known as the Sámi inhabit northern Norway, Russia, Finland, and Sweden, comprising distinctive cultures and languages.
The group has experienced a legacy of subjugation strongly evidenced to this day. In northern Finland, the expansion of community-driven cultural heritage
revitalization programs have focused on the reclamation of traditional knowledge perceived as lost or disappearing. This remembering is an active process
which involves engagement with past material culture detailed in museum records, the archaeological record, oral histories, and tools and materials of
production themselves. The paper examines a specific case study involving the building of a traditional Sámi boat made of planks sewn together with pine
roots. This project sought to create tangible benefits for the community undertaking the work, after establishing they wished to have the project recorded in
detail. Simultaneously, we sought to address specific research questions comparing the community’s engagement with past techniques and productions to
that of experimental archaeologists.
Magnani, Natalia [54] see Magnani, Matthew
Magnoni, Aline [125] see Terry, Richard
Magoon, Dane (Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency), Dale Hutchinson (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) and John Krigbaum
(University of Florida)
[286]            Dietary Adaptation in Coastal Virginia and North Carolina during the Late Woodland Period
According to early historic accounts that depict coastal Virginia and North Carolina, maize was a component of Native American diet by the late sixteenth
and early seventeenth centuries. There remain questions, however, regarding the introduction of maize into the region and how it was incorporated into
local subsistence regimes, especially within a coastal setting. Previous stable isotope studies have focused upon the presence or absence of maize as a
component of diet at the population level. This study will explore potential gender-based and aged-based differences in dietary adaptation within the
coastal plain of Virginia and North Carolina during the Late Woodland Period, and focus on individual cases as examples of the cultural transformations
which took place during this period.
Mahar, Ginessa (University of Florida)
[133]            Reconsidering Mass-Capture Fishing Practices: Methodological and Theoretical Implications
The term “mass-capture” is widely used in archaeological and zooarchaeological discourse to connote any form of capture that results in the simultaneous
collection of multiple organisms. However, mass-capture as an umbrella term obscures critical variation among diverse techniques that have implications
for anthropological interpretation. Nowhere does this limitation have more of an impact than in coastal settings, where fishes and shellfishes constitute the
majority of subsistence prey items.
 This paper reconsiders mass-capture technologies as they apply to fishing practices along the coast of the southeastern United States. Recent research
has begun to more intensively investigate southeastern fisheries, addressing issues of antiquity, intensification, and sustainability. Using zooarchaeological
analysis, these researchers have speculated on the types of fishing techniques used in antiquity and the potential ecological and social impacts of these
practices—particularly mass-capture practices. The present research adds to this discussion by unpacking the term mass-capture and challenging
common assumptions about what it might mean for the anthropological interpretation of past coastal dwelling. Additionally, novel data pertaining to fish
weirs and seine nets will be presented as part of my ongoing research along the north Florida Gulf Coast featuring ethnographic, archaeological, and
experimental methods.
[133]            Chair
Maher, Thomas
[30]             Complying with NAGPRA at the Largest Public Utility: It’s Complicated
The Tennessee Valley Authority has control of approximately 8,000 human remains and 100,000 funerary objects stored in multiple major research
Universities in the southeastern United States. It also manages 293,000 acres of land with 11,000 known archaeological sites. The successes, pitfalls, and
unexpected discoveries resulting from complying with NAGPRA over the last 6 years are evaluated in light of the future of prehistoric archaeology in the
southeast U.S.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             270
Maher, Ruth [210] see Bond, Julie
Mahoney, Maureen (Seminole Tribe of Florida THPO)
[29]             Tribal Community Engagement and Archaeology: The Story of the Seminole Tribe of Florida’s Tribal Historic Preservation Office
Like other THPOs across the country, the Seminole Tribe of Florida’s Tribal Historic Preservation Office (STOF THPO) is charged with serving the STOF
communities and preserving their cultural heritage. With a staff of 17 individuals, the STOF THPO is heavily involved with both on and off reservation
compliance projects ranging from home sites, pasture improvement projects, and wetland mitigations. However, as this paper and the symposium will
demonstrate, these projects only make up a percentage of what the STOF THPO completes. With all of these projects, the underlying goal for the STOF
THPO is to work with various communities that make up the STOF so that the tasks are completed appropriately and information can be shared. This
paper will provide both a brief synopsis of the daily work that the STOF THPO completes, and will also detail how these projects provide the STOF
communities an outlet in which to participate in decisions regarding heritage preservation. Through active participation with other THPOs we hope not only
to share the STOF THPO story, but also to understand the makeup and specific goals that drive the direction for other THPOs.
[203]            Discussant
[29]             Chair
Mainland, Ingrid, Jane Downes (University of the Highlands and Islands Archaeolog), Scott Timpany (University of the Highlands and Islands
Archaeolog), Julie Bond (Dept. of Archaeological Sciences, University of Br) and Jen Harland (University of the Highlands and Islands
Archaeolog)
[210]            The Potential of Coastally Eroding Palaeoenvironmental Deposits and Middens as Climatic and Cultural Data Reservoirs
The acute problem facing Scotland’s archaeological heritage through loss and damage by rising sea levels and increased storminess in response to global
climate warming is gaining increasing recognition. This threat is prompting diverse mitigating responses, most significantly Historic Scotland's Coastal Zone
Assessment Surveys and the work of the SCAPE Trust. These surveys have, however, predominately focused on the recording of cultural, rather than
palaeoenvironmental remains; while midden sites or coastal peats have been noted, such sites have not been analysed or assessed in detail. Their
potential as a source of evidence for environmental change and human response to it thus remains largely unexplored. This paper will present a review of
coastally eroding middens and other sources of palaeoenvironment evidence in selected regions within the Northern Isles of Scotland to highlight the scale,
extent, significance, and character of this resource and the current and future impact therein of erosion and rising sea levels. Using cases studies drawn
from recent work in Orkney, the paper will go on to illustrate the potential of these sites for addressing human response to environmental change, in
contributing to the development of modern marine resource management and as unique data reservoirs for local climatic change across millennia.
Maitland Gardner, Amy (University College London)
[47]             Their World at Hand: Entering the Language of Gesture in Classic Maya Art
Our hands shape and express the social and material worlds in which we live by creating and measuring things around us and communicating our
thoughts, feelings, and ideas. In Classic Maya iconography, hands are represented in a variety of shapes and forms, which offers a unique glimpse into
ancient Maya gestural practices. This paper journeys through the actions and representations of hands in the ancient Maya world, exploring the dynamic
and dialogic relationships between bodily gestures and their referents in figurative art. What is the nature of this gestural language? Who could ‘read’
gestures in the iconography? Where did these gestures come from? And when did this body language end? By asking such questions, and by drawing
upon gestures studies in art history and anthropology, this paper proposes that this visual language of gesture is rooted in deeper notions of time,
measurement and offerings, which span the history of Maya culture and crucially situates Classic Maya figurative art within this historical and cultural
framework. Fundamentally, this paper argues that the broader practice of gestures beyond elites was the repertoire from which certain gestures were
drawn, with careful selection to function in particular iconographic contexts during the Classic Period.
[47]             Chair
Majewski, Teresita (Statistical Research, Inc.), Jeffrey Altschul (Statistical Research, Inc.) and Antonio Arantes (State University of Campinas,
Brazil)
[10]             Heritage as Collaboration: The 2015 Inaugural Inter-American and Caribbean Cultural Heritage Working Group Meeting, UNICAMP,
                 Campinas, Brazil
In response to ever-growing threats to intangible and tangible cultural heritage in the region, the Anthropology Department of the State University of
Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil, organized and held the inaugural meeting of the Inter-American and Caribbean Cultural Heritage Working Group
on August 11–12, 2015, at UNICAMP. The goal is to establish a permanent collaborative forum to explore ways to improve anthropological practical and
theoretical approaches to cultural heritage issues. Representatives from major anthropological and archaeological associations based in the Americas and
the Caribbean, the UNICAMP Anthropology Department, and interested individuals discussed how anthropologists should engage with these issues to
foster outcomes in the best interest of society. The group drafted a declaration on the need to protect and safeguard cultural heritage in the Americas and
the Caribbean and stressed the need for improvements in the theoretical and practical approaches used to develop community-based investigations about
and interpretations of cultural heritage. The declaration is expected to foster increased discussion and collaboration on cultural heritage studies.
Makowski, Krzysztof, James Davenport (University of New Mexico), Mercedes Delgado (QALLTA, Centro de Investigación para la Preservaci),
Iván Ghezzi (IDARQ, Instituto de Investigaciones Arqueológicas) and Michael Glascock (MURR)
[57]             Comparative Characterization and Sourcing of Pottery Styles from the Lurin Valley, Central Coast of Peru
Our goal is to reconstruct networks of ceramic production and exchange on the Peruvian central coast through a comparison of compositional datasets on
pottery and soil samples from the Lurin valley. While one dataset from Villa El Salvador dates to the late Early Horizon, most of the pottery sample comes
from Late Horizon occupations at the Pachacamac, Pueblo Viejo, and Huaycan de Cieneguilla sites. In Tawantinsuyu, the products and networks of
exchange connected heterogeneous populations, and thus the identities of producers, traders, or builders of public and domestic spaces did not coincide.
Imperial ideology materialized in official architecture and paraphernalia, but not always in the vernacular versions. For pottery, producers followed local and
regional styles and technologies, possessed their own clay sources, standards for temper selection and inclusion, and recipes for pigments, to produce
both local and imperial styles. To what extent then did Inka control affect the technological choices of these local potters, especially for reproducing
imperial forms and decorations? Our research focuses on the effect of Inca subjugation on central coast pottery production by comparing compositional
groups and contrasting them with clay sources to reconstruct the networks of pottery production and exchange.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             271
Maksudov, Farhod [134] see Hermes, Taylor
Maldonado, Blanca (El Colegio de Michoacan, A.C.)
[100]              The Environmental Dynamics of Colonial Mining and Metallurgy in the Bishopric of Michoacan, 1522 to 1810
Mining and metallurgy played a critical role in the economic, political, and social development of Spanish American colonies, and although it has
consequently received extensive attention by scholars, there have been very few studies of the environmental dimensions of these industries. The present
work explores the impact of mining and processing of metal ores on the environment, for the mining districts located along the Bishopric of Michoacan
(which included the modern states of Michoacan and Guanajuato, as well as parts of Jalisco, Colima, Guerrero, and San Luis Potosí), from the beginning
of colonial mining (1522) to the turn of the nineteenth century. It also details the more local environmental dynamics of metallurgy and fuel wood
consumption—the main source of energy for metal smelting and processing—and their related social aspects.
Maldonado, Jesus [110] see Shirazi, Sabrina
Malhi, Ripan [84] see Witt, Kelsey
Malloy, Maureen (Society for American Arch), Crystal Alegria ( Project Archaeology), Robert Connolly (University of Memphis ) and Giovanna
Peebles (Independent Scholar/Retired VT State Archaeologist)
[71]               Diggers Evaluating Diggers: A Collaboration between SAA and the National Geographic Channel
Since 2014, the SAA has collaborated with the National Geographic Channel to evaluate episodes of the cable television program Diggers and to
recommend changes to help ensure a more ethical and accurate portrayal of archaeology. Our paper will examine the history of the collaboration,
guidelines developed for reviewing episodes, and a suggested framework for crafting accurate and ethical portrayals of archaeology in the context of a
reality television show. Lastly, we will evaluate the outcomes of our efforts from the perspectives of both the discipline and the viewing audience.
Manahan, T. (Kent State University) and Emily O'Brien (independant scholar)
[86]               Recovery and Conservation of a Classic Maya Shell Mosaic Human Trophy Skull from Xuenkal, Yucatan
Human trophy skulls have a long history in Mesoamerica. Excavation of Structure 9M-136, an elite household in the center of the ancient Maya center of
Xuenkal revealed a trophy skull in situ from funerary context, where it was found placed on the chest of an elite individual within a complex burial deposit.
The primary individual was interred with a bifacial flint lance, a carved bone pendant, and the trophy skull resting on his chest. The skull had been
extensively modified in preparation for its use as a trophy. The front of the skull had been decorated with over 100 pieces of shell tesserae to create a
mask in the form of a human face, and additional shells were used to create dangles that hung down from either side of the skull. This presentation details
the context of the find, the process of excavation, analysis of the skull, and the shells used to make the mask, and the restoration of the piece.
Mancini, Jason (Mashantucket Pequot Museum)
[61]               “The More Usual Place of their Abode”: Ethnogeography, Community Dynamics, and Household Economies on the Mashantucket Pequot
                   Indian Reservation
Between December 1773 and June 1774, a new road was surveyed and laid out across the Mashantucket Pequot Indian Reservation. Two survey points
along this route mention an “Indian meeting house” and a “small Indian house.” The construction of this road and the architectural landmarks along it
illustrate, in part, the considerable adjustments that Pequots were making in the aftermath of colonization and land dispossession. Public architecture,
such as the “meeting house,” was unknown at Mashantucket only 10 years earlier and prior to that time, there would have been little question that the
“Indian house” was a wetu or wigwam. In this maelstrom of change, informal land divisions, social tensions, and the rapid shift to a market economy
highlight many new ways of living. This paper provides a framework for accessing and contextualizing hidden indigenous histories—notably household
and community dynamics —through the integrative use of historical archives, archaeological data, and ethnogeography. Data from Mashantucket
problematize an otherwise static perception of Indian agency and reveal a rich, complicated, and dynamic cultural landscape.
Manion, Jessica (University of Calgary) and Geoffrey McCafferty (University of Calgary)
[234]              Mortuary Practices at Locus 3, El Rayo, Nicaragua
Excavations in 2009 and 2010 established the presence of mortuary remains at the El Rayo archaeological site, located on the Asese Peninsula near
modern Granada, Nicaragua. In 2015, an additional field season expanded upon previous excavations in Locus 3, one of two known cemetery locations at
the site, exposing several more burial urns, and further investigating previously known urn burials. This new data contributes to a greater understanding of
mortuary practices at El Rayo, which at Locus 3 includes a cluster of burial urns in association with a stone structure. The urns, containing burials from the
Sapoà (800–1350 C.E.) period, include several examples of multiple-individual interments, which is accentuated by a child burial in Feature 8 alongside
portions of another, older, individual. Possible re-deposition of remains within urns alongside multiple individuals may suggest continued use and reuse of
the cemetery by related peoples throughout time, indicating a maintenance of social identity through burial rituals.
Mann, Kristen [189] see Cabaniss, Andrew
Manney, Shelby
[168]               Material as Behavior: The Role of Generative Information Mechanisms in Restricting and Aiding in Settlement Dynamics
Archaeologists have long argued that the built environment is an expression of prehistoric community organizations, social interactions, and changes
through time. Traditionally, archaeologists have interpreted buildings and settlement landscapes as proxies for estimating population size; indices of power
structures; representations of community organization; markers of social interactions; etc. Even though there has been an increasing awareness of the
importance of architecture it has been challenging to operationalize a shared common method and dialogue. The concept of formalization of approaches to
ancient architecture is not new, yet in most areas archaeologists have been slow to adopt methods and concepts for analysis of built environments from
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                272
disciplines outside of archaeology. To this end, I will explore the applicability of outside methods and concepts as a means of operationalizing and unifying
existing scholarship. I will consider concepts of: (1) form and place as conceptualized by French architect Pierre von Meiss (1990); (2) urban morphology
and “the Conzenian tradition” of “townscape” (in Smith 2011; see also Conzen 1968, 1988; Whitehead 2001, Lilly 2000, and others); (3) Roland Fletcher’s
work on the limits of settlement Growth (2007). In this way, empirical evidence should outline preliminary patterns, baselines, thresholds, and boundaries.
Mannheim, Bruce (University of Michigan)
[99]             Ontological Foundations of Inka Archaeology
The “ontological turn” ties several core anthropological questions about cultural variability in human interaction with the world, all of which can best be
summarized by Sapir’s dictum—from the 1920s— that “the worlds in which different societies live are distinct worlds, not merely the same world with
different labels attached.” Drawing on evidence—ethnographic, grammatical, cognitive, material, and visual—from the central Andes (principally from
Southern Quechua and their Inka ancestors), I discuss several areas in which sensitivity to ontological ordering principles constrain the interpretation of
archaeological and ethnohistorical evidence: properties of the world; spatial orientation and principles of semiotic interpretation; agency; and causal
structures. In each case, I identify social practices that presuppose and entail the ontological categories. All ontological structures are produced by social
practices or by social practices plus cognitive mechanisms identified independently of the ontological question; none make reference to “cosmology.” And
in conjunct, they permit a more parsimonious interpretation of material evidence, suggesting that some absences of evidence are in fact evidence of
absence. Most strikingly, they suggest a new interpretation of the spatial organization of Inka Cuzco.
Manning, Nikki (University of Montana)
[35]             When the Small, Local Archaeology Project Goes Global—The Missoula Historic Underground Project
During the fall of 2012, a local, urban archaeological survey project was conducted to see what evidence remained of the Missoula, Montana, historic
“underground” landscape. Now heading into the fourth year of research and expanding geographically into other cities of the American west, the project
which actually began from public inquiries into the existence of a small town underground continues to hold the interest of the local community and beyond.
As the project has continued to grow in scope and interest, and a book published based on the initial research has reached a small but global audience,
measurable educational results are more difficult to evaluate, especially with the use of social media and other internet tools. This is challenging not only in
terms of tracking successful use of digital technology for educational outreach but also the responsible dissemination of information about a topic that
captures imagination and struggles against myths and urban legends—in this case, an archaeology project dedicated to providing systematic, fact-based
documentation that aids in understanding how the historic political and social climate of developing urban areas may have affected the creation and use of
space and the built environment.
Manning, Sturt [106] see DAlpoim Guedes, Jade
Mans, Jimmy (Leiden University)
[3]              Transforming Material Collectives: The Subaltern vs the Global
In this paper, the relation between transforming material collectives and subalternity is investigated. When a people or group incorporate new materials
hereby slowly transforming its own material collective into the similar new ‘dominating’ material collective, does that imply that the ‘subaltern’ loses its
archaeological identity? Does it mean the dominating new collective always represents ‘hegemony’? Not necessarily. In this paper, cases from the circum-
Caribbean are discussed concerning their indigenous historical and contemporary archaeologies. Since the new boundary context came into existence in
1492, the once separate Indigenous and European material collectives started to blur. Indigenous material assemblages transformed through the influence
of the European colonizer. Vice versa, the early European colonizers transformed their collectives with indigenous elements. The original material
collectives no longer exclusively represent either the indigenous or the European colonizer, but both have transformed each other’s local collectives. The
transformation effect of this on the Indigenous-Caribbean collectives is discussed.
Manzanilla, Linda [129] see Froese, Tom
Manzano, Bruce (University of Kentucky) and Carolyn Rock (Brockington and Associates, Inc.)
[164]            Bone Tool Production and Use in the Interior of Southern Florida
This poster discusses patterns of bone tool production and use in light of results from recent testing at six sites in the interior of southern Florida. More
than 100 worked bone tools and production wastage were identified from the six sites dating from the Archaic to the Historic periods. The artifacts reveal
patterns of bone tool production from various elements of Chondrichthyes (cartilaginous fishes), Reptilia, Aves, and Mammalia. Functional interpretations
of the bone tools and production wastage along with the range of activities that likely took places on the sites will be discussed.
Marajh, Leah (Trent University)
[262]            Water Management in the Ancient States of South India and Sri Lanka
Water management practices have been instrumental in the rise and collapse of many complex societies. Informed through case studies from South India
and Sri Lanka, this paper explores the importance of water management in their developmental trajectories during the Chola (848–1279 C.E.) and
Sinhalese Empires (377 B.C.E.–1310 C.E.). Initial conditions that led to the impetus for water management include environment and climate changes.
Continued growth and prosperity relied on the development and use of more sophisticated water management practices for agricultural extensification,
political hegemony, and ritual worship. Interest is placed on understanding how subsequent political and social changes resulted in water management
practices becoming vulnerable to perturbations, which may have ultimately contributed to the decline and collapse of these tropical societies.
Marc, Testé [96] see Cyril, Castanet
Marciniak, Stephanie [85] see Harris, Alison
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              273
Marcone, Giancarlo
[97]              The Andean Road a Long Trajectory of a Social Institution
Infrastructures like the Qhapaq Ñan or Inka roads can be viewed as social institutions that are the result of a complex network of social interactions
between populations and their environments and fulfill several local social needs. This vision opposite the ones that understand that centralized
government is necessary for local level communities to maintain certain infrastructure, like irrigation canals and roads.
The Inka road system is an intricate network of Tambos, administrative centers, and roads long thought of as the network that allowed efficient
administration of the Inca Empire. The traditional modes hold that the nodes of the network collapsed during the conquest, when administrative centers
lost their centralized management.
Looking ar the roads as networks in a long time trajectory suggests the links (roads) of the network came to hold more importance than the nodes, since
the roads have local meanings in the interaction of men and their space. In this way, the roads helped to institutionalize this relation and play a key role in
shaping historical events after the Spanish conquest until the present day.
[283]             Discussant
Marcoux, Jon (Salve Regina University)
[284]             Documenting Southeastern Indian Coalescence during the early Carolina Indian Trade
Past research has outlined the profound effects of the Carolina Indian deerskin and slave trade on the cultural landscape of the southeast during the late
seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. This work has identified a number of historical processes (e.g., population movements, disease, endemic
violence, and economic transformation) stemming from the interaction of southeastern Indian and European Colonial worlds. Together, these processes
forged a dynamic, even chaotic, landscape. In adapting to this new colonial landscape, many southeastern Indian groups employed social coalescence as
a strategy to ameliorate population loss resulting from disease and slave raiding. In this paper, I compare the pottery assemblages from a number of
contemporaneous Indian communities across the southeast in order to explore how "improvised" communities were enacted by ethnically diverse remnant
or refugee groups. I argue that patterns of diversity in these pottery assemblages reflect distinct potting traditions that can be used as material markers of
this region-wide strategy of coalescence.
[284]             Chair
Marcum-Heiman, Alesha (University of Oklahoma), Leland Bement (Oklahoma Archaeological Survey), Kristen Carlson (Augustana College) and
Brian Carter (Oklahoma State University)
[123]             Renewed Investigation of Sites within the Black Mesa Region, Oklahoma Panhandle
Early archaeological investigations in the Black Mesa area of Oklahoma were geared toward the discovery of additional evidence of “Early Man” in North
America. The 1926 discovery of the Folsom type site encouraged E.B. Renaud to explore caves along the Dry Cimarron just 50 kilometers downstream.
Rather than discovering additional Paleoindian sites, the University of Denver’s surveys documented numerous post-Folsom occupations. Despite the early
documentation of these sites, systematic investigation in the area has been sporadic. Renewed interest in this region resulted in several systematic
surveys and test excavations at four archaeological sites. Results of these studies address gaps in our current understanding and build a foundation for
future research. In addition to presenting new radiocarbon dates, this paper presents the results of a lithic analysis conducted to assess the usage of local
outcrops of Dakota quartzite through time. Using newly acquired data, broader questions regarding subsistence and inter-regional spheres of interaction
are also addressed.
Marek-Martinez, Ora (Navajo Nation)
[203]             Discussant
Marin, Rosa [31] see Pozorski, Shelia
Marin Arroyo, Ana B. [134] see Jones, Jennifer
Marino, Marc (University of Arkansas), Nathan Meissner (Southern Illinoise University, Carbondale) and Lucas Martindale Johnson (University
of Florida)
[179]             Source Variability and Technological Variation of Domestic Lithic Production at Santa Rita Corozal, Belize, during the Late Postclassic
                  Period
Lithic raw material acquisition and household flaked stone crafting continues to enable a better understanding of ancient Maya domestic economies. One
such example at Santa Rita Corozal, Belize, seeks to determine how local households provisioned themselves and how Santa Rita Corozal articulated with
other Chetumal Bay sites during the Late Postclassic Period (A.D. 1200–1530). Data presented in this paper challenge previous models of resource
exploitation and exchange by suggesting that a diverse suite of lithic raw materials not associated with Colha chert deposits appear at Santa Rita Corozal.
Likewise, several households at Santa Rita show evidence for intensive local craft production of small projectile points and other formal tools. The raw
cryptocrystalline silicates needed for crafting these artifacts may have been available from more nearby geologic deposits. Importantly, subtle differences
among haft types on the points emerge when comparing Colha to non-Colha materials. This evidence for local craft production and exploitation of both
distant Colha and local non-Colha cherts demonstrates a diversity of exchange and technological practice.
Marino, Marc [212] see Meissner, Nathan
Marjenin, A. E. [159] see Hemmings, C.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              274
Markel, Marilyn [267] see Toney, Elizabeth
Marken, Damien (Bloomsburg University)
[27]              Low-Density Urbanism in the Classic Maya Lowlands: A View from El Perú-Waka’, Guatemala
As a key example of indigenous New World urbanism, the development, organization, and abandonment Classic Maya cities are subjects of great
anthropological importance. Despite their comparative significance, for much of the twentieth century Classic Maya centers (ca. 250–950 C.E.) have been
viewed by the public and many scholars as “non-cities,” the capitals of complex polities, but lacking the residential density characteristic of fully urban
places. Roland Fletcher has recently proposed that Maya urbanism belongs within a new comparative urban type which he calls “low-density, agrarian-
based urbanism.” Like all typological categories, “low-density, agrarian-based urbanism” is not without its faults, however. This paper will present over ten
years of settlement research at the Classic Maya city of El Perú-Waka', Guatemala, in order to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of Fletcher’s model
of low-density urbanism as applied to the Maya area. The data from El Peru-Waka' suggest that while Fletcher’s overall model is widely applicable to the
Maya Lowlands, several common assumptions about Classic Maya cities require reexamination.
Markin, Julie (Washington College) and Vernon Knight (University of Alabama)
[8]               A Mode-based Approach to Seriation of Woodland Pottery in Northwest Georgia
The complex nature of ceramic style geographies of the Woodland Period in northern Georgia has led many to argue that pottery cannot be properly
seriated in this region. When we rely on our current typological tools, this assertion holds true because major styles are contemporaneous for long periods.
A further complication is the use of different decorative modes within a small community or even by a single household. The overlapping nature of
decorative modes does not yield itself well to seriation across a single region as large as northern Georgia but argues rather for the construction of mode-
based micro chronologies. A mode-based analysis of pottery from secure contexts in a seven county area of northwest Georgia reveals the gradualness of
style replacement between modes. The continuing evolution of elements within a single stamping tradition forces us to rethink and even discard current
diagnostic types. Redrawing chronological boundaries in this region based on subtle stylistic connections will enable better assessment of the precise
timing and tempo of changes in population, settlement, subsistence, and sedentism.
Marklein, Kathyrn [147] see Yoakam, Stacia
Marko, Alex (Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and the Ancient World)
[33]              Discussant
Markofsky, Steve (University College London) and Steven Markofsky (Institucion Mila y Fontanals, Spanish National Res)
[150]             The Desert is Coming: A Multi-Proxy Approach to Investigating Late Holocene Human/Environmental Dynamics in the 'oasis' Margins of
                  Central Asia
The inland alluvial fans commonly found across the deserts of central Asia constitute regions of environmental and geomorphological transition as well as
social liminality. Straddling the line between fertile, sustainable environments and adverse regions often incapable of sustaining significant human
occupation, these dynamic and evolving regions are excellent case studies through which to study the dynamic processes that have characterized
human/environmental relationships throughout the Holocene.
This paper examines local socio-ecological variability in one such inland delta, the Murghab delta in Turkmenistan. Due to its rich archaeological heritage,
the Murghab offers an excellent research environment to examine late Holocene socio-ecological dynamics. Research suggests that human settlement
and landscapes were characterized by pronounced local variability not always best described by regional approaches. Via an integrated approach that
incorporates remote sensing, field survey data, and geoarchaeological analysis, this paper examines local socio-ecological 'niches' in the broader context
of regional palaeoclimate and paleogeography, as well as the co-development of settlement and environment in these unique oasis regions. Multiproxy
analyses include Loss on Ignition, Particle Size Analysis, geochemistry, and micromorphology. Via these integrated approaches, the paper highlights local
geomorphological and ecological variability, and explores their association with differing patterns of occupation, land-use, and exploitation.
[150]             Chair
Markofsky, Steven [150] see Markofsky, Steve
Marks, Theodore (The University of Iowa), Grant McCall (Tulane University), Andrew Schroll (Tulane University) and James Enloe (The
University of Iowa)
[94]              Applying Frames of Reference: The CLIMAP Dataset and the Middle to Later Stone Age Transition in the Namib Desert
In his landmark work, "Constructing Frames of Reference," Lewis Binford attempted to create a series of models relating hunter-gatherer adaptive
responses to observable climatic and ecological dynamics. In southern Africa, the large scale shift toward microlithic technologies associated with the
Middle to Later Stone Age transition is believed to coincide with the environmental changes that occurred around the Last glacial Maximum. It has been
frequently hypothesized in the African literature that these technological shifts corresponded with shifts in mobility and foraging strategies driven by
environmental change. However, datasets useful for actually testing these ideas around the Middle to Later Stone Age transition have been lacking. Here,
we use data from the CLIMAP Project, a synthetic model of global and regional climatic conditions at the LGM, and lithic sourcing data from two sites in the
central Namib Desert of Namibia, to model conditions at the LGM and test expectations of hunter-gatherer mobility, site use, and land use patterns against
archaeological data.
Marks, Naomi [294] see Lorenz, Samantha
Markus, David (University of Florida)
[213]             The Archaeology of Frontier American Judaism: Exploring the Mosaic of Jewish Domestic Religious Practice in the 19th Century
The Block Family Farmstead in Washington, Arkansas, represents the first documented Jewish immigrant family to arrive in the state and their home is the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             275
most extensively excavated Jewish Diaspora site in North America, dating to the first half of the nineteenth century. The site gives unique insight into the
domestic practices of a Jewish family on the frontier in absence of an ecclesiastical support network or coreligionist community. The faunal assemblage
recovered primarily from the home’s detached kitchen may indicate the manner in which the Block family transgressed against the tenants of their faith,
either intentionally or through pragmatic necessity. However, two key features, an articulated fowl burial and a trash pit feature, also adjacent to the home,
may provide material evidence to suggest that the family attempted to atone for, or mitigate these potentially unintentional lapses in faithful religious
observance, while masking the more orthodox elements of their religion from their potentially xenophobic neighbors. Although they appear isolated, when
these features are viewed within the same context of the yard space of a known Jewish family, they provide the artifactual evidence to explain the
complicated mosaic of practice required of frontier Jews for their religious, social, and economic survival.
Markussen, Christine [183] see Simon, Katie
Marquardt, William
[60]             Dialectic in Historical Ecology
It has been my privilege to call Carole Crumley a friend for 44 years. Our experiences working together in Burgundy, France, in the 1970s and 1980s were
formative to my research perspective in historical ecology, a perspective to which Carole herself has been a major contributor. Historical ecology is the
multiscalar and multitemporal study of the dynamic relations between people and their environment. But “environment” is more than the sum total of one’s
physical surroundings. As perceived by humans, environment is always cognized and often mystified, and it is subject to interpretation and reinterpretation
based on spiritual beliefs, vested economic interests, and power relations. Therefore, the historical study of human-environment relations cannot be
separated from the study of social, economic, and political relations. For both Carole and me, dialectical method has always been an essential part of
historical-ecological investigation, but it is sometimes poorly represented or missing altogether from studies today regarded as historical ecology. A
dialectical approach can enrich historical-ecological understandings and help to resolve differences among contemporary scholars who focus variously on
agency, materiality, landscape, monumentality, and relational (animic) ontology.
Marquardt, William (University of New Mexico, United States Forest Service)
[65]             Effects of Clay Shrinkage on Sex Estimation of Dermatoglyphic Impressions on Ceramics
Dermatoglyphic impressions—the patterns of ridges and furrows, whorls, loops, and arches present on human hands and feet—are recognized by forensic
scientists as having sexually dimorphic characteristics. Sex and age can be estimated from these impressions achieving rates of accuracy similar to other
metric methods utilized in physical anthropology and bioarchaeology (Marasco et al. 2014, Mundorff et al. 2014). Despite this potential, analysis of
dermatoglpyphic impressions left on plastic materials (e.g., ceramics) has received little attention in archaeological studies. Stinson (2004) and Kamp
(1999, 2001) remain two of only a handful of archaeologists who have given any serious attention to dermatoglyphs. This method of analysis is in its
infancy and more research is needed to maximize its potential for the archaeologist. For instance, the effects of clay shrinkage on sex estimation from
dermatoglyphs are poorly understood and may lead to erroneous sex estimates in fired ceramics. This study, utilizing ridge density analysis, investigates
potential bias in data arising from shrinkage of clay during the drying and firing process in a sample of dermatoglyphic impressions on clay. Initial results
suggest that sex can still be determined despite shrinkage found in a sample of native New Mexican clays.
Marquardt, William [290] see Walker, Karen
Marquez, Heriberto (California State University, Monterey Bay), Cristina Verdugo (University of California, Santa Cruz), Hector Neff (California
State University, Long Beach) and James Brady (California State University, Los Angeles)
[93]             Exploring the Use of Red Ochre at Midnight Terror Cave, Belize
The earliest use of red pigment in mortuary contexts has been documented in Neanderthal burials during the Upper Palaeolithic Period (50,000–12,000
B.C.E.) in Europe (Roper 1991). The use of red pigment for both mortuary and decorative practices has been identified in Mesoamerica as early as the
Early Preclassic. These practices include the sprinkling or encasing of various artifacts such as shell or bone in either red ochre or cinnabar. Investigations
at Midnight Terror Cave (MTC) carried out between 2008 and 2010 recovered nearly 10,000 human bones. Among these, 27 bone and bone fragments
recovered from Lots V, VI, and VII, were partially or fully covered in red pigment. The presence of pigment on such a limited number of bones suggests
some type of special treatment. Deposits of skeletal material are co-mingled throughout the cave, so the analysis of these 27 bone fragments may reveal
relationship between the movement and redeposition of bone along the documented ritual circuit in the cave. Exploring the use of red pigment in cave
contexts becomes particularly interesting as caves are seen as important sacred landscape features which house the gods, are the source of rain, and
places from which people first emerged into the world.
Marreiros, João [170] see Bicho, Nuno
Marrinan, Rochelle (Florida State University)
[133]            Vertebrate Fauna from the Grand Mound Shell Ring site (8Du1), Florida
The Grand Mound Shell Ring (8Du1) is a Mississippi-period site on the southern end of Big Talbot Island in Duval County, Florida. The site consists of an
annular shell midden, composed primarily of oyster, with a sand burial mound deposited over the western ring arc. Excavations by faculty of the University
of North Florida recovered a large vertebrate faunal sample marked by the presence of numerous avian species, some of which today are extinct. This
paper presents the vertebrate faunal data recovered from a trench excavated through the south ring arc with special attention to the avian fauna and
avifauna from other Mississippi-period coastal sites in the region.
Marrinan, Rochelle [133] see Parsons, Alexandra
Marsaglia, Kathleen [41] see Lawrence, John
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             276
Marsden, Susan [132] see Ames, Kenneth
Marsh, Anke [257] see Holt, Emily
Marshall, Amanda (Kleanza Consulting) and Stephanie Huddelstan (Kleanza Consulting Ltd.)
[124]             Culturally Modified Trees of the Pacific Northwest: How Do We Define What is Protected and Not Protected Under the HCA in British
                  Columbia
In British Columbia, archaeologists are challenged with the task of identifying and recording Culturally Modified Trees (or CMTs) with some live trees dating
back to the early seventeenth century. How these features are recorded as archaeological sites, are guided and managed by the BC Archaeology Branch
under the Heritage Conservation Act (HCA). This provincial ministry is constantly changing departments, and sometimes change how they would like
archaeologists to inventory and manage CMTs. Up until recently, archaeologists recording these features would document and include all CMT features in
a cluster as one ‘site,’ regardless of age, with varying feature types and ages, and a site was considered to represent continuous use of the landscape over
time. More recently, the direction from the Archaeology Branch has been to not include CMTs that are more recent than A.D. 1846 in the recorded site
boundaries, unless they happen to fall within the cluster of the pre A.D. 1846 features. Our paper will discuss the implications of this current direction, and
how this potentially affects First Nations and their rights and title to the land.
Marsteller, Sara (Arizona State University), Kelly Knudson (Arizona State University), Gwyneth Gordon (Arizona State University) and Ariel
Anbar (Arizona State University)
[135]             A Bioarchaeological Approach to Ychsma Regional Interactions: Stable Oxygen and Radiogenic Strontium Isotopes and Late Intermediate
                  Period Mobility on the Central Peruvian Coast
Archaeological and ethnohistoric evidence indicates that, for the Inca Empire and the Spanish Viceroyalty, the Rimac and Lurin Valleys on central Peruvian
coast served as a key regional hub for religious and administrative activities. The nature of regional interactions prior to Inca imperial influence in this area,
however, remains unclear. Well-known historical narratives claim populations from the adjacent Huarochirí highlands defeated coastal Ychsma populations
for agricultural land, but archaeological evidence concerning the timing and extent of coastal-highland interactions is a source of debate. Here, we assess
the potential for radiogenic strontium and stable oxygen isotopes to shed light on the regional mobility of coastal Ychsma groups during the Late
Intermediate Period. We analyzed regional environmental baseline samples and archaeological human tooth enamel and bone samples from 113
individuals buried at Armatambo and Rinconada Alta, in the lower and lower-middle Rimac Valley, for radiogenic strontium and stable oxygen isotopes.
Results reveal a broad isotopic range for the region likely due to diversity in water and bedrock sources. Nevertheless, one individual presents a non-local
strontium value indicating mobility to an outside region. Complications for using isotopes to assess mobility in the Central Andes are discussed and future
directions for research are proposed.
Marston, John (Boston University)
[184]             Wheat and Barley Morphometrics: A New Method for Quantifying Ancient Cereal Varietals
Free-threshing wheat (Triticum aestivum and T. durum) and barley (Hordeum vulgare) were staple cereal crops in the ancient Near East. Although modern
varietals of these species have significant variation in growing times, water requirements, and grain yields, few studies have distinguished varietals in the
past. Traditional approaches have used grain seed size and shape to identify different crop varieties. These coarse metrics, including length:breadth and
thickness:breadth ratios, give only a cursory understanding of ancient variation in seed shape. A recent method uses multidimensional analysis of grain
morphometrics (GMM) to refine differences in shape that are poorly distinguished by basic measurements; this approach has considerable potential for
adding nuance to discussions of cereal farming in the ancient Near East.
We present both basic measurements and multivariate GMM analyses of more than 1,000 complete wheat and barley grains from the site of Gordion in
central Turkey, occupied from the Early Bronze Age (ca. 2500 B.C.E.) to the Medieval Period (ca. fourteenth century C.E.). We compare these data to
grain measurement analysis from contemporaneous sites across the Near East to shed light on regional agricultural practices, and develop a comparative
perspective on the value of seed morphometrics for reconstructing Near Eastern farming systems.
[19]              Discussant
Marston, John [149] see Pio, Kayla
Martin, Alexandra
[18]              The History and Future of Ceremonial Stone Landscapes of Southern New England
Indigenous people have lived on and moved throughout the landscape of southeastern New England for thousands of years. Today, representatives from
several Tribal Historic Preservation Offices are interested in identifying and protecting ceremonial stone groupings that are significant elements of
ceremonial landscape sites, ties to which were in many cases severed by colonial law. These sites are important loci of Indigenous history, inter-Tribal
ceremony, and collective memory. This presentation draws on my dissertation research, which examines ceremonial stone features and sites that
represent the ancestors’ attempts to gain harmony with the Earth, her children of the nations of crawling, flying, walking, swimming, stone, and plant, and
her celestial relatives. Historic sources, oral traditions, and ethnographic accounts, along with GPS and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) have been
used to “let the landscape speak,” presenting spatial data for preservation and the reestablishment of Tribal connections to ceremonial places.
Martin, Debra (University of Nevada/Las Vegas)
[215]             The Poetics of Corpse Fragmentation and Processing in the Ancient Southwest
The bioarchaeological record in the ancient southwest has an abundance of evidence of disarticulated remains to suggest a long history of body (corpse)
processing and fragmentation. From A.D. 800 to the 1500s, various assemblages of processed human remains have been recovered. Published studies of
these have argued for a wide range of motivations that could account for such assemblages including anthropophagy/cannibalism, massacres, torture,
witch executions, ritualized violence, warfare, raiding, and captive-taking. Using a fine-grained bioarchaeological approach to re-imagine the diverse
actions taken by the living as related and connected, a different set of motivations emerges. Using a poetics of violence approach (as imagined by Neil
Whitehead) provides a different way of thinking about these disparate bone assemblages. Moreover, identifying culturally-specific patterns related to age,
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 277
sex, and social status provides an increasingly complex picture of early small-scale groups. Some forms of cultural violence have restorative and
regenerative aspects that strengthen community identity. Bioarchaeological data can shed light on the ways that violence becomes part of a given cultural
landscape. Viewed using a poetics framework, the dismemberment and disarticulation of bodies can be seen as constitutive of social relations and
identities and not of cultural rupture, violence and chaos.
[24]              Discussant
[215]             Chair
Martin, Paul [37] see Johnston, Cheryl
Martin, Alexander (University of Pittsburgh)
[97]              Preliminary Results from “the Role of Religious Institutions in Pre-Columbian America Data Analysis Project”
The past couple of decades have seen a marked rise in behavioral and social science research from evolutionary psychologists, sociologists, and
anthropologists looking to clarify what motivated the development and spread of religious institution throughout the world. These approaches tend to
highlight the functional “prosocial” role that religion played in social development, citing its character as an integrative social device, as mitigator of external
social stress, or as an enforcer of more efficient, cooperative, or regulatory social norms. Behavioral scientists frequently attempt to support these claims
by testing them against present-day populations, but archaeology can talk directly to this discussion since its subject matter is explicitly the development of
human behavior and its institutions over time, and its methodological tools were purposefully designed to investigate that topic through the long
developmental sequence that behavioral scientists try to infer about based on modern test subjects. This presentation gives preliminary results on a multi-
year data analysis project that explores how religious institutions evolved in various precolumbian societies to validate or reject different prosocial
explanations for the role of religion in human social development.
[97]              Chair
Martin, Paul (University of Memphis - Department of Earth Sciences) and Blair Tormey (Western Carolina University - Program for Develope)
[187]             To Dig or Not to Dig? A Case Study of Suspected Remains Buried under Concrete
Ground-penetrating radar (GPR) results can factor into the decision to excavate in the search for a clandestine grave. Most published research and case
studies focus on the successful location and recovery of human remains, while relatively few examples have been published showing negative results. This
presentation highlights a cold case where the data interpretation led to excavation, but did not produce the target sought.
Information from a confidential informant led investigators to question if patched concrete areas in the floor of an abandoned warehouse concealed the
remains of a missing person. After a cadaver dog search resulted in no trained final response, investigators requested that a GPR survey be conducted.
Using a 250 MHz GPR antenna configured on a cart, a potential target was identified during the survey. After post-processing the data, a target area was
identified beneath the concrete, with a size, shape, and radar velocities consistent with a potential human burial.
The decision was made to excavate and, unfortunately, failed to yield remains. Using this example, we examine the technical, ethical, and moral decisions
that must be carefully considered when utilizing GPR in the search for clandestine graves.
Martin, Andrew (Principia College)
[247]             Prehistoric Conflict Resolution: Archaeology’s Unique Position to Address Today’s Problems
At the geographical interface between two cultures or worldviews, there are often found a hybrid or unexpected set of burial practices that mix ideas from
each culture. This is the case for numerous prehistoric and historic cultures including the North American Hopewell and British Early Bronze Age, which will
be examined here. However, if we look closely at these instances, there exists much more than just a borrowing of ideas. Amalgamations are often
accompanied by acts of violence, destruction of each other’s tombs and use of each other’s traits in very different ways, before differences are resolved
through amalgamation. These conflicts and the resulting resolutions appear to be the catalyst for subsequent changes to the overall culture.
One lesson from the Islamic destruction of temples and religious sites is that people outside of the Western world give far more importance to religion than
us. In a similar way, prehistoric religious conflicts illustrate the stark difference between modern and non-modern views of religion. They also provide a
unique opportunity to examine how religious conflicts were resolved. This paper will examine several conflicts, their resolutions and what they mean for a
conception of non-modern religion, as explored in my book "Archaeology Beyond Postmodernity."
Martin, Simon (University of Pennsylvania Museum)
[256]             At the Heart of the Serpent: Archaeology, Epigraphy, and Iconography at Calakmul, Campeche, Mexico
The metropolis of Calakmul has a pre-eminent place in Classic Maya history that is best understood from a multi-disciplinary perspective, combining the
study of its extensive archaeological remains with that of its monuments, both in terms of inscriptions and imagery. This paper focuses on a 100-year span,
from the seventh and eighth centuries C.E., which covers the reign of three of its best-known rulers. Representing the highpoint of the Snake kingdom’s
“international” influence, this small slice of Calakmul’s story shows how political success was manifested in the monumental display of a major Maya
capital.
[256]             Discussant
[256]             Chair
Martindale, Andrew [132] see Ames, Kenneth
Martindale, Andrew (University of British Columbia), Kenneth Ames, Bryn Letham, Kevan Edinborough and Sarah Wilson
[132]             Midden Accumulation Rates in Prince Rupert Harbour: New Applications for Percussion Coring
The monumentality of the anthropogenic landscape of the Prince Rupert Harbour region on north coastal British Columbia has long been recognized for
the number, density, and size of the shell midden terraces containing villages dating to the last 5,000 years. The scale of the region’s archaeological record
makes regional assessments of the mode and tempo of shell-bearing site construction difficult. We report on a program of regional and site-specific
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               278
percussion coring combined with 14C dating to evaluate patterns in accumulation rates of shell-bearing components in the anthropogenic terraces of major
village sites. Specifically, we examine accumulation rates as measures of volume/year in the stratigraphic column. We compare these results against
Bayesian modeling of 14C dates and other archaeological and historical indicators to assess major stanzas in settlement history in the region in terms of
monumental site construction.
Martindale Johnson, Lucas [179] see Marino, Marc
Martindale Johnson, Lucas (University of Florida) and Lisa M. Johnson (University of California, Berkeley)
[179]            A Materialist Perspective on Ancient Maya Flaked Stone Technology: Chert Blade-Core Artifacts from Caracol, Belize
Using a recently analyzed lithic deposit, from Caracol, Belize, this paper considers ancient Maya crafting from a materialist perspective. Through this
perspective, we consider Caracol’s chert technology not as separate and distinct from obsidian, implicating a separate community of crafters, somehow
less prestigious or knowledgeable, but rather, we argue that similarity in material properties enabled the utilization of identical reduction techniques. Those
techniques in crafting were shared across both obsidian and chert material, suggesting that crafting communities were not restricted to material type.
Through the chaîne opératoire analytical approach, we have learned that crafters at the Classic Period Maya (A.D. 250–900) site of Caracol, reduced and
shaped local chert using identical techniques to that of obsidian production, specifically, blade core technology. This realization, and the juxtaposition of
this large chert deposit in the same context of like numbered obsidian artifacts, has prompted a reassessment of common assumptions regarding the
distinction between obsidian and chert, both as status symbols and as valuables. For the ancient Maya of Caracol, it appears that chert and obsidian were
both regarded similarly, as utilitarian and ceremonial alike.
[179]            Chair
Martinez, Desiree (Cogstone Resource Management)
[5]              Discussant
Martinez, Gustavo [16] see Gutierrez, Maria
Martinez, Marco
[64]             Ceramic Analysis of Site 291, A Historic Casas Grandes Site
Casas Grandes is an archaeological prehistoric site located in the state of Chihuahua, northwest Mexico. The region’s chronology remains unclear, with
knowledge gaps between its time periods. One of these gaps includes the possible social configurations after the collapse of Casas Grandes. This
research aims to provide new data obtained from the analysis of the ceramic assemblage of an archaeological site whose architecture seems to linger
between late Casas Grandes and Spanish. This site, 291, is located just a few kilometers north of the main Casas Grandes site, Paquimé, and it is
immediately surrounded by small neighboring sites. Like its neighbors, 291 is small and was located over a terrace overlooking the floodplains of a local
arroyo and spring. Most of the ceramic sherds found on site are, apparently, Casas Grandes plainware, and interestingly, radiocarbon dating for 291
delivered dates as early as the 1600s. This paper provides preliminary results of the contrast between the composition of the plainware ceramics from sites
291 and the Medio Period site 204, to observe if their respective manufacture process changed over time, if they’re similar at all, and provide a discussion
regarding the nature of such change and the questions this might yield.
Martinez, Eva
[163]            Chichicaste Ceramics and Regional Interactions in Eastern Honduras
Although the ceramics of eastern Honduras have been sometimes described as being remarkably homogenous throughout the region, recent research
points to intraregional variations regarding ceramic assemblages and what they represent in terms of intra and inter regional interactions. The identification
of the ceramic group known as Chichicaste has contributed to point out a greater diversity of ceramic traditions in eastern Honduras as well as to recognize
more nuances in its intraregional interactions. Our ceramic analysis from the Jamastrán Valley, in southeastern Honduras, brought to our attention the
importance of keep looking for a finer understanding of Chichicaste ceramic´s role in terms of interactions within eastern Honduras and other neighboring
areas. Ceramic groups of the Chichicaste Polychromes seem to represent a stylistic tradition that extends from western Honduras (Cancique Bichrome and
Polychrome and Sulaco Polychrome), Nicaragua (Caucalí Rojo Sobre Naranja), and El Salvador (Machacal Purple Painted). This paper deals with a re-
examination of interactions among some archaeologically known areas within eastern Honduras; it also attempts to explore, albeit superficially at this point,
the relationship among communities in southeastern Honduras and northern Nicaragua.
Martínez, Andrea [259] see Pavlovic, Daniel
Martínez, Valentina L. [205] see Garzon-Oechsle, Andres
Martínez Lara, Mario (UNAM)
[136]            Cacaxtla en el devenir histórico mesoamericano: una propuesta desde sus expresiones plásticas
El sitio arqueológico de Cacaxtla es famoso por la pintura mural y la importancia que ésta tiene como fuente de información para el entendimiento del
desarrollo prehispánico de la región. Sin embargo, esta expresión plástica en particular es la que mayor atención ha recibido y en ocasiones se desarticula
de aquellas hechas en otros materiales como la cerámica o la lítica encontradas en el Gran Basamento y en su periferia. En ese sentido, esta ponencia
tiene como objetivo exponer la necesidad de realizar una tipología estilística que las conjunte y así, poder vislumbrar las variaciones artísticas como pistas
sobre aquellos cambios y continuidades que se suscitaron durante el desarrollo socio-histórico del sitio. Reconocer estas variaciones y permanencias nos
permite comparar la tipología estilística de la región con otras presentes en sitios arqueológicos que le fueron contemporáneos y detectar ideologías
compartidas, reinterpretadas o propias y así, coadyuvar a reflexionar sobre la cronología del sitio y también a la comprensión del papel de Cacaxtla en el
devenir histórico mesoamericano.
[136]            Discussant
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               279
[136]            Chair
Martínez Rojo, Iziar (Escuela Nacional de Antropología e Historia (ENAH)) and Verenice Heredia (El Colegio de Michoacan, A.C.)
[169]            From Second Tier to First Tier: Cerro Topiltepec in Light of New Research
Recent excavations at Cerro Jazmín, a first tier center in the Mixteca Alta, Oaxaca, indicate that this center´s main occupations were during the Early and
Late Ramos phases and not during the Early Las Flores phase as it was previously established. These new data change our perspective on Cerro
Topiltepec, a putative secondary center in the Nochixtlán Valley, and its role in the region during the Early Las Flores phase. In this paper, we analyze the
changing political landscape in the Nochixtlán Valley and the status of Topiltepec within it by looking at multiple scales of analysis. First at the regional level
(Central Mixteca Alta), second at the sub-regional level (Nochixtlán Valley) and third at the center itself. We conclude by talking about the scale of polities
during the Early Las Flores phase in general in light new research.
Martínez Tuñón, Antonio (SUNY-Albany)
[169]            Construyendo Estatus. El urbanismo emergente visto desde una unidad doméstica de élite
Las excavaciones de Cerro Jazmín se han enfocado en distintos sectores de la ciudad con funciones diferenciadas que nos ayudan a comprender los
procesos del urbanismo emergente en la Mixteca Alta de Oaxaca. En esta ponencia me concentraré en una unidad domestica excavada en la Terraza
131. La ocupación de esta terraza se ubica entre 262 A.C. y 273 D.C. En esta terraza los materiales cerámicos indican el acceso a bienes foráneos, en
particular de tipos grises característicos de Monte Albán. Además se logró identificar un área de producción lítica que nos habla de las estrategias
económicas de sus residentes. Nueve entierros excavados en la terraza muestran una gran diversidad en el tratamiento funerario y condiciones de salud
de los habitantes. A partir de la evidencia arquitectónica, es posible reconstruir una secuencia de construcción, remodelación, colapso, y reutilización de
distintas partes de la terraza. El conjunto de esta evidencia sugiere que el surgimiento de la sociedad urbana fue un periodo no exento de tensiones, en el
que la estratificación social y el estatus hubo de construirse paso a paso, y piedra sobre piedra con algunos derrumbes de por medio.
Martinez-Cruzado, Juan, Juan Ortiz-Aguilú (Universidad Técnica de Manabí, Portoviejo, Ecuador), Jennifer Raff (University of Kansas), Andrés
Príncipe and María Nieves-Colón (Arizona State University)
[160]            Ancient mtDNA: Both Amazonian and Andean Migrants in Western Puerto Rico by Late Saladoid Times
The Machuca archaeological site in western Puerto Rico is found in the Añasco river flood-plain, next to one of the presumed ancient mouths of the river,
less than half a kilometer east of the shoreline. The first burial was found in a fetal position together with ceramic remains of the Late Saladoid or Cuevas
period. Radiocarbon dating on bone collagen placed the burial at A.D. 550 to 660 (2-sigma calibration) whereas that on charred material found inside one
of the pots placed it at A.D. 650 to 780. DNA extracted from the first cervical vertebra produced a sequence from three overlapping mtDNA segments
spanning the whole HVR-I identical only to one described from a modern northern Amazon Brazilian, closely related to clade D1g2a. MtDNA obtained from
a tibia of a second burial found in a similar ceramic context approximately 40 meters from the first produced sequences from two non-overlapping HVR-I
segments. The sequences obtained strongly suggested it belonged to haplogroup A2 and that it was closely related to modern haplotypes described only
for the Colombian highlands. In summary, results suggest South American migrants from both the Andean and Amazonian regions had arrived to western
Puerto Rico by late Saladoid times.
Martini, Sarah (Harvard University)
[118]            The Space Between: An Investigation of the Changing Occupied Landscape at the El Brujo Archaeological Complex, Chicama Valley, Peru
Here, I present the results of a systematic surface survey investigating cultural development on the geological terrace of El Brujo in the Chicama Valley,
Peru. Previous research has shown that this one square kilometer space contains over 5,000 years of occupation encompassing the early preceramic
through Colonial periods. Based on survey and excavations that include nucleated architecture, archaeologists have assumed a general northern
movement of consecutive occupations, with each new group choosing to abandon the previously occupied area. I have tested this model by combining
data from such previous research with the results of my systematic surface survey of the “intermediate” areas located between architectural nuclei.
Through a visualization of the densities of materials and their characteristics in ArcGIS, I analyze the spatial distribution of periods of occupations and,
subsequently, the types of occupation each period represents. The results of this process reflect changes in the management of space caused by the
existence of prior occupations on later occupations, allowing a discussion of new issues such as the creation and continuity of “places” of particular
significance.
[118]            Chair
MARTINI, SARAH [118] see Tavera Medina, Ana Carito
Martinón-Torres, Marcos [173] see Li, Xiuzhen
Mar'yashev, Alexei [134] see Hermes, Taylor
Mascarenhas, Shannon (University of Toronto) and Steve Kosiba (University of Alabama)
[209]            Style and Substance in the Inca Imperial Capital: A Preliminary Archaeometric and Attribute Analysis of Ceramics, Materiality, and
                 Aesthetics in Ancient Cusco
Archaeologists have long examined how ancient empires and states developed a standard aesthetic and material culture—a set of styles and iconographic
designs meant to express their claims to regional authority. In contrast, this paper moves beyond style designations and iconographic interpretations, which
often draw on texts to make claims about representations of myths and political personages, to instead understand the materials and technological
sequences that constituted a regional aesthetic from the ground up. It analyzes Inca and pre-Inca (Killke) pottery from Cusco, Peru, to provide preliminary
insights into how changes in clay resources and technological sequences contributed to the creation and dissemination of the aesthetic that defined the
Inca Empire (ca.1450–1532 C.E.). Archaeometric (LA-ICP-MS) and macroscopic attribute analyses reveal patterned relationships between clay resource
procurement, decorative motifs, and vessel forms among a sample of pre-Inca, Killk’e, and Classic Inca polychrome serving vessels. The data complement
recent studies from Cusco, which indicate that specific, valued raw materials were important constituents of the Inca imperial aesthetic. The study
contributes to a growing body of archaeological research that complements a traditional focus on stylistic design with a nuanced understanding of the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                280
materials that constituted a regional aesthetic.
Maschner, Herbert (University of South Florida)
[4]              Virtualization, 3D Technologies, and the Democratization of Archaeological Research
The promise of the information age is access to data. Advances in online data availability have permeated nearly every scientific and humanities field
providing access to unprecedented quantities of research materials. But the key missing element in archaeological (and paleontological research) is
access to the material remains that are key to investigating the past. Because of logistical barriers, conservation concerns, conditions of ownership, or
other factors limiting access, many of the most important collections are unavailable for study. New developments in 3D scanning, visualization, and
database development have made the concept of virtual repositories, complete with on-screen analytical tools, a viable option. New projects in North
America, the Arctic, and across the Mediterranean are transforming the analysis of material remains by participating in the global Democratization of
Science Project. This project aims to put entire collections online in the form of virtual repositories so that anyone, anywhere, can conduct their own
analyses and create their own results. Here, new methods of virtualization and new on-screen analytical tools are presented.
Mason, Robert [199] see Matheson, Carney
Mason, Owen (INSTAAR University of Colorado), James Jordan (Antioch Graduate School NE) and Shelby Anderson (Portland State University)
[217]            The Giddings’ Legacy of Beach Ridge Archaeology in Alaska: A Proxy Record of Late Holocene Climate
Beach ridge archaeology developed as a relative-age archaeological survey method in the late 1950s within Kotzebue Sound. Giddings’ breakthrough
collaboration with geologists David Hopkins and George Moore focused on Cape Krusenstern, defining 5,000 years of prehistory from the Denbigh
complex to Thule tradition, dated mostly by reference to the type site at Onion Portage and 14C ages mostly on Old Whaling and Ipiutak and Thule
occupations, but none on Norton or Denbigh. The onset of beach ridge deposition co-occurs with the stabilization of sea level ca. 5,000 yrs B.P. Abundant
sources of mobile sand or gravel form beach ridges at depositional termini of long shore transport and are often ornamented by dunes, as at Cape
Espenberg. Our geoarchaeological research since 1986 includes >300 14C ages to define coastal evolution, expanding the record from Norton Sound to
Point Barrow, establishing that heightened storminess prevailed between 1200 and 1000 B.C. and A.D. 800 to 1200. Research at Cape Krusenstern
validates some of Giddings’ original chronological inferences but provides a more detailed age model of the foreland’s evolution, especially in the older
record and has refined the chronology of Norton and Thule occupations and produced firm ages on the Denbigh sequence.
Massey, David (Indiana University - Bloomington) and Alex Elvis Badillo (Indiana University - Bloomington)
[237]            Archaeological Prospecting using Remote Sensing Techniques in Quiechapa, Oaxaca, Mexico
While aerial photography is still widely used for the “brute force” identification of archaeological sites, multispectral remote sensing approaches hold the
greatest potential for archaeological surveys because of their ability to detect hidden or subsurface archaeological remains. This poster examines
Quiechapa, a small rural municipality located in the foliage covered mountains in the southwestern state of Oaxaca, Mexico, which has never before been
studied by archaeologists and likely contains many overgrown or buried architectural remains. We will use ERDAS Imagine to identify anomalies within
vegetation, moisture, and soil spectral signatures in Landsat imagery for further field investigation. Results are currently being verified using through a
regional archaeological survey.
Masson, Marilyn (University at Albany SUNY), Carlos Peraza Lope (Centro INAH Yucatan), Timothy Hare (Morehead State University) and
Bradley Russell
[26]             Rural Economies at Agrarian Houselots Before and After the Rise of Urban Mayapán
This paper examines wealth and occupational diversification of rural houselots of the Terminal Classic and Postclassic northern Plains of Yucatan. Eight
dwelling groups are compared that were situated in different types of rural/peripheral contexts. Ubiquitous Terminal Classic dwellings in the study area
were located at the margins of a modest town (the Rank IV center of Tichac/Telchaquillo) far from cities of any size or political significance. In contrast,
Postclassic houses were within 1 or 2 kilometers of Mayapán’s city wall, with their economies potentially linked to the needs of the largest urban capital of
the Maya realm and enhanced opportunities for exchange. Significant differences are observed in the household economies of urban versus rural
Postclassic houses in the quantity, value, and diversity of debris. Rural houses of both periods exhibit low indices of wealth and productive diversification.
All houses exhibit long term occupations and investment in architecture suggestive of permanent occupation, challenging views that low artifact densities
equate with seasonal farmsteads. The implications of these findings contribute to understanding the role of peripheral and agrarian populations in regional
political economies of northern Yucatan.
[59]             Chair
Mata-Miguez, Jaime [64] see Battillo, Jenna
Mateus, Jorge and Rita Scheel-Ybert (Museu Nacional, Universidade Federal do Rio de Jan)
[49]             Phytolith analysis in Sernambetiba shell mound, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.
Phytoliths are an important evidence for archaeology to address the behavior of ancient human societies, specifically their relation with botanical contexts.
As with any other archaeological material, it is important to assess the preservation of these silica structures, understanding the process of degradation
and dissolution that affects them. One of the factors cited in the literature as responsible for the degradation of phytoliths is the alkaline condition of
sediments. Humid tropical conditions also have been indicated as aggressive for these structures. Archaeological tropical shell middens are good
scenarios to explore the role that these conditions play in the phytoliths’ preservation. In order to assess the behavior of these plant micro-remains in these
conditions, we analyze four sediment samples from Sernambetiba, a shell mound located in the state of Rio de Janeiro. Here, we present the preliminary
results of this analysis, the structures identified until now, and some conclusions about the behavior of the human group responsible for the deposition of
the plant remains observed.
Matheson, Carney (Lakehead University), Cory Vickruck (Lakehead University), Chris McEvoy (Lakehead University) and Robert Mason (Royal
Ontario Museum)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             281
[199]             Ancient Explosives from Jerusalem Identified on the Analysis of the Mysterious Sphero-Conical Ceramic Vessels using Archaeological
                  Chemistry
Thick-walled small stoneware Sphero-conical vessels have been found throughout the Middle East between the tenth and fourteenth centuries.
Researchers have proposed that these vessels could have been used as smoking pipes, grenades, or containers holding medicines, mercury, beer, or
perfume. The unusual nature of the ceramic, being the only highly fired stoneware produced in the Middle East, together with the very thick walls, would
indicate an unusually dedicated function that only existed between the tenth and fourteenth century. Although incendiary devices are well-known in this
period, the properties of sphero-conical vessels would suggest an explosive function but there is actually no evidence for gunpowder in the Middle East at
this time. However, all the components of gunpowder are well-attested, and it was certainly known in China. The ancient Middle Eastern weapon known as
Greek Fire has been purported to contain many of the components of incendiary devices or explosives but none of these have any been confirmed or
identified. Archaeological chemistry has been applied to a set of sphero-conical vessel fragments from the eleventh century, Jerusalem. The results of this
research will be presented here and the interpretation of the analysis maintains the possibility of weaponry.
Mathews, Jennifer (Trinity University) and John Gust (University of California, Riverside)
[130]             Life is Bittersweet: The Rise and Fall of the Sugarcane and Rum Industry in the Nineteenth Century
 The nineteenth century in the Yucatán Peninsula was a period of major transition. Amidst the backdrop of colonialism, slavery, indentured servitude, and
an indigenous revolt during the Caste War (1847–1901), foreign and local residents of the remote region of northern Quintana Roo engaged in small-scale
commodity industries such as sugarcane farming and rum making. While workers dealt with harsh and dangerous conditions, they also had access to an
unusual array of cosmopolitan luxury goods imported from the United States through coastal trade. This paper looks at the daily life of laborers living within
the context of uprising and upheaval, within their small communities and across the region.
Mathews, Darcy (University of Victoria)
[132]             Monumental Stonework and the Making of Places and History on the Northwest Coast of British Columbia
Archaeologists do not think of the peoples of the northwest coast as monumental stone builders, yet current research indicates that the enhancement and
demarcation of critical resource sites entailed both the massive movement of stone and the building of stone monuments. The Coast Salish peoples built
remarkable numbers of burial cairns and mounds, using stones cleared from important and valuable root crop fields to then inscribe the landscape with
their ancestral dead. Their Heiltsuk neighbors to the north reshaped shorelines with stone constructions to promote the growth, accessibility, and
predictability of their most economically important intertidal resources. Stone intertidal fish traps and boulder terraces promoted the growth and abundance
of clams and other bivalves are common in their territory. These ubiquitous Coast Salish and Heiltsuk stone constructions are the intentional products of
not only ecological management—the process of building these features was the very making of histories and places. The materiality of these monumental
stone works are enduring and visible constructions that speak to emergent and changing practices of ownership, tenure, and relationships of power over
the past three millennia.
Mathias, Errol [93] see Poister, Nicholas
Mathiowetz, Michael (Riverside City College)
[101]             Weaving Our Life: The Economy and Ideology of Cotton in Postclassic West Mexico
West Mexican archaeologists long have noted that around A.D. 900 the material culture record in this broad region exhibits a pronounced increase in the
presence of modeled ceramic spindle whorls, particularly along the Pacific coastal plain of Nayarit and south-central Sinaloa. Although limited evidence of
cotton in this region is present in the Classic Period, the heightened cotton cultivation and consumption that seemed to accompany the dramatic social
transformations in the Aztatlán culture during the Postclassic Period suggests that there were important political, social, economic, and ideological
ramifications tied to its production and use. This presentation examines the ethnographic, ethnohistoric, and archaeological data on cotton cultivation,
trade, and ritual use in order to better understand how this domesticated plant was valued by Aztatlán societies.
Mathwich, Nicole (University of Arizona), Alexander Ruff (University of Arizona) and Barnet Pavao-Zuckerman (University of Maryland)
[134]             Fodder and Water: Isotope Analysis of Livestock Enamel in Southwest Spanish Colonial Settlements in the Pimeria Alta
The introduction of livestock to the Pimeria Alta in the eighteenth-century dramatically shifted resource use in the Sonoran Desert and the Santa Cruz River
Valley. Colonial and indigenous politics and economics were transformed as a result of the presence and uses of these animals, but it is relatively unknown
how O’odham people in the Santa Cruz Valley balanced the grazing and watering needs of livestock with the needs of farming and seasonal wild food
gathering in the arid region. Using carbon and oxygen isotopes from sheep/goat and cattle teeth from four Spanish colonial sites in southern Arizona, we
explore the environmental and social implications of animal management in the colonial period. Our preliminary data from bulk and serial enamel sampling
suggest different seasonal watering and grazing regimes for sheep/goat and cattle herds. Seasonal shifts in plant communities and water evaporation
reflected in δ18O and δ13C ratios may offer a limited proxy for O'odham labor and herd and resource management. This research connects isotope
analysis methods most frequently applied to paleontological specimens to the reconstruction of recent historical landscape management and the social
shifts initiated by colonial interaction.
Matisoo-Smith, Lisa (University of Otago)
[160]             Welcome to My Nightmare—Ancient DNA from Pacific Islands
Recent reports of ancient DNA recovery from samples that are 10s if not 100s of thousands of years old attest to the amazing developments in aDNA
technology in recent years. Unfortunately, most aDNA from the Pacific Islands is poorly preserved and highly degraded. Despite the relatively short history
of settlement on many Pacific Islands, ancient DNA is often difficult, if not impossible, to obtain from archaeological samples recovered from Pacific sites.
Still, we are able to recover aDNA sequence from an increasing number of animal and human samples from across the Pacific, which are providing
intriguing clues about the complexity of Pacific settlement history. Several examples from our lab will be presented, demonstrating both the powers and the
pitfalls of working with ancient DNA in the Pacific and integrating aDNA data with the archaeological record to reconstruct aspects of Pacific settlement and
prehistory.
Matney, Timothy (University of Akron), Sarah E Travaly (University of Akron), Linda R Barrett (Univesity of Akron) and David S Perry (University
of Akron)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  282
[197]             Detecting and Characterizing Archaeological Deposits Using In Situ Shallow Subsurface Spectroscopy
Geophysical prospection is now a common field technique employed by archaeologists across the globe. Likewise, chemical analyses of soils, residues,
and other samples in laboratory settings have been part of archaeological research for decades. This paper examines a new technique, still in an
experimental phase, which allows archaeologists to refine the results of geophysical surveys by conducting chemical characterizations of deposits in situ
using shallow subsurface spectroscopy. A near infrared and visible light diffuse reflectance spectrometer is employed via a truck-mounted push-probe
system to collect spectra with signatures characteristic of archaeological features and distinguishable from background spectra. This paper reports on
results of a pilot study conducted at two Native American settlements in Kansas and the results of bench tests to determine the ability of NIR and VIS
spectroscopy to discern the presence of fatty acids, similar to those found in human burials, in various concentrations and soil types. Finally, the potential
uses and limitations of this emerging technology are discussed.
Matsumae, Hiromi [147] see Karsten, Jordan
Matsumoto, Mallory (Brown University) and Misha Miller-Sisson (University of California, San Diego)
[20]              Visualizing Death: Representations of Death and Rebirth on an Early Classic Maya Mid-Level Elite Burial Vessel from Uxul, Mexico
Excavations during the 2014 field season at the Maya site of Uxul in Campeche, Mexico, revealed an Early Classic ceramic burial vessel that was
embellished with hieroglyphic elements and contained an infant skeleton. The hieroglyphic elements on the vessel body and lid visually represent the
underworld and feature components of larger phrases that are used in Classic Maya monumental and ceramic texts to record processes of death and
renewal. The occurrence of both iconographic and hieroglyphic elements on the vessel to refer to the deceased's passage into the underworld and
eventual rebirth indicates the importance of both concepts in the Classic Maya funerary complex. The discovery of the vessel under the base of a mid-level
elite structure in an architectural group associated with ritual functions suggests that this social stratum had access to literacy and utilized it in complex
ritual behavior. Furthermore, the vessel offers yet another example of the interface between iconography and hieroglyphic writing in Classic Maya culture. It
is anticipated that this research will inform future Classic Maya studies of mid-level elites, including the roles that they fulfilled within the settlement, and the
symbolism underlying their material culture.
Matsumoto, Yuichi, Jason Nesbitt (Tulane University), Yuri Cavero (UNMSM) and Edison Mendoza (PUCP)
[31]              Ceremonial Center and Domestic Rituals: The Case of Campanayuq Rumi, South-Central Highlands of Peru
The main theme of this paper is to reconsider the relationship between the ritual activities in public architecture and domestic rituals carried out in the area
outside of ceremonial core through the recent data of Campanayuq Rumi, a late Initial Period and Early Horizon ceremonial center in the Peruvian south-
central highlands.
 New data from the domestic areas of Campanayuq Rumi suggest that ritual activities had been carried out before the construction of public architecture.
While the domestic rituals were maintained, they seem to have been separated from those of the public architecture during the late Initial Period (the
Campanayuq I Phase: 1000–700 cal. B.C.). However, in the Early Horizon (the Campanayuq II Phase: 700–500 cal. B.C.), they got more integrated into
those of the public architecture. This change occurred in accordance with the adoption of hierarchical social organizations at the site, and thus possibly
related to the strategies of emerging elite class.
Matsumoto, Go (Southern Illinois University Carbondale)
[57]              A compositional Signature of Multi-Craft Production?: Food Vessels from Great Plaza of Huacas de Sican
This paper discusses the results of a recent compositional analysis by INAA of 225 samples of ceramics sherds excavated from the Great Plaza of Huacas
de Sicán. The analysis revealed a limited number (3) of compositional groups and a high rate of arsenic and uranium in one group. The author argues that
the high rate of arsenic indicates the side-by-side production of arsenical copper and ceramic vessels and that the vessels used at the Great Plaza were
produced at the regional ceramic workshop of Huaca Sialupe in the Lower Lambayeque Valley, known for its multi-craft production of metals and ceramics.
Matt , Ira [191] see Yu, Pei-Lin
Matthiesen, Henning [210] see Hollesen, Jørgen
Mattson, Hannah [66] see Kerr, R. Stanley
Mattson, Hannah (University of New Mexico)
[194]             Directionality in Ceramic Vessel Construction and Ceremonial Circuitry in the Ancestral Pueblo World: A Case Study from Pueblo Bonito
This paper explores the relationship between utility ware vessel construction and widely shared elements of cosmology in the Chaco interaction sphere
through an examination of corrugated gray ware ceramics from Pueblo Bonito. The direction of coiling, which is inversely related to the angle of corrugation
or pinching, appears to be a conservative element of ceramic technological style and is typically consistent within regions. As these differences cannot be
accounted for by handedness alone, it has been proposed that coiling direction may be related to directional symbolism. Based on an analysis of over
11,000 indented corrugated gray ware sherds from the Pueblo Bonito middens, Cibola, Chuska, and Tusayan wares are found to exhibit primarily
counterclockwise coiling, while Mesa Verde wares exhibit a significantly higher proportion of clockwise coiling. These results indicate that directionality in
vessel manufacture is neither randomly distributed nor tied to specific production units, but instead may be associated with longstanding traditions of
ceremonial/processional circuitry across the Ancestral Pueblo area.
[194]             Chair
Mauck, Jessica [245] see Burnett, Katherine
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               283
Mauricio, Ana Cecilia [118] see Kelley, Alice
May, Rossana (Cinvestav), Tomás Gallareta (Centro INAH Yucatán) and William Ringle (Davidson College)
[127]             Boundary Traits in Archaeological Settlements of the Bolonchen District, Yucatán, México.
In the course of surveying a kilometer-wide strip linking the archaeological sites of Labna, Kiuic, and Huntichmul, several types of rare feature clusters were
recorded that are difficult to interpret. Although some spatial patterns of these "special" features with respect to the local topography were recognized as
                                                             2
the survey proceeded, it wasn’t until the sample of 10 km was completed and analyzed using GIS "least cost routes" that we were able to offer a more
thorough interpretation of their functionality.
The importance of these elements is that they represent markers of settlement limits created by their ancient inhabitants, so they can lead us to
interpretations about how built space was emically conceived and organized. These boundary elements seem to be related to the custody of borders, and
the control of people and goods moving through the roads, although most probably they may also convey ideological meanings.
May Ciau, Rossana [127] see Seligson, Ken
Mayer, Aaron (University of South Dakota) and Matthew Sayre (University of South Dakota)
[19]              A Glimpse of Domestic Space at Tenahaha from the Cotahuasi Valley, Peru
In the field seasons of 2004–2007, Justin Jennings and his field crew conducted archaeological excavations at the Middle Horizon (600–1100 A.D.) site of
Tenahaha in the Cothuasi Valley of the Peruvian Andes. During 2013–2014 floatation samples from the site were analyzed in the Archaeology Laboratory
at the University of South Dakota. The Tenahaha site contained five domestic areas from which macrobotanical data was collected and interpreted. It is
believed that the Tenahaha necropolis was only periodically occupied during ritual and ceremonial events. This should be reflected in macrobotanical and
domestic material remains. In this paper, Tenahaha is compared to other Middle Horizon sites and used to determine ancient food ways and other
domestic activities in the region.
Mayewski, Paul
[1]               Discussant
Mayle, Francis [167] see DeSouza, Jonas
Mazow, Laura (East Carolina University)
[252]             Weapon or Weaving Swords and the Complexities of Gender Construction
The existence of weaving swords in the Bronze and Iron Age Levant is hinted at in both the textual and archaeological records. Furthermore, weaving
swords as grave goods would fit the generally accepted pattern of weaving tools in association with female burials. Yet when swords have been found in
graves with positively identified females, the deceased have been described as ‘warrior women’ or the burial reinterpreted so as to disassociate biological
sex and gender. In recognizing the use of weaving swords in the Bronze and Iron Ages, we may find additional previously identified weapon swords whose
form better fits a weaving function. In this paper, I argue that our lack of understanding of weaving technologies combines with our hasty and often
uncritical assignment of gender categories to see a martial quality in all depictions of ‘swords.’
[252]             Chair
Mazzia, Natalia [139] see Flegenheimer, Nora
Mazzucato, Camilla [265] see Hodge, Christina
McAlister, Andrew [296] see Allen, Melinda
McAllister, Martin (ADIA) and Brent Kober (Northland Research, Inc.)
[187]             The Value of Forensic Archaeology Training for All Law Enforcement Officers: A Case Example
Law enforcement officers working for agencies not directly involved in land management, such as county sheriff’s departments, traditionally have not been
trained to recognize evidence of crimes related to resource protection, for example, artifacts and human remains stolen in the commission of
archaeological crimes. In a recent class presented by our firm and cohosted by the Lake County, California Sheriff’s Department and two California tribes,
sheriff’s deputies and evidence technicians received training in the investigation of archaeological crimes and the forensic archaeology of identifying the
evidence of these crimes. Two days after the training was completed, one of these deputies made contact with a suspect in a potential child abuse case. In
a search of the suspect’s vehicle, he found drugs and drug paraphernalia and also artifacts with cards possibly identifying the locations from which they
were removed, evidence he would not have recognized earlier. The suspect has now been charged with violations of California’s archaeological protection
laws in addition to his drug related charges and the case has received considerable local and regional media attention due to its archaeological nexus. This
illustrates the value of providing forensic archaeology training to all law enforcement officers.
McAnany, Patricia (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill) and Maia Dedrick (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill)
[26]              Rights to Land and Labor in Yucatán during Pre-Conquest and Colonial Times
Land and labor are particularly integral to agrarian economies. The extent to which either is exchanged, sold, inherited, or privatized can shape the
dynamics of hierarchy, habitation, and migration as well as exchange. The diverse perspectives on Yucatec possession of land—from assertions of private
property to denial of property as a relevant concept—are reviewed for both preconquest and Colonial times. Relevant data include land plot demarcations,
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               284
historical documentation of land struggles, and Yucatec Maya linguistics. In reference to labor, evidence for the mobilization of work parties is examined
across the time spectrum with attention to its materialization in the form of monumental architecture, large ceramic basins, and feasting debris. The
manifestation of labor as tribute goods can be identified through extant tax records, patterns of trade, and the necessity of food imports. A historically and
geographically contingent model of power over land and labor is offered for Yucatán.
McBride, Kevin [61] see Dezi, Gina
McBride, Kevin (University of Connecticut) and David Naumec (Clark University and Mashantucket Pequot Museum an)
[61]               Battlefields of the Pequot War (1636-1637)
Conflict archaeology can offer a unique perspective into the nature and evolution of warfare in Native American and Euro-American societies in colonial
contexts and how these societies shaped warfare and were in turn shaped by them. The Battlefields of the Pequot War Project, funded by the National
Park Service American Battlefield Protection Program, seeks to move beyond documentation of battle-related objects associated with Pequot War
battlefields and place the conflict in a broader cultural and historical context. The archaeology of the Pequot War provides a useful framework for
understanding the nature and evolution of Pequot military, political, and social institutions in the early seventeenth century prior to their first encounters with
European militaries. These conflicts involved thousands of combatants from dozens of tribes and communities across southern New England. The regional
scope of these sustained conflicts, fought between large numbers of combatants for what appears to be control of territory, is not consistent with tribal
scale conflicts between kin groups which had traditionally defined Native warfare in the region.
McBrinn, Maxine (Museum of Indian Arts and Culture, Santa Fe)
[63]               Marriage Patterns and Material Culture: A Pueblo/Fremont Test Case Using Basketry
At various times, archaeologists have proposed that the Great Basin Fremont, who lived in Utah and nearby areas between A.D. 500 and 1250, were
Pueblo colonists, a purely indigenous Great Basin development, intrusive Athabaskans, or something in between. Fremont material culture is generally not
very different from that of their neighbors, except in a few cases. Four artifact categories distinguish the Fremont: rock art and pottery depictions of
trapezoidal figures; grey coiled-construction utility pottery made using local materials; uniquely constructed leather moccasins; and one-rod-and-bundle
coiled basketry. Fremont basketry is distinctly different from that of their contemporary neighbors and from the later Numic-speaking peoples who may
have replaced them. One possible explanation for the suite of Fremont material attributes is a differential marriage pattern between Great Basin peoples
and the Ancestral Pueblo, wherein only Pueblo men or Pueblo women married into Fremont groups. In our initial analysis to examine this hypothesis, we
focus on basketry attributes and distribution.
[63]               Chair
McBrinn, Maxine [265] see Montoya, Amy
McCafferty, Geoffrey [163] see Fernández-León, Elisa
McCafferty, Geoffrey (University of Calgary) and Shaelyn Rice (University of Calgary)
[163]              In Defense of Plainware Ceramics: Form, Function, and Foodways in Sapoa Period Pacific Nicaragua
Plain, utilitiarian pottery has typically been considered the 'red headed stepchild' of ceramic studies. This is especially the case in Pacific Nicaragua, where
beautifully decorated polychromes have attracted the most attention. However, more theoretically engaged studies consider utilitarian pottery as a key to
understanding foodways, and therefore offer important insights into alternative dimensions of social practice. This paper will consider plainware cooking
and storage vessels from several sites along the shore of Lake Cocibolca in Pacific Nicaragua. Variations in form and orifice provide a starting point for
discriminating between kitchen assemblages that vary across time and space, and can therefore distinguish food production across the cultural mosaic of a
multi-ethnic landscape.
McCafferty, Sharisse (University of Calgary) and Geoffrey McCafferty (University of Calgary)
[234]              Camp Granada, the Next Generation: Recent Excavations at the El Rayo site, Pacific Nicaragua
El Rayo, located on the Asese Peninsula in Lake Cocibolca, continues to surprise with its archaeological resources. Initially identified as a small fishing
community on the lakeshore, investigations in 2009 and 2010 revealed extensive mortuary remains as well as rich domestic refuse. In the summer of 2015,
a field school by the Institute for Field Research re-opened excavations at the Locus 3 mortuary complex, uncovering additional burial urns in diagnostic
Sacasa Striated ‘shoe-pot’ urns. A second focus of excavation, however, discovered an unexpected example of monumental architecture on a low mound.
A well-constructed stone foundation outlined a building measuring 20 x 10 m, with at least three layers of walking surface representing sequential
modification. This poster will outline the new discoveries, with special emphasis on the architectural feature.
McCall, Grant [94] see Marks, Theodore
McCall, Grant (Tulane University)
[152]              Mesolithic Stone Tools and the Organization of Technology at Kenure, Ireland
During the late 1950s, the avocational archaeologist Gwendoline Stacpoole collected a sizable assemblage of stone tools from farm fields along Ireland's
east coast near the town of Kenure, Rush, County Dublin. Stacpoole worked in collaboration with G.F. Mitchell at Trinity College, Dublin, and the
assemblage from Kenure was ultimately donated to the National Museum of Ireland. In the summer of 2014, I analyzed a considerable sample of
Stacpoole's collection from Kenure and this paper presents the results of this analysis. This paper comes to three main conclusions: (1) I generally support
initial assessments of the chronology of the assemblage as belonging to the late Mesolithic on the basis of formal tool typology; (2) the characteristics of
the assemblage suggest a pattern of expedient knapping of locally available glacial till flints and cherts; (3) in spite of shortcomings concerning the
provenience and chronology of the Kenure assemblage, it has much to offer our knowledge of Middle-to-Upper Holocene patterns of human economic
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               285
organization in eastern Ireland. I conclude by offering some directions for future research for this and other surface-collected lithic assemblages from along
the County Dublin coastline.
[152]             Chair
Mccarty, Rita (Mississippi National Guard)
[73]              Discussant
McClung, Terry [64] see Slaughter, Mark
McClung De Tapia, Emily (IIA-UNAM MEXICO)
[129]             Prehispanic Landscape and Agriculture in the Teotihuacan Valley: The Tlaijnga Área
Archaeological evidence indicates occupation in the Tlajinga área of the southern Teotihuacan Valley throughout the Classic and Postclassic (ca. 200–
1500 d.C.) as well as the Colonial Period. Excavations as well as soil profiles in this sector provide macro- and micro-botanical remains that, together with
stable carbón isotope values (δ13C) provide new insights with respect to agricultural activities, conforming evidence for maize (Zea mays), and
opportunistic flora associated with food production. A buried soil with vertic properties, overlying the tepetate substrate but situated approximately 1-1.5 m
below the modern surface, is broadly distributed throughout the área and represents an important stratigraphic marker in the effort to trace dynamic
processes in landscape transformation and human impact in the región through time.
McClure, Sarah B. [146] see Zavodny, Emily
McConnan Borstad, Courtney, Jane Kelley (University of Calgary) and M. Anne Katzenberg (University of Calgary)
[275]             Dietary Variation at Paquimé (Casas Grandes) and Convento Sites: Evidence from the Stable Isotope Analysis of Human Bone Collagen
Paquimé (Casas Grandes), located in northern Mexico, is well known for its Medio period (A.D. 1200–1450) monumental architecture and the variation
apparent in its mortuary practices. While previous bioarcheological studies have addressed a wide range of questions, dietary practices at Paquimé still
remain largely unexplored. Stable isotope analysis of bone collagen is one technique that can directly reconstruct diets at Paquimé and identify differences
between individuals, time periods, and sites.
Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope values were obtained from the bone collagen of 60 Medio period individuals from Paquimé and 14 Viejo Period (A.D.
900–1200) individuals from the nearby site of Convento. Isotopic data from the two are largely similar, indicating that both relied on C4 plants and fauna.
However, some Medio period individuals have higher isotope ratios for both carbon and nitrogen. This suggests status differences, and these individuals
are further considered with respect to other archaeological evidence. Comparisons to other contemporary sites within Chihuahua and to the American
southwest place these results within a larger regional context. They show that Paquimé, while distinct in many ways, also conformed to many of the
general dietary patterns typical of the time.
McCormick, David [212] see Meissner, Nathan
McCoy, Mark (Southern Methodist University)
[174]             Geospatial Big Data in Archaeology: Prospects, Problems, and How it Will Shape the Future of Archaeology
Initial worries about the adverse effect the adoption of GIS would have on archaeology in terms of environmental determinism have proved to be
unwarranted. Today, as spatial technology has evolved and become integrated into the discipline, we must rise to a new set of challenges posed by the
sheer size and complexity of data we use and produce. Field survey and excavations regularly yield far more pieces of spatial information than ever before.
At the same time, the amount of available satellite imagery, airborne lidar, and other remote sensing and environmental datasets increase in size and
complexity. I discuss how we deal with geospatial big data—broadly defined as data sets that exceed the capacity of widely available hardware, software,
and/or human resources. While my examples are mainly drawn from archaeological studies within Oceania, the goal of my presentation is to identify how
the questions we ask and the conclusions we accept can be shaped by geospatial big data, regardless of study area.
McCoy, Mark [227] see Codlin, Maria
McCuistion, Ashley (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[36]              Spatial Analysis of the DuPont Powder Mill in Southwestern Pennsylvania
Western Pennsylvania has long been recognized as a center for industrial development in the United States. While the region is best known for coal
mining and steel production, numerous industries have developed and prospered in the area for centuries. The DuPont Powder Mill, located in Forbes
State Forest in southwestern Pennsylvania, is a valuable resource for information on the black powder industry in western Pennsylvania and the individuals
who worked in the mills during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Originally owned by the Laflin and Rand Powder Company, the mill is now
a large complex of ruins within a state park near Fairchance, Pennsylvania. Preliminary results from a survey of this complex provide necessary data for
inventory and spatial analysis of the site.
McCullen, Megan (Alma College)
[232]             Lithics as Evidence of Social Networks and Landscape Knowledge among the Western Wendat, 1670–1701
The Western Wendat were refugees that fled their homeland villages in Ontario in 1649, and resettled in the western Great Lakes. This paper examines
the lithic resources from their village at the Straits of Mackinac, inhabited from 1670–1701. Lithics can be indicative of multiple aspects of the resettlement
process—particularly knowledge of local resources and strength of social networks. Results show that formal tools, excluding gunflints, tend to be made
from cherts from the lower peninsula of Michigan, while informal tools and flakes are more commonly made of locally available beach gravels. Other lithic
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 286
resources (excluding European flints) are minimal. While many of the trade items associated with the fur trade appear to be heading east-west through this
village, it appears that for functional items that are not desired by participants in the fur trade, ties to north-south networks are being maintained. Intrusive
features at the site that allow for stratigraphic distinction further suggest that during later occupation the use of Bayport chert from the Saginaw Bay
dropped, and emphasis was placed on Norwood chert from the Lake Michigan shore. This may be related to shifts in social networks and community
identity over the 30-year occupation of the village.
McCurdy, Leah [40] see Williams, Justin
McCurdy, Leah (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[119]              Maya Monumental Energetics
Inspired by the important development of architectural energetics methodologies in Maya studies, I explore current research concerning monumental
construction practices and labor at the ancient Maya site of Xunantunich, Belize. I discuss the foundational energetics principles applied to the major
acropolis of Xunantunich, known as the Castillo, and highlight how virtual reconstruction plays a role in developing such energetics studies. Most
importantly, I discuss how the scale of monumentality at the Castillo affects architectural energetics outputs and how construction process modeling yields
nuance to the energetics of monumentality.
[119]              Chair
McCutcheon, Patrick [148] see Brown, James
McDavid, Carol (University of Houston)
[5]                Discussant
McDonough, Katelyn and Dennis Jenkins (Museum of Natural and Cultural History, University)
[113]              New Excavations at an Old Site: Reevaluation of Chronology and Subsistence at the Connley Caves (35LK50), Lake County, Oregon
The Connley Caves are composed of eight rockshelters eroded into a south-facing ridge of welded tuff, rhyolite, and fine-grained basalt in the Fort Rock
Basin of central Oregon. The caves contain deeply buried and well-stratified sediments dating to the late Pleistocene-early Holocene. Excavations directed
by Stephen Bedwell in the late 1960s recovered many lithic artifacts and intriguing radiocarbon dates of 10,600±190 14C yr B.P. and 11,200±200 14C yr
B.P. Bedwell’s interpretations of the Connley Caves data were central to his proposed concept of the ‘Western Pluvial Lakes Tradition,’ and sparked much
debate concerning the importance of wetland resources to early Holocene occupants of the Great Basin. However, his conclusions were questioned due to
a lack of precise provenience data, and imprecise methods of analysis. The University of Oregon (UO) field school has since revisited the caves for four
field seasons, and will return to the site again in 2016. Recent excavations of Cave 4 uncovered a dense unifacial and expedient tool lithic assemblage, two
bone needles, and projectile points of the Western Stemmed Tradition. A summary of observed stratigraphy, recovered artifacts, protein analysis, and
radiocarbon dates from the 2014 and 2015 UO excavations are presented in this poster.
McElhoes, Jennifer (California State University Long Beach) and Carl Lipo (SUNY Binghamton)
[110]              Technological and Functional Characteristics of Ceramics and Their Distribution along the Southern California Coast
Prehistoric ceramics found across southern California have a relatively discrete spatial distribution. While locally manufactured ceramics are common to
the south and southeast of the Los Angeles River, prehistoric sherds are rare in deposits located to the northwest. This marked distribution is potentially
explained by regional differences in surface ages and post-depositional processes. Alternatively, populations to the north may have had access to
resources necessary for pottery alternatives, may have differed in their settlement patterns, mobility, and/or subsistence practices. Finally, it is possible that
ceramics are concomitant with distinct population histories and that the south is occupied by populations that are derived from the California Desert. In this
poster, I evaluate measurements of technological and functional variability of ceramic assemblages from deposits across southern California to determine
the degree of variation that exists in the use and production methods of vessel ceramics. After ruling out differences in surface age and deposition, if
aspects of the environment are correlated with space, it is likely that vessel ceramics are tied to an ecological or economic feature of the environment.
Alternatively, random variability across space potentially supports the hypothesis that population histories are largely driving the presence of pottery.
McElroy, Kate (Western Kentucky University), Darlene Applegate (Western Kentucky University) and Brianna Brown (Western Kentucky
University)
[286]              Bioarchaeological Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains from Site 15Wa916, Warren County, Kentucky
Site 15Wa916 is a prehistoric burial ground in northern Bowling Green is located immediately south of the pumping station on Barren River along Highway
957 opposite Beech Bend Park. Dr. Jack Schock of Western Kentucky University excavated several prehistoric grave features at the site in May 1973. One
uncalibrated radiocarbon date of 910 B.C. indicates the site dates to the early part of the Early Woodland Period. Schock’s excavation yielded, among
other artifacts, hundreds of human bones and bone fragments. Analysis of the commingled human remains from two of the burials indicates the presence
of at least five individuals, including two adult males and one infant of unknown sex. One adult male was affected by severe osteoarthritis, and the infant
exhibited a strong periosteal reaction. Large muscle attachments and bone robusticity indicate that the adult male engaged in strenuous physical activity.
McEvoy, Chris [199] see Matheson, Carney
McEwan, Colin (Dumbarton Oaks)
[172]              The Ties that Bind—Color, Structure and Meaning on Miniature Tupu Cords
Andean tupus (cloak pins) recovered from archaeological contexts often have a single perforation in the middle of the head. This suggests that they were
connected by a woven cord and worn in pairs, an observation that is corroborated by ethno-historic accounts as well as contemporary ethnography. There
are also some surviving examples of miniature tupus connected by miniature woven cords from capac hucha burials. This presentation describes and
analyses one such example from the British Museum collections which incorporates 13 paired tocapu designs.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                287
McFadden, Leslie [65] see Huckell, Bruce
McFadden, Paulette
[164]            Home Is Where the Past Is: The Role of Environmental and Social Factors in Precolumbian Settlement on the Northern Gulf Coast of
                 Florida
Precolumbian settlement practices in coastal settings were influenced by both environmental and sociocultural factors, but determining the role of each is
often hindered by a lack of paleoenvironmental data that is applicable to particular coastal areas. In Horseshoe Cove, on the northern Gulf coast of Florida,
settlement practices varied between the Deptford/Swift Creek periods and the Weeden Island Period, but were these practices driven by environmental
change or were they linked to social forces? A paleoenvironmental reconstruction specific to Horseshoe Cove made it possible to isolate environmental
factors thus providing a better understanding of the sociocultural aspects of shifting settlement practices. When shoreline transgression forced relocation
after about 500 B.C., Deptford/Swift Creek residents targeted mainland areas bordering marshes and adjacent to tidal creeks. As new areas were settled,
seaward sites were abandoned. After the seventh century A.D., these abandoned sites were re-occupied by Weeden Island people, even though they
were isolated from the mainland, likely lacked a source of fresh water, and were more vulnerable to the higher energy open marine environment. The lack
of single-component Weeden Island occupations in other similar environmental settings in the cove suggests that these sites may have been targeted
because of their previous occupations.
McGill, Dru [137] see Peterson, Staffan
McGillivray, Tegan [262] see Carter, Alison
McGovern, Thomas
[60]             Historical Ecology in the Cold and Wet: Carole Crumley’s North Atlantic Legacy
In 1990, Carole Crumley organized a School of American Research (SAR) seminar that brought together a group of researchers from different areas with
interests in a wide range of periods and topics in world archaeology and human ecology. This disparate group was united by Carole’s vision of a fresh
approach to the interactions of environment and society through time—something beyond the increasingly stale processual/ post-processual debates of
that period. Her vision of a dynamic interaction of place, people, history, climate, and dialectical inter-relation of nature and culture owed much to her own
exposure to the Annales school and its notion of long term interactions of variables operating at different temporal and spatial scales, of the cross cutting
conjunctures that could create transformative change, and of the importance of a sustained regional research focus. The 1990 SAR seminar generated the
hugely influential 1994 edited volume and likewise altered the professional trajectories of many of the participants. This presentation provides an overview
of the impact of Carole’s longitudinal research strategy in two decades of North Atlantic research.
[1]              Discussant
McGovern, Thomas [261] see Strawhacker, Colleen
McGrath, James (University of Iowa)
[181]            Ochre in the Desert: Preliminary Sourcing and Colorimetric Results from Two Stone Age Sites in the Central Namib Desert
Ochre becomes ubiquitous across southern African archaeological sites beginning in the Middle Stone Age and continuing throughout the Later Stone Age.
For the last decade, ochre research has focused upon the utilization of ochre, cognitive implications of its use, and of the ochre assemblages themselves.
Recently, a growing number of ochre studies have attempted to source ochre through a variety of analytic techniques. This study attempts to differentiate
ochre raw material sources with a novel method utilizing portable x-ray fluorescence on ochre streak samples produced from analyses of two Middle and
Later Stone Age archaeological sites in the central Namib Desert: Erb Tanks and Mirabib Hill Shelter. This study also examines possible relationships
between ochre raw material and streak color using quantitative color values.
[13]             Chair
McGrath, Krista (BioArCh), Keri Rowsell (BioArch, University of York), Christian Gates St-Pierre (Université de Montréal) and Matthew Collins
(BioArCh, University of York)
[84]             The Identification of Archaeological Bone through Non-Destructive ZooMS: The Example of Iroquoian Bone Projectile Points
ZooMS (Zooarchaeology by Mass Spectrometry) is a technique for the identification of archaeological bone. In this study, we apply a refined ZooMS
method to worked bone points. The traditional ZooMS technique requires destructive analysis of a specimen, which is obviously problematic when dealing
with intact rare artefacts. The bone points are part of large assemblages of bone tools and manufacturing debris recovered from two precontact Iroquoian
village sites located in southern Quebec, Canada. White-tailed deer was the most important mammalian species identified in the faunal assemblages. This
information combined with the approximate size of the original bone suggested the points were likely deer, however, preliminary ZooMS analyses using
this new technique revealed the unexpected species identification of bear. The results were subsequently confirmed using traditional ZooMS and DNA
analyses. Further testing of additional artefacts from the site using the modified ZooMS method has resulted in several additional species identifications.
These surprising results would never have come to light through traditional zooarchaeological methods, highlighting the importance of advancing
biomolecular research in this field.
McGrath, James [121] see Enloe, James
McGrew, Dan [78] see Laluk, Nicholas
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              288
McGuire, Randall (Binghamton University)
[54]              Can Archaeology Slow Down Fast Capitalism?
The great intellectual myth of the end of the twentieth century was that the twenty-first century dawned in a world of "posts"; post industrial, post colonial,
and most importantly, post capitalist. The sociologist Ben Agger has argued that we do not live in a post capitalist world but rather in a world of hyped up
Capitalism or Fast Capitalism. More recently, the economist Thomas Piketty has redirected economic research back to the study of wealth and Capital. His
work sustains Karl Marx's fundamental observation that the processes of Capitalism tend to increase inequalities in wealth. In this paper, I build on my
earlier arguments for a praxis of archaeology to challenge the status-quot and to slow down down Fast Capitalism. This reflection is pessimistic of grand
schemes to change the world but suggests that we can impede just a little the rush of Fast Capitalism. We can do this both in the practice of archaeology
and in the larger world. The contradictions of Fast Capitalism shape the practice of archaeology both in CRM and in the academy. We can also use
archaeology to challenge the ideological lies that support, naturalize, and justify the growing inequalities in wealth.
McKee, Brian (University of Arizona)
[32]              The Forgotten Area: The Archaeology of Morazán, El Salvador
The archaeology of the department of Morazán, in northeastern El Salvador, is poorly known. Several sites there were included in national site lists
compiled in the 1920s and 1940s, and a small survey was conducted in the 1950s, but only one site, the Gruta del Espiritu Santo, has been thoroughly
documented. Multiple reasons explain the dearth of archaeological research. Much of the worst fighting during the 1980s and 1990s civil war occurred in
Morazán, which is also one of the poorest and most remote areas of El Salvador. The precolumbian Lenca and Ulua sites there tend to be smaller and less
spectacular than many sites elsewhere in El Salvador. In 2015, Peace Corps began a project to document archaeological sites in Morazán and to survey a
portion of the department to assist a larger tourism development project. We documented precolumbian sites including obsidian scatters and Lenca and
Ulua settlements and hilltop fortresses. XRF sourcing of obsidian recovered from various settings suggests connections to Guatemala and Honduras.
Historic and colonial sites include settlements, churches, and sites related to indigo and coffee, important colonial industries. Other sites consist of civil war
battle locations.
McKee, Arlo [168] see Chavez, Christina
McKeown, Ashley H. [288] see Green, Kirsten
McKillop, Heather (Louisiana State University)
[238]             Paynes Creek Salt Works: Ten Field Seasons of Underwater Maya Survey, Mapping, and Excavations
The unexpected discovery of wooden buildings preserved in the mangrove peat sediment below the sea floor in Paynes Creek National Park, southern
Belize, provided an opportunity to re-evaluate the nature of salt production in the ancient Maya economy and the nature of ancient Maya wooden
architecture. Innovative techniques based on shallow underwater survey elsewhere were used to systematically search in a salt-water lagoon system for
wooden structures and associated briquetage—the pottery used to evaporate brine over fires to make salt. The first phase of field research included survey
and total station mapping of over 4,000 posts and associated artifacts by a team of LSU grad and undergrad students and the author. The second phase of
field research brought in specialists for mangrove sediment coring and palynology, sonar using an automated research vessel specially-designed for
shallow water, and a drone for low-level photography. This phase also included transect excavations at 10 underwater salt works to investigate production
and other activities by LSU grad and undergrad students and the author. A pilot study in 2015 included diving deeper sites that also included shell
middens, but had been inaccessible to the field teams using Research Flotation Devices (RFDs).
[158]             Moderator
[158]             Discussant
McKillop, Heather [238] see Feathers, Valerie
McLay, Eric (University of Victoria)
[132]             The Monumentality of Clam Gardens in the Southern Gulf Islands, British Columbia
Clam gardens represent monumental coastal landscapes constructed by northwest coast hunter-gather-fisher peoples over the past 1,000 years. The slow,
laborious movement of boulders and cobbles to build up rock-walled intertidal terraces not only created new productive shellfish habitat for greater food
security, but transformed social and political relations over peoples’ rights to lands, foreshore, and access to shellfish at a regional scale. As large-scale
community works, clam gardens must be viewed as contested monuments that were actively negotiated in their construction, use, and maintenance over
time. More broadly, clam gardens must be viewed as monuments where new forms of domestic relations were created by peoples, shellfish, and the
animated sea. This paper will explore aspects of monumentality of clam gardens in the Southern Gulf Islands, British Columbia, where regional
archaeological survey have discovered these megalithic works stretch for kilometres along the coast.
McManamon, Francis (Center for Digital Antiquity) and Jodi Flores (Center for Digital Antiquity)
[10]              Heritage in the Digital Age: Guidelines for Preserving and Sharing Heritage with Digital Techniques.
Individuals, organizations, and public agencies responsible for cultural heritage face challenges and opportunities as stewards of this important information.
Challenges include: heritage loss due to poor access and preservation; lack of perceived value; hesitancy to share information resulting in absence of
public interest; and loss of heritage information through destruction or neglect. Digital techniques can provide access to information (with appropriated
controls) and long-term preservation. Current legal and policy issues related to digital technology and cultural heritage are summarized. Our work with
digital archaeological data is used to consider how to preserve more general cultural heritage data and information.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  289
The stewardship of archaeological monuments and sites began even before the NPS was created. In the U.S., some of these early efforts occurred at
sites that later would become part of the National Park system. The management of archaeological resources has become more scientific and systematic
since its earliest days, but we still learn from past efforts and codify what works into contemporary practice. Current efforts focus on the maintenance and
protection of archaeological resources; improving the care for physical collections, systematic building of resource inventory and related data; and ensuring
the appropriate access to and long-term preservation of archaeological data and information. NPS archaeologists, along with colleagues in a variety of
other organizations, professions, and specialties need to work cooperatively to meet the current and future challenges.
[202]             Discussant
[261]             Chair
McNeil, Cameron [121] see Verlee, Jotka
McNeil, Cameron (Lehman College, CUNY)
[212]             Rio Amarillo: A Community on the Edge of the Kingdom
Situated along the frontier between Maya and non-Maya lands, Rio Amarillo reflects mixed allegiances in its architecture and artifacts, although its Late
Classic ceremonial core is most strongly associated with Copan. While politically autonomous during the Early Classic, an inscription on an altar at the site
demonstrates that this precolumbian town came under Copan’s power during the time of Ruler 12. The construction of an elaborately sculpted building
during the reign of Ruler 16 suggests that this control continued through to the end of the Late Classic. During this period, the ceremonial core of the site
and its residential structures broadcasts affiliations with Copan, including the veneration of K’inich Yax K’uk’ Mo’, Copan’s “founder.” Like Copan, Rio
Amarillo’s population enjoyed imported goods from eastern Honduras, but unlike Copan, some residential structures outside of the center were constructed
in styles that copied those of the interior of Honduras. For the large polity downriver from the site, the fertile alluvial plains of Rio Amarillo may have helped
solve food shortages in the kingdom’s center, but this area likely held another valued resource, the tropical rainforest and its products that stretched along
the hillsides to the north of the town.
[212]             Chair
McQueen, Felipe [105] see Jennings, Justin
McReynolds Shebalin, Theresa (Durham Academy and Exploring Joara Foundation)
[37]              Lessons from the Classroom: A Teacher’s Suggestions for Improving K-12 Archaeology Outreach
Archaeologists committed to public outreach are typically motivated by the hope that helping individuals appreciate how archaeology contributes to
understanding the past will in turn encourage citizen stewardship of the archaeological record. Archaeologists working with children in particular have the
best chance of making an impact in this area since their audiences can in turn act upon and help spread messages of site preservation and other matters
of archaeological ethics for many years to come. Unfortunately, many K-12 outreach efforts fall short of satisfactorily reaching this overarching objective,
usually because archaeologists do not understand how to design resources and activities that effectively reconcile their own objectives with the very
different goals of K-12 teachers and their students. This poster and accompanying handouts summarize lessons learned by an archaeologist-turned-
classroom-teacher and offer practical suggestions for professional archaeologists involved in K-12 public outreach. Topics covered include finding
appropriate audiences in and outside of the classroom, designing curricula and activities that will appeal to those audiences, and evaluating the
effectiveness of educational resources and programs with respect to meeting the objectives of all participants.
McTavish, Rachel (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee), Lucienne Van de Pas (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee) and Amy Klemmer
(University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee)
[225]             Economics, Culture, and Ecology: A Comparative Study of Oneota Localities in Wisconsin
The manifestation of different cultural history trajectories of Late Prehistoric Oneota groups from eastern and western Wisconsin can be seen in multiple
material classes, including faunal remains. Despite the generally similar use of shell as a ceramic tempering agent and generic vessel shapes, Wisconsin
Oneota groups vary among localities in settlement and subsistence practices. The relationship among Oneota groups and wild rice, maize, aquatic, and
upland game, as well as the choice of materials for food procurement technology, is compared. In relation to Classeen's (1968) and Borgstrom's (1962)
models for agriculturalist communities’ risk-buffering behaviors using seasonal shellfishing, this research expands beyond the economics of potential risk
management to include the socio-cultural aspect of differing degrees of Middle Mississippian influence. This paper presents an examination into the
treatment of the same resources by groups occupying the Lake Koshkonong locality in southeastern Wisconsin and those in the La Crosse locality in
western Wisconsin.
Mead, Jim [222] see Steadman, David
Means, Bernard (Virtual Curation Laboratory)
[35]              Visualizing a Wired World’s Past: Digital and Tactile Public Archaeology in the Virtual Curation Laboratory
The Virtual Curation Laboratory at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) uses 3D scanning technologies to capture archaeological discoveries from all
over the world. Used effectively, these 3D digital artifact models can help cultural heritage institutions share their amazing discoveries to a global audience
and not simply to their fixed geographic locations. How to share these 3D digital artifact models to an audience wider than undergraduate students and
professional archaeologists has proven more difficult than originally expected. Challenges encountered have included concerns over cultural patrimony,
intellectual property rights, cross-platform technological compatibility, and accessibility issues for disabled persons. Here, I discuss different techniques we
and our partners have implemented to make these 3D digital models more broadly accessible in virtual and tangible realms, ranging from passive
animations posted on the internet, to displays of accurately 3D printed and painted artifact replicas at public archaeology events and in museum
exhibitions.
[202]             Discussant
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             290
Me-Bar, Yoav [294] see Brady, James
Medellín Martínez, Christian (UASLP) and Verónica Pérez Rodríguez (University at Albany)
[169]             La producción lítica y su papel en la economía de Cerro Jazmín
Mediante el análisis morfológico de los materiales líticos de talla obtenidos durante las excavaciones 2013–2015 del Proyecto Arqueológico Cerro Jazmín,
se reconocerán las materias primas, formas y etapas de producción que se emplearon en diferentes zonas de este centro urbano mixteco, interpretadas
como un área habitacional, áreas públicas y área de producción de figurillas, con el fin de profundizar en la producción lítica y en la economía del sitio.
En las diferentes áreas de excavación se observaron dos materias primas principales para talla: sílex y obsidiana. En el caso de la obsidiana se han
encontrado navajillas prismáticas de etapa de producción avanzada y pocos desechos de producción, lo que sugiere una producción importada a Cerro
Jazmín. En cuanto al sílex, pudo obtenerse de un sitio cercano y los artefactos encontrados permiten plantear una producción local de artefactos enfocada
en herramientas expedientes sobre herramientas formales. Así mismo, se observó una variación en la cantidad de artefactos encontrados en las áreas,
que puede deberse a su función.
Medina, Paulo (Boston University), Justin Holcomb (Boston University) and Kristian Boschetto (Boston University)
[237]             Fuzzy Numbers or Publishable Data? An Intra-Instrument Test of pXRF Calibration Techniques on Obsidian from Highland Mexico
Archaeological applications of portable X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry (pXRF) have increased over the last decade due to the instruments' low cost,
ease of operation, and decreased analysis time. Obsidian provenance studies utilizing pXRF are now a common approach to answering questions
regarding resource access and/or trade relationships in many regions and sub-disciplines of archaeology. Despite this increased popularity, the validity and
accuracy of this device and the results derived from these analyses are still commonly met with skepticism. We argue that this is due to a
misunderstanding of the calibration techniques needed to properly utilize pXRF devices. Here, we discuss a study comparing the results of pXRF analysis
of an archaeological obsidian assemblage from highland Mexico using "off the shelf" calibration to those derived from an "altered calibration" using USGS
standards. These data were further compared to previously obtained LA-ICP-MS and desktop XRF data obtained from the same assemblage. This study
seeks to answer the following questions: (1) How reliable are factory calibration techniques? (2) Is it possible to provenance obsidian from highland Mexico
using "off the shelf" calibration? and (3) Given these data, what are the larger implications and lessons for archaeologists interested in using pXRF for
provenance studies?
Medina-González, Isabel (ENCRyM-INAH), Manuel E. Espinosa-Pesqueira (Laboratorio de Microscopía Electrónica - Instituto) and Gregory
Pereira (ARS-Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique –)
[179]             Mesoamerican Silver Bells: New Data on Proto-Tarascan Archeometallurgy
Silver is fairly uncommon in Mesoamerican archaeology, if compared with copper and gold, both of them materials that have been widely studied
particularly in relation to the development of Western Mexican precolumbian cultures. Henceforth, material and technological aspects regarded
Mesoamerican silver metal-work are still widely unknown. This paper presents the initial results on a interdisciplinary research based on state of the art
analytical techniques (XRD, SEM-EDX-XRF) on a couple of bells made of silver alloy which were recently discovered in Malpaís Prieto (Zacapu,
Michoacan, Mexico), an archaeological site ascribed to Proto-Tarascan Uacusecha peoples. The investigation discusses previous information about
precolumbian silver artefacts in order to set the newly obtained data up within the framework of the metallurgic regional model of western Mesoamerica.
Meehan, Pascale (University of Colorado, Boulder)
[20]              Preliminary Results of the Zacatepec Archaeological Project
The archaeological site of Zacatepec, Oaxaca, is located in the coastal mountains of the state of Oaxaca, Mexico, in between the modern towns of Putla
de Guerrero and Pinotepa Nacional. First identified in 2014, a two month field season was undertaken in June and July of 2015 to uncover a larger portion
on the site and identify the time period with which the site is affiliated. This presentation summarizes the results of the summer 2015 field season which
incorporated both a survey and an excavation component. These results will then be situated within the broader context of Oaxacan archaeology and
avenues for future research will be discussed.
Meeker, Halston
[123]             Measuring Differences in Occupation Length at Short Term Habitation Sites along the Base of the Colorado Front Range
Two stone circle sites, T-W-Diamond (5LR200) and Killdeer Canyon (5LR289), offer insight into occupation length and structure use intensity. The two are
located in northern Colorado, in the hogback zone along the Front Range of the Southern Rocky Mountains. Elizabeth Ann Morris and the Colorado State
University field school excavated the sites in 1971 and 1982. This paper summarizes my thesis research, examining how temporary stone circle habitation
sites actually are. Stone circle sites can indicate differences in seasonal mobility strategies based on how intensive and how long each structure is
occupied. This analysis examines use intensity and occupation length through ratios of local and non-local chipped stone, faunal procurement and
processing strategies, and petrographic and radiocarbon analyses. Results from these analyses are used as a proxy to situate T-W-Diamond and Killdeer
Canyon on an occupation length continuum. The findings are then compared to other regional residential sites in similar ecological settings.
Meer, Kelsey (Mississippi State University), J. Ryan Young (Mississippi State University), D. Shane Miller (Mississippi State University) and
Albert C. Goodyear (University of South Carolina)
[8]               2015 Allendale Chert Quarry Survey: Methods and Preliminary Results
 In 1984, Goodyear and Charles conducted a survey of an area adjacent to the Savannah River encompassing the Allendale Chert quarries, which
includes the multi-component Topper Site (38AL23) in Allendale County, South Carolina. During the summer of 2015, Mississippi State University revisited
a 102-acre area included in this survey. The survey revealed a near continuous scatter of lithic debitage throughout the project area, at varying depths
across different geomorphological settings. Preliminary results of this survey suggest that stratified archaeological deposits that date from late Pleistocene
to historic in age are likely present in many areas surrounding the Allendale Chert outcrops.
Mehta, Jayur [60] see Rodning, Christopher
Mehta, Jayur (Tulane University) and Elizabeth Chamberlain (Tulane University)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                291
[277]             Monumentality and Cultural Resilience in Coastal Louisiana
Resilience is the ability of complex systems to adapt to change in the wake of disturbance. Here, we describe the relationship of natural deltaic land
evolution and anthropogenic monument construction using a case study of Ellesly Mound, an earthen monument located in the Lafourche subdelta of the
Mississippi Delta. Borehole and LIDAR data show that Ellesly mound is situated above naturally deposited crevasse sediments underlain by organic-rich
facies indicating a relatively low-lying vegetated environment, and then a succession of emergent delta facies. This suggests that native communities
waited until land was suitably stabilized and elevated before constructing major earthen monuments.
Meiggs, David [134] see Brad, Chase
Meira, Sérgio (Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi (MPEG))
[23]              Cariban Historical Linguistics: The State of the Art
The Cariban language family, with between 25 and 40 languages (depending on one's criteria for distinguishing languages from dialects, and on the quality
of older sources for extinct languages), is one of the most important language families in South America, together with Tupian, Arawak, and Macro-Ge.
Although much descriptive work remains to be done, there are now sufficiently many good descriptions of Cariban languages to warrant good lexical
comparative work, going well beyond Girard's 1971 Proto-Carib phonology. In this presentation, the current results of ongoing research on the history of
the Cariban lexicon and its consequences for our understanding of the external history of Cariban peoples will be discussed in detail, with special attention
to the reconstructibility of specific lexical items relating to Cariban culture and to current theories on the location of the Cariban homeland and possible
migration routes, given the current geographic distribution of Cariban peoples.
Meire da Silva, Sergia [167] see Silva, Rosicler
Meissner, Nathan [179] see Marino, Marc
Meissner, Nathan (Southern Illinois University Carbondale), David McCormick (Yale University) and Marc Marino (University of Arkansas)
[212]             Socioeconomics of Craft Production in the Copán Hinterland: The Chert Industry of Río Amarillo, Honduras
This study presents new data from the site of Río Amarillo, Honduras, focusing on the social aspects of craft production in the political sphere of Copán,
Honduras (A.D. 400–900). Between 2011 and 2014, excavations led by the Proyecto Arqueológico Río Amarillo Copán (PARAC) have recovered large
quantities of microcrystalline silicate artifacts, including nodules, debitage, and finished tools. Such data are important as they shed light onto the
procurement strategies, methods of local production, and the economic place of Río Amarillo during a period of proposed Copán expansion. Data suggest
that residents partially relied on a local procurement network that included settlements near the confluence of the nearby Río Piedras Negras and Río
Blanco. In addition, two unknown microcrystalline silicate sources were exploited late in the site’s history, possibly from more distant areas in the Copán
pocket. A full sequence of reduction activity was documented at the site—a trend that appears to increase during later occupations including the transition
from the Terminal Classic to Early Postclassic periods (A.D. 800–1200). Thus, this study adds to a growing body of intra-regional studies of the Copán
hinterlands by highlighting the interrelationships among polities at a time of political integration.
[291]             Chair
Mejia, Martha [14] see Carvajal Contreras, Diana
Mejia Cano, Martha (Mejia Cano)
[14]              El Consumo de Plantas en el Caribe Colombiano durante el Formativo Temprano (7000–3000 A.P.): Una Evaluación Paleoetnobotánica de
                  la Subsistencia a partir de Almidones
En el norte de Colombia, el Formativo Temprano se ha considerado un período transcendental para entender el paso de una economía de caza y
recolección a la experimentación con plantas. Nuevos aportes efectuados en los sitios arqueológicos de Puerto Hormiga, Monsú y San Jacinto 1, ubicados
en el departamento de Bolívar ha permitido la recuperación e identificación de gránulos de almidón de varias plantas (entre ellas la yuca, el maíz y el
ñame) obtenidos del interior de varios fragmentos líticos, de concha y en una muestra de cálculos dentales. Estos resultados permiten proponer que no
solo los grupos humanos que habitaron los sitios procesaron y consumieron los cultivos de raíces como tradicionalmente se había sugerido en las
investigaciones, sino que a ello se le sumaba tubérculos, semillas y rizomas como complemento a la ingesta de animales terrestres. La aproximación de
estos tres sitios se une al pequeño pero creciente número de regiones en el trópico y del interior de Colombia, lo que suscita un nuevo interés sobre la
importancia relativa de diversidad y contribución a la dieta de estos recursos como de las rutas de domesticación y propagación de los cultivos en
Suramérica.
Mejia Ramon, Andres, Luis Barba (Instituto de Investigaciones Antropológicas, UNAM), Deborah Nichols (Dartmouth College) and Sergio Gomez
(Zona Arqueológica de Teotihuacan, INAH)
[129]             Watering Tlaloc's Gardens: Ancient Irrigation in the Teotihuacan Valley
As showcased by the "Feeding Teotihuacan" symposium at the 79th Annual Meetings of the Society, there has been a surge of interest in understanding
Teotihuacano agriculture or food production. Nevertheless, there is still the glaring question of how the ancient inhabitants dealt with water collection and
irrigation in the semi-arid environment of the northeastern Basin of Mexico. Although canal systems have been previously identified and excavated in
various sites throughout the Teotihuacan Valley, the scale of these systems has eluded study. Using remote sensing and geospatial analysis, we have
identified previously unknown canal systems throughout the valley, and have intensively studied one such system in the Ejido de San Sebastian through
geophysical prospection. As a result, it is now possible to better understand the scale of such systems and hydraulic management techniques employed by
the inhabitants of the valley through the centuries-old history of Teotihuacan. This paper will attempt to reconstruct the irrigation system of ancient
Teotihuacan using the current sources of information available, and show how through time, the strategies employed by the inhabitants changed.
Melcher, Jennifer
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              292
[6]              25 Years of Digital Archaeology—Updating the Past to Plan for the Future
Beginning in the late 1980s, the University of West Florida Archaeology Institute began making extensive use of digital technology to aid in archaeological
research. The past 25 years of research have left a plethora of data on a variety of digital media. Current work on developing a new interpretive plan for
downtown Pensacola, Florida made it necessary to update and combine as much of this data as possible. Updating this information required the
use of a variety of hardware and software before combining data into a single GIS product and associated artifact database. This combination of older
data allows for easier access by researchers to look for broad patterns and make new interpretations of the overall downtown area.
Melesse, Addisalem [269] see Duff, Andrew
Melgar, Emiliano [44] see Bernard, Henri
Melgar, Emiliano (Museo del Templo Mayor-INAH) and Emiliano Gallaga (EAHNM)
[179]            The Blue Stones from Chiapa De Corzo: Mineralogical Identification and Manufacture
Since the beginning of Mesoamerican societies, the elites employed prestige goods to display their power and status. At Chiapa de Corzo (Chiapas,
México), a Formative Period site that lasted until the late Classic, the archaeologist recovered a group of ornaments crafted on bluish stones that contrasts
with the common greenstone objects found at the tombs. In this paper, we present the mineralogical identification and technological analysis of them in
order to discuss their local or foreign origin. As results, we identified them as amazonite, a blue-green variety of microcline feldspar, which sourcing areas
are located in Chihuahua and Colorado. This identification only incremented the nonlocal items list that the Chiapa de Corzo elites obtain through long
exchange relationships. Based on the experimental archaeology and the SEM analysis of the manufacturing traces, we detected the standardization of
tools and techniques. Finally, we compared these traces with other lapidary items of the site, in order to discuss their place of production.
Melgarejo Pérez, Manuel [264] see Pool, Christopher
Mena, Mario [93] see Poister, Nicholas
Ménard, Clément (University of Florida), François Bon (Université Toulouse Jean Jaurès) and Lamya Khalidi (CEPAM - CNRS, Université Nice
Sophia Antipolis)
[22]             Lithic Traditions in the Horn of Africa from MIS 3 Onwards: Views from the Main Ethiopian Rift
The Horn of Africa plays an important role in debates on emergence and dispersal of Anatomically Modern Humans (AMH) and their associated
technologies (Middle Stone Age). In comparison, the period that follows (Late Stone Age) has been the subject of much less investigation. We argue that
evidence regarding prehistoric groups that remained or came into the region during the latest part of the Pleistocene is critical for understanding the
conditions of AMH’s unprecedented expansion and diverse adaptive solutions. We present the results of archaeological investigations conducted in the
Ziway-Shala basin, a well-developed lacustrine sequence from the central part of the Main Ethiopian Rift, with an emphasis on lithic technology. Based on
this, we review the available archaeological data from Marine Isotope Stage (MIS) 3 up to the onset of the Holocene at a regional scale and discuss the
links between technological traditions. We finally stress the lack of evidence for human occupation during MIS 2 and question the role of several
environmental constraints as well as possible research bias.
Mendelsohn, Rebecca (University at Albany, SUNY)
[20]             Cultural Processes without Chronology: The Formative to Classic Period Transition (150 BC- AD 200) at the Early Urban Center of Izapa,
                 Chiapas, Mexico
In southern Mesoamerica the transition from the Formative to Classic Period (150 B.C.–A.D. 200) was a time of population decline, cessation of
monumental construction, and abandonment of many sites. At the city of Izapa, located in the Soconusco region of Mexico, evidence for a dramatic shift
has been presented for the Hato phase (ca. 150 B.C.–A.D. 50). The New World Archaeological Foundation archaeologists, working in the 1960s, noted
that an urn burial custom and use of foreign pottery styles arrived at Izapa just as the tradition of low relief monuments came to a close. They cited this
data as evidence for a new ethnic or cultural association or domination at the site. This paper provides evidence from recent excavations at Izapa, a re-
analysis of early survey collections from the region, and the re-discovery of a nearby center. These data suggest that, while some undeniable changes
occurred at the site, Izapa’s transition during the Hato phase was far less dramatic than originally reported. This study illustrates how an improved
understanding of ceramic chronology impacts our understanding of major cultural shifts in the region. It serves as a cautionary tale for drawing cultural
conclusions before a firm chronology is developed.
Mendez, Cesar [207] see Reyes, Omar
Méndez, César (Universidad de Chile)
[139]            The initial Peopling of Continental Aisén: New Data from Cueva de la Vieja
This paper summarizes recent research conducted at Cueva de la Vieja site (BN15; 45°16’27’’ S; 71°32’24’’ W, 718 masl) in the Ñirehuao B
asin, Aisén, Chile, targeted at characterizing aspects of the initial peopling of Central Western Patagonia. Systematic stratigraphic excavations at this small
cave yielded material evidence for human activities starting at 12,000 calibrated years B.P. and ever since redundant occupations at the same locale. Site
formation processes are described and discussed in frame of available paleoenvironmental reconstructions and the Post Glacial reconfiguration of the
landscape. The archaeological assemblages and features are analyzed and further discussed in order to characterize technological choices, the activities
conducted at the site, and the occupation time-span. These results, analyzed in light of the available radiocarbon dataset, allow characterizing an
intermittent, though recurrent human signal at the locale and the basin. This is further compared to equivalently radiocarbon dated sites in the broader
region of northern Aisén in order to build an image on the intensity and character of space hierarchy for the initial settlement of the region. FONDECYT
grant #1130128.
[139]            Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                    293
Mendoza, Edison [31] see Matsumoto, Yuichi
Mendoza, Rubén (CSU Monterey Bay)
[117]               The Harvest of Souls: Mimesis, Materiality, and Ritual Human Sacrifice in Mesoamerica
The art and science of ritual human sacrifice is a fundamental axiom of Mesoamerican social violence. Accordingly, interpretive constructs for human heart
excision and ritualized dismemberment remain keyed to synchronic ethnohistorical and iconographic frames of reference or practice. Though ritual
dismemberment, decapitation, and cannibalism have been traced to remote antiquity in highland Mesoamerica, the cosmological underpinnings of human
heart excision, and its corollary technologies of terror, have yet to be fully interrogated in terms of naturalistic metaphors and agricultural mimesis. This
paper reviews those cosmological constructs and agricultural metaphors instrumental to the formation and validation of Mesoamerican ritual human
sacrifice. As such, this study explores those agricultural metaphors identified with (a) the planting of tzompantli skull banners, (b) human heart excision,
and (c) blood tribute or autosacrifice. I hereby contend that Mesoamerican agricultural practices constitute the instrumental inspiration for ritual
decapitation, the installation of skull banners, and their identification with the cleft-earth ball courts of creation. This interpretive schema is operationalized
via botanical metaphors identified with maguey castration, and the extraction of the agave heart and its “blood” as a corollary dimension of mimesis that
fueled the ideology of human heart excision at the dawn of the Mesoamerican Classic era.
Menocal, Tatianna (Desert Research Institute)
[114]               Chipped Stone Results from Four Lowland Virgin Branch Puebloan Sites
The Yamashita sites are four Virgin Branch Puebloan sites in southern Nevada dating between the early Pueblo II (A.D. 1000–1050) and the Pueblo III
period (A.D. 1200–1300). This poster summarizes the chipped stone tool and debitage data collected from the sites. The goals of this project were to
examine what the chipped stone tool and debitage site assemblages revealed in regard to lithic technology organization. As sedentary settlements with a
horticultural subsistence, the expectation was that the chipped stone would show increased expedient technology and more diversified tool assemblages.
Yet, results indicated that persistent chipped stone technological design choices were implemented in tool production, which did not conform to expected
patterns of chipped stone manufacture and use. Tool assemblages were overwhelmingly the result of the manufacture and maintenance of biface
technology. Debitage data supported this, showing high proportions of biface maintenance and retouch. As bifaces tend to be the main tool type for mobile
populations, as tools associated with risk-management, time-intensive to produce but made to be dependable, analysis of these assemblages possibly
suggests that social conditioners of tool preference superseded environmental and economic choices involved in tool design regardless of accessible high
quality raw material and sedentism.
Menz, Martin (University of South Florida)
[8]                 Like Blood from a Stone: Teasing Out Social Difference from Lithic Debris at Kolomoki
Early phases of Kolomoki’s occupation have been characterized as relatively egalitarian, with little evidence for status differentiation. However, patterned
variability in lithic raw material use and intensity of production in domestic areas suggests heterogeneity in the community at multiple scales. In light of
Kolomoki’s emphasis on communal ceremony, internal divisions between groups of households highlight the tension between public and private
expressions of status and social solidarity. New radiocarbon dates from the southern margins of the village have allowed us to assess the contemporaneity
of this pattern, and by extension, the chronology of village aggregation.
Menzer, Jeremy [145] see Ernenwein, Eileen
Menzer, Jeremy (Environmental Dynamics PhD Program, University of Arkansas), Katie Simon (Center for Advanced Spatial Technologies,
Universi), Matthew Piscitelli (Integrative Research Center, The Field Museum) and Carl Williford (Department of Anthropology, University of
Arkansas)
[206]               Ground-Penetrating Radar and Topographic Correction Using Ground-Based Photogrammetry at the Late Archaic Ceremonial Site of
                    Caballete (Fortaleza Valley, Peru)
Caballete is a Late Archaic (3000–1800 B.C.) ceremonial site located in the Fortaleza Valley of Peru. In 2015, a focused archaeo-geophysical survey was
conducted as a pilot effort to determine the utility of ground-penetrating radar (GPR) and magnetometry in locating subsurface features at the site. The
Caballete survey included approximately 1.5 ha of targeted GPR and a smaller magnetometry survey across the 400 ha site. The site features six platform
mounds ranging from approximately 5 to 17 m in height. Five of the mounds are arranged in a “U” pattern. An open area of approximately 10 ha is situated
within this “U” and features a centrally located low lying rise of 0.12 ha. Five GPR survey areas were selected instead of one large contiguous area in order
to test multiple architectural features throughout the site. Due to environmental and logistical restrictions an aerial photogrammetric survey was not
possible. Instead, ground-based photogrammetric photos were taken to produce digital elevation models (DEMs). DEMs were then used to topographically
correct the GPR data. This study tests the applicability of non-aerial photogrammetry when drones or kites are inaccessible or fail. In addition, feature
detection with topographically corrected and non-topographically corrected GPR data are compared.
Menzies, Andrew [57] see Vidal Montero, Estefania
Meredith, Steven (Panamerican Consultants, Inc.) and Daniel Turner
[98]                Mossy Bluff, an Early Alabamu Site in Northeast Alabama
The Alabamu people, along with the affiliated Coasati, were an important part of the Creek Confederacy in the late eighteenth century. Excavations at
Mossy Bluff (1Ct610) in northeastern Alabama revealed the first Alabamu site to be identified in the area that they inhabited before their migration and
coalescence with the Creeks. The site is located in a relatively secluded location, near the southeastern margin of what is interpreted to be the tribe’s pre-
migration territory. This paper describes the Mossy Bluff material culture as a first step toward identification of pre-coalescent Alabamu sites and perhaps
their post-migration households within the larger Creek confederacy.
[225]               Chair
Meredith, Steven [225] see Turner, Daniel
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              294
Merrick, Dustin (California State University Northridge) and Matthew Des Lauriers
[245]             The Problem of Geographic Circumscription, Population Aggregation, and Ideal Free Distribution on Isla Cedros, Baja California, Mexico
In the last half-century, studies using human behavioral ecology (HBE) have made significant headway in modeling how humans in the past would have
adapted to the environmental constraints surrounding them. There has been much less progress in terms of examining the socio-political pressures hunter-
gatherers in the past would have felt in their daily lives. Factors driving choices in these models are often based on an underlying assumption of ideal free
distribution; however, one is hard-pressed to find an example where social and political pressures failed to influence peoples’ choices in the past. This
paper aims to employ HBE concepts within a specific historical framework in order to explore how social structure and demographics might have affected
the inhabitants of Isla Cedros during the late Pleistocene as compared to Montero (A.D. 400–600) and Huamalgüeño phase (A.D. ~1150–1732) sites
across the landscape. This diachronic approach uses Cedros as a case study in order to showcase the ways in which socio-political constraints may
outweigh ecological incentives. By incorporating a historically contingent and geographically specific context to models of past human behavior, this paper
seeks to further our ability to understand the dynamic and reciprocal relationships between societies and their natural and physical environments.
Merrick, Dustin [277] see Des Lauriers, Matthew
Merriman, Christopher [65] see Huckell, Bruce
Merwin, Keith (Institute of Maya Studies, Inc.)
[121]             Utilizing LED and Solar Power at a Remote Field Site in the Holmul Region
Providing adequate lighting for subterranean work at a remote site in the Peten of Guatemala usually involves flashlights or gasoline generators and CFL
lights on homemade power cords. Because of the cost of generators and the difficulty and cost of transporting fuel to the field site, most tunnel work uses
head lamps and flashlights. In an effort to be environmentally sensitive and to be more efficient the Holmul Archaeological Project has started using 12 volt
LED light strips powered by a battery that is charged by solar panels or a generator. Battery charging by generator is still more efficient as multiple
batteries can be charged by a single generator during the evening. The LED strips are far more efficient and durable than incandescent or CFL bulbs. This
research covers our selection and design of the LED system and the first field season using them. Additional work was done at both field camps, Holmul
and Cival, to increase the use of solar power for LED lights, to recharge computer and camera batteries, and provide food refrigeration.
Merwin, Daria (NY State Historic Preservation Office)
[157]             Prehistoric Maritime Cultural Landscapes in the New York Bight
The study of prehistoric maritime cultural landscapes (or seascapes) in the broadest sense seeks to explore the relationship between people and the
water. If we are to reconstruct the nature of this relationship over time along the Atlantic coast of North America, however, we must account for
environmental changes, particularly sea level rise and related shifts in ecological communities and habitats on the shore and at sea. This paper examines
the coastal archaeology of the New York Bight (the bend in the Atlantic coast between southern New Jersey and Cape Cod) over the course of the
Holocene, drawing data from terrestrial and now submerged sites to examine topics such as the role of coastal environments in human settlement,
evidence for fishing and seafaring technology, and the origins and consequences of adopting maritime cultural adaptations.
Messal, Sebastian
[34]              Filling the Gap: Continued Large Scale Geomagnetics at Hopewell Mound Group, Ross County, Ohio
This report presents the results of a large-area magnetic gradient survey at Hopewell Mound Group, a unit of Hopewell Culture National Historical Park in
Ross County, Ohio. In 2011, a first survey covered only half of the archaeological monument, but for reconstruction and heritage management of the site a
complete survey was sought. This survey was conducted in April 2015 by the German Archaeological Institute. During the survey, several magnetic
anomalies of potential archaeological interest were detected, including known features from nineteenth century maps and many other new features of
interest which are forming a new and very detailed picture of the ancient Hopewell site.
Messenger, Phyllis (University of Minnesota)
[11]              Archaeologists and the Pedagogy of Heritage: Preparing Scholar-Practitioners for Complex and Changing Heritage Work
Heritage studies and public history are the publicly engaged and community-accountable practices of historical scholarship, whether it is based in archival
research, archaeology, architecture and preservation, landscape studies, or other related areas. Archaeologists share a commitment to public
interpretation, education, and preservation with these other disciplines, and graduate education must reflect this reality. Today’s scholar-practitioners need
to understand the connections and common issues shared by all these perspectives in a heritage field increasingly characterized by interdisciplinary
integration and innovation, a diversity of voices and authorities, and responsibilities shared broadly among agencies and with various publics. This paper
will discuss a cluster of innovations in undergraduate and graduate education offered in a variety of settings for archaeologists and others preparing to
work in heritage fields. A particular focus will be on work toward establishing a Masters in Heritage Studies and Public History at the University of
Minnesota as a collaborative initiative between a Tier I Research University and a State Historical Society. Goals of this graduate program include
providing a solid scholarly/professional background, offering practical training for working with public audiences, and increasing the diversity of scholar-
practitioners entering the heritage field.
Messenger, Jr., Lewis (Hamline University)
[11]              Engaging the “First Person” in the Past—BACAB CAAS Revisited
Descendant, often indigenous, communities, have felt varying degrees of tension between themselves and archaeologists. Historically, this results from an
archaeology that often treated ancient cultural materials as specimens to be scientifically analyzed. While seen as contributing to the greater knowledge,
the sense of the ancient individual, of the person—those often perceived as direct ancestral kin of descendant communities—is lost. In many cases, this
has led toward feelings of distrust and indignation toward archaeologists. Taking advantage of anthropology’s skills and talents toward pursuing cross-
cultural empathy, I have developed a pedagogical approach for undergraduates, both majors in anthropology and non-majors, combining archaeological
research and creative writing. It is a semester-long process involving careful research into the specific details of the minutiae of day-to-day life of a
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                295
particular culture, while forcing students to approach it in a first-person narrative fashion. Students begin to confront archaeological epistemology to
understand their person’s life in the past. That person’s heritage becomes meaningful to today’s student who has learned how to personalize those whose
“small things forgotten” are revealed today archaeologically.
Messer, Andrea (Penn State)
[250]             Discussant
Metzger, Melissa (University of Bradford)
[146]             Polished Flint Discoidal Knives
This Ph.D. research investigates the use of polished flint discoidal knives from the Late Neolithic/Early Bronze Age, which are reportedly unique to the
British Isles. No scientific study has been performed on these artifacts and functional understanding to date is based on contextualized hypotheses from
the literature. The three main hypotheses from the literature are that the discoidal knives are perceived as: 1) unused status symbols; or that they were
used: 2) for butchering; or 3) for the processing of hides. Recent research has shown that these tools did not function well as hide scrapers. Use-wear on
the few archaeological samples studied so far does not support that hypothesis.
Polished stone artifacts can be difficult to analyze due to the uncertainty of how polished surfaces affect microwear. The process of using silicone moulds
and resin casts allows for use-wear on top of the polished surface to be microscopically visible for analysis. The Olympus LEXT OLS-4000 Laser Scanning
Microscope is being used for the microscopic analysis. The use of the LEXT and 3D metrology allows polished stone tools to be viewed and compared in
new ways, which may help to lead to new discoveries about artifact use.
Meyer, Dominique [20] see Vaughan, Andrew
Meyer, Regina (Missouri Army National Gaurd)
[73]              Discussant
Meyer, Sabrina (Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, University of Zurich), Frank Rühli (IEM, University of Zurich) and Christian Auf der Maur
(Institute of Art History, University of Zurich)
[147]             Archaeo-Anthropological Analysis of the Early to Late Middle Age (7–14th Century) Parish Church and Graveyard from Sursee, Switzerland
In 1985/86 the parish church of St. Georg, Sursee, was excavated. The archaeological findings showed that the ecclesiastical beginnings of the church
date back to the early Middle Ages.
In the early seventh century C.E. a wooden church was built near burials dating back to late antiquity. In total, five occupational phases for the cemetery
can be associated with five construction phases (one wooden and four stone phases) of the church. Of the 223 recovered burials, only 119 individuals
were anthropologically analyzed (age, sex, body height) due to poor preservation. All age ranges from perinatal to late adulthood were determined. The
fact that many infants were buried under the roofline of the church is of cultural significance for this time. Within the studied adult sample both sexes are
represent in equal numbers.
Additionally, several cases are of paleopathological interest. A hydrocephalitic skull of a 5-7 year old child, as well as long-bone fractures and a high
percentage of osteoarthritis in the spinal column (all regions affected) were identified.
One of the most important contributions of this study is that it develops our anthropological, paleopathological and cultural understanding of the fascinating
transitional era of early Christianity in Medieval Central Switzerland.
Meyer, Dominique (University of California, San Diego), Jamie Hodgkins (Anthropology- University of Colorado, Boulder), Caley Orr (Cell and
Developmental Biology- University of Colo), Fabio Negrino (DAFIST- University degli Studi di Genova) and Matthias Czechowski (Archaeological
Sciences- University of Tuebingen)
[278]             Using Photogrammetry to Complement and Visualize the Paleolithic Excavation of the Arma Veirana Cave in Italy
Archaeological excavations are increasingly using digital surveying techniques for better documentation and visualization. Using high resolution imaging
systems and UAS (Unmanned Aerial Systems), photographic surveys were completed of the interior and exterior of the Arma Veirana Cave in Liguria, Italy.
The aim is to contextualize the excavation within its environment for accurately geo-referencing the excavation trenches and to better understand how
Neanderthals lived with respect to their environment. Artifact locations were documented using a total station, and a photogrammetric model was created
at multiple excavation depths to help correlate the position and orientation of the artifacts. Exterior modelling of the terrain served for probabilistic analysis
of the movement and hunting areas of the Neanderthals. Combining photogrammetry with total station measurements provides large point clouds which
represent the environment with providing higher geometric samples in addition to a photorealistic model.
Meyers, Maureen (University of Mississippi)
[8]               Results of the Southeastern Archaeological Conference Sexual Harassment Survey
In the fall of 2014, the Southeastern Archaeological Conference sponsored a sexual harassment survey of its membership. Goals of the survey were to
identify frequency and types of sexual harassment in field situations and identify consequences of such incidences for perpetrators and victims. The
survey was also designed to identify if victims of sexual harassment had suffered adverse effects to their career, and to collect longitudinal data on
changes in sexual harassment over time. The poster presents the results of the survey and suggests ways to decrease incidents of sexual harassment in
the field.
[186]             Discussant
Meyers, Allan (Eckerd College)
[142]             Landscapes of Slavery and Emancipation on Cat Island, Bahamas
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   296
Although Bahamian plantation archaeology has witnessed considerable growth in the last three decades, no sites of the Loyalist period (c. 1783–1838) on
Cat Island have hitherto been systematically studied. An ongoing interdisciplinary project aims to address this omission, and the resulting scholarship will
contribute to the island’s first heritage management plan. Since its launch, the Cat Island Heritage Project has documented six Loyalist-era sites at the
island's southern end. Among these is Golden Grove, a plantation that gained widespread notoriety after an 1831 slave uprising. Recent surveys reveal
material culture features across the sites that shed new light on plantation landscapes in the Bahamian colony. The project's long-term goal is to build an
interdisciplinary framework for understanding, interpreting, and conserving the physical remains of sites related to slavery and emancipation. It thus
embraces an approach to archaeology that privileges local stakeholders. It elevates consultation with descendants, and it employs interpretive frameworks
that honor the island's rich tradition of oral narratives. The program invites local participation with an eye toward increasing community investment in the
stewardship of cultural heritage.
[142]            Chair
Meyers Emery, Kathryn (Michigan State University)
[116]            Preparing Their Deaths: Examining Variation in Co-occurrence of Cremation and Inhumation in Early Medieval England
The practice of cremation and inhumation can occur within the same cemetery during the same time period. This co-mingling of burial forms is found
throughout western history from Mesolithic and Neolithic Europe to Ancient Rome and Greece through the Early Medieval Europe and today. Despite its
wide chronological and geographic extent, data-driven study of co-occurrence of burial treatments is limited for a number of reasons; the most problematic
being the disciplinary perception that cremation is diametrically opposed to inhumation due to the differences in archaeological deposits of each form,
which lend themselves to different theoretical and methodological approaches. This paper examines why co-occurrence has been understudied and
potential approaches towards this type of research. Five cemeteries from early medieval England have been selected as case studies since this period
offers ample evidence for co-occurrence of cremation and inhumation over two centuries. Through the use of statistical and spatial analysis, variation
within and between these two forms of burial treatment are examined and discussed within the broader context of the period. Comparison and discussion
of the relationships between inhumation and cremation in early medieval England has the potential to reveal insight into ideological, social, political, and
economic variability during this period.
[116]            Chair
Meza, Yarely [93] see Hankins, Sharon
Meza-Peñaloza, Abigail [236] see Aguirre-Samudio, Ana
Michael, Amy [116] see Wrobel, Gabriel
Michel, Kelly [64] see Payne, Jennifer
Michelet, Dominique [96] see Nondédéo, Philippe
Micheletti, George (University of Central Florida)
[27]             The Fluidity of Ideology: A Late Classic Architectural Transformation in Plaza A at the Ancient Maya Site of Pacbitun, Belize
The ceremonial heart of the ancient Maya site of Pacbitun, thriving for the site’s entire 2,000 year existence, must have held an enormous amount of
cosmological significance to its inhabitants. However, while the sacredness of this location remained constant, the ideology within this space was
incessantly in flux. Over the past 30 years, Plaza A excavations have revealed numerous architectural transformations signifying sociopolitical unrest.
One such transformation is archaeologically evident in Pacbitun’s ceremonial E Group complex occurring sometime in the Late Classic Period (550–700
A.D.). In a recent study, Jaime Awe (2016) recognized that Pacbitun and several other Belize Valley E Groups have been found with unique architecture
and an abundant amount of interments implying that these structures act more as eastern shrines than E Group complexes. Attempting to identify defining
attributes of E Groups and eastern shrines, a closer inspection of Pacbitun’s assemblage has found characteristics that belong to both archetypes. This
paper will present evidence to suggest that Pacbitun’s ceremonial assemblage was originally constructed as an E Group but later transitioned into a shrine
like complex. If this is correct, this transition coincides with other construction activity at the site possibly signifying social and/or political change.
[27]             Chair
Micheletti, George [234] see Weber, Jennifer
Mickel, Allison (Stanford University)
[79]             Edges of Teamwork in Archaeology:Network Approaches to Excavation Histories
Network science has begun to transform how we view systems of people and objects in the archaeological past, but also provides new insight into how
archaeologists collaborate to create the archaeological record. Using two longterm excavations as case studies—Catalhoyuk in Turkey and the Temple of
the Winged Lions in Petra, Jordan—I demonstrate how network approaches help to visualize and measure teamwork on these archaeological sites. I
identify how a person's position in formal site hierarchy relates to their role in transmitting information between team members, map out transformations in
team structure over time, and address the consequences of how foreign excavators interact with local laborers.
Mickleburgh, Hayley and Jaime Pagán-Jiménez (Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University)
[296]            Diet Change in the Ceramic Age Caribbean Archipelago
This paper addresses temporal changes in dietary practices in the Ceramic Age (500 B.C.–A.D. 1500) Caribbean. Evidence from human dental wear and
pathology has indicated a broad shift in dietary practices from the Early Ceramic Age (500 B.C.–A.D. 600/800) to the Late Ceramic Age (A.D. 600/800–
A.D. 1500). Comparisons between the two periods revealed significant differences in the rate of dental wear and pathology, suggesting a growing focus on
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               297
refined, cariogenic foods, most likely horticultural produce. Paleoethnobotanical studies throughout the region have, in parallel, revealed a broader and
more diverse range of plants in Late, as opposed to Early, Ceramic Age assemblages. Although research biases toward the Late Ceramic must be
considered, there appears to be a greater emphasis on tuberous plants (as well as sugary fruits) in the Late Ceramic Age. The plant component of the diet
tends to be varied across space and time, with no single plant or group of plants dominating assemblages. The combined approach using dental and
botanical evidence has provided evidence for temporal shifts in diet in highly diverse island environments. We discuss the significance of these data in the
light of diachronic social and climatic changes in the Caribbean islands.
Middleton, William
[125]              Discussant
Mihailovic, Dušan [146] see Heffter, Eric
Mihok, Lorena (Eckerd College)
[142]              Landscape of Royalization: An English Military Outpost on Roatán Island, Honduras
During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the English Crown competed with other European imperial powers for control over the land, labor, and
materials of the Caribbean. The English Crown came to view the Caribbean as the geographical hub within which it would be able to obtain key resources
and to challenge the rapidly growing power of the Spanish Empire. One of the most contentious ports in the western Caribbean was New Port Royal harbor
on Roatán Island, Honduras, because of its strategic location across the Bay of Honduras from the Spanish settlement of Trujillo. In 1742, the settlement of
Augusta was established as an outpost of English royalization on Roatán Island. In this paper, I utilize the concept of landscape archaeology to explore the
spatial organization and artifact assemblages recovered from recent archaeological investigations at Augusta. I argue that Augusta’s function as a military
outpost in the Bay Islands dictated the colonists’ use of the landscape and that the daily routines carried out within the spatial layout reflect this overarching
goal.
Milan, Christopher (DePaul University)
[31]               One Thousand Years of Regional Integration: Malpaso and the Role of U-Shaped Temples in Long-Distance Exchange
Located 31 km from the Pacific, Malpaso is the most inland of 8 U-shaped temples in the Lurín Valley. This form of monumental architecture is associated
with the Manchay culture that dominated the central coast of Peru during the Initial Period. Malpaso is also one of only a few U-shaped temples located in
the chaupiyunga, a climatic zone that serves as an intermediary between the Pacific coast and the Andean highlands. Consequently, Malpaso shows ties
not only to the U-shaped temples of the lower Lurín Valley but also to settlements in the highlands of Huarochiri.
The goals of this paper are twofold: first, I will examine the way that Malpaso united disparate settlements in the middle Lurín Valley; secondly, I will look at
how Malpaso integrated the region into a larger valley wide network for exchange. Archaeologists have proposed that U-shaped temples served as civic-
ceremonial centers that managed irrigation or controlled small chiefdoms. However, I propose that the main role of a U-shaped temple was to serve a
space for large rituals that integrated various populations. Moreover, Malpaso also connected the middle Lurín Valley into a large network of exchange
allowing it access to resources on the coast and highlands.
Milbrath, Susan (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[15]               Seasonality in Central Mexican Painted Images of Tlaloc: From Classic to Postclassic
Tlaloc, the rain god of Central Mexico, has different seasonal avatars in painted imagery. Colonial codices document these variants in veintena festivals
recorded to help Spanish friars detect survivals of indigenous religion. Rainy season imagery shows Tlaloc associated with maize plants and agricultural
fertility. In contrast, imagery of the dry season emphasizes Tlaloc’s mountain aspect, because the rain god withdrew into the mountains to hold back the
rainfall. The priests performed mountain sacrifices to Tlaloc during the dry season, and the texts suggest these sacrifices placated Tlaloc so that he would
release rainfall during the rainy season. Corresponding dry season images can be recognized in the Postclassic Codex Borgia, which shows Tlaloc in
scenes of blood sacrifice with death aspects of the maize goddess. The Borgia shows a different aspect of Tlaloc during the rainy season, one that
bestows rainfall and helps fertilize the fields. A similar dichotomy between rainy and dry season imagery of Tlaloc can be seen in mural paintings of the
Teotihuacan Storm God. The audience for the Teotihuacan murals in elite apartment compounds was clearly the residents and visitors, but seasonal
variations in the Storm God’s imagery was certainly well know to the general populace.
[15]               Chair
Milella, Marco (Institute of Anthropology, University of Zurich), Christopher J. Knüsel (UMR5199 PACEA, Université de Bordeaux, Bâtiment B8)
and Scott D. Haddow (Çatalhöyük Research Project, Stanford Archaeology)
[215]              A Neolithic Irregular Burial at Çatalhöyük (Turkey)
At Neolithic Çatalhöyük, adult burials are usually located beneath platforms within habitations. Middens (waste areas) are, on the other hand, only
sporadically used as burial locations at the site and, overall, are consistent with intentional exclusion from platform depositions, therefore representing a
form of irregular burial.
Here, we describe a young adult male from Çatalhöyük buried in a midden and presenting several skeletal anomalies (united and unhealed fractures, and
bone structural changes) consistent with a diagnosis of fibrous dysplasia. The observed pathological condition, together with his deposition in a midden,
suggest a complex scenario, with the individual becoming the focus of special attention, possibly in a negative way, as his physical appearance and
behavior would have been altered by the progress of the disease. Altogether, the present case may document a form of disease-related social exclusion-
and its impact on funerary behavior in a Neolithic society.
Milks, Annemieke (UCL Institute of Archaeology) and Matt Pope (UCL Institute of Archaeology)
[146]              Middle Pleistocene ‘Hunting Lesions’: Experimental Approaches to an Archaeological Puzzle
Hunting lesions provide indirect evidence of humans using weapons for subsistence. Potential examples of hunting lesions from the European Middle
Pleistocene are limited, having been proposed for one scapula each from the British sites of Boxgrove and Swanscombe. These scapulae, both bearing
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              298
semi-circular damaged edges, have been suggested to have been impacted by untipped wooden spears, similar to those from the Middle Pleistocene sites
of Schöningen and Clacton-on-Sea. Plain wooden spears from this period represent the earliest weapons in the archaeological record, and are also known
to have been used in the Late Pleistocene and Holocene.
The damage on the two scapulae has received little critical evaluation. A number of issues arise in the identification of hunting lesions from wooden spears
not only due to the near-lack of an experimentally-generated reference sample, but also due to problems with equifinality. This paper presents ongoing
experimental research aiming to better understand damage signatures of wooden spears on bones, actualistic research on how the use of hammerstones
to access marrow and grease may mimic hunting lesions, and an assessment of the Middle Pleistocene scapulae in comparison with experimental
research and hunting lesions from later periods.
Miller, D. Shane [8] see Anderson, Derek
Miller, Stephanie
[20]              Coba: New Findings and Future Directions of Research
This paper presents new spatial and cultural data on the Maya archaeological site of Coba. As part of the Political Interaction Project of Central Yucatán,
we have piloted a new investigation on the political, social, and economic relationship between the two Maya cities Yaxuna and Coba. These two cities are
connected by the longest sacbe in the Maya region, Sacbe 1, stretching 100 km across the peninsula. Understanding the relationship between these two
cities will require a multi year and multi site investigation and this paper presents our preliminary findings at one end of the causeway. Topics that will be
addressed include new chronological data that sheds light on Coba's greatest period of urban and political development, spatial data on Maya household
organization, and artifactual data on domestic economies at Coba. Additionally, methodological issues encountered and proposed resolutions will briefly be
addressed. As a conclusion, this paper brings together our findings on Coba to propose ideas on how Classic period Maya state development can be
better understood through investigation of household integration.
Miller, Myles (Versar)
[55]              The Middle and Late Holocene Archaeological and Climatic Records of Southern New Mexico and Trans-Pecos Texas: New Insights and
                  New Revelations
A contextual analysis of 3,989 radiocarbon dates provides unprecedented insights into 8,000 years of prehistoric adaptions and social evolution in the
northern Chihuahuan Desert of southern New Mexico and Trans-Pecos Texas. The chronology is particularly robust between 4500 B.P. and historic times,
allowing for distinctive subsistence, technological, and social developments to be isolated throughout the terminal Middle Holocene and Late Holocene and
corresponding Middle Archaic, Late Archaic, and Ceramic cultural periods. The high-resolution chronology is based on radiocarbon-dated settlements,
features, technologies, perishable items, and projectile points and reveals several trends and transitions, including punctuated demographic swings and
periods of regional abandonment, shifting lowland desert and upland mountain settlements, and related technological and subsistence developments. The
archaeological sequences are then compared to geomorphological sequences, speleothem records, and other proxy paleoenvironmental data, as well as
radiocarbon and optically-stimulated luminescence dates from geomorphological and paleoenvironmental studies. The combined archaeological and
environmental records provide insights into several topics of archaeological and anthropological significance, including culture-climate interactions, the
introduction and spread of maize, and relationships between horticulture and earth oven plant baking, each of which in turn are related to increasing social
complexity in the arid lands of the northern Chihuahuan Desert.
[55]              Chair
Miller, Mary
[209]             Jaina Figurines: A Text without a Text?
Most Maya figurines have traditionally been evaluated on the basis of style and facture, and more recently, on the basis of archaeological context, where
possible, as at Motul de San José, Guatemala. But what about the dozens of Jaina figurines in the Mexican national collections? Is there a way to examine
the figurines typically considered to be mothers, lovers, weavers, wanderers, or warriors, almost none of which bear inscriptions, in such a way as to
reevaluate the sort of assumptions made abut the figurines? Can one generate a text? Particular attention will be given to both the monumental record of
the first millennium C.E. and ethnohistoric records of later years.
[58]              Discussant
Miller, Holly (University of Nottingham) and Naomi Sykes (University of Nottingham)
[134]             Stable Isotopes and the Dynamics of Human-Animal Relationships
A central focus of stable isotope analysis in archaeology has always been to reconstruct human diet, with faunal samples examined primarily to better
understand the human data. This paper will challenge this precept and highlight that important information about human-animal relationships can be
obtained from isotope studies if the animals are viewed as individuals in their own right, as opposed to mere background data. Using several species as
case-studies, this paper will examine how stable isotope date can inform various human-animal relationships from the past 2,500 years across northern
Europe. These studies also highlight an enhanced potential for stable isotope data when used in combination with other sources of evidence.
Miller, Melanie (University of California, Berkeley)
[205]             Exploring Social Differences as Evidenced by Measures of Physical Activity and Skeletal Health in a Muisca Population (950–1400 A.D.,
                  Soacha, Colombia)
The human skeleton is a dynamic tissue that changes over the lifetime in response to particular variables such as an individual’s diet, health, sex, and
physical activity. Studying human long bones, such as femurs and humerii, for measures of bone quantity and shape can provide insights into the ways
that the skeleton reflects the amounts and types of work performed during life. The Muisca, from northern Colombia, are often characterized as highly
stratified societies where social differences were strongly marked. One area where social differences may be evidenced is through daily laboring practices,
which may be intertwined with social roles such as an individual’s status, age, and sex. Human skeletal remains from the archaeological site of Tibanica
(Soacha, Colombia; 950–1400 A.D.) were imaged using non-invasive computed tomography (CT) in order to study how bone measures may reflect
differential activity patterns between particular social groups (such as females vs. males, young vs. old age adults, etc.). Cross-sectional geometry data
indicate significant differences between males and females in both their amount of bone, and the strength and robusticity of their long bones, suggesting
that an individual’s sex may have delineated the types and amounts of work that one performed.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               299
Miller, Michelle (Louisiana State University) and David Chicoine (Louisiana State University)
[207]            Preliminary Results on Pottery Technology through Macroscopic Classification at the Early Horizon Center of Caylán, Coastal Ancash,
                 Peru
This poster presents the analysis of ceramic fragments from the Early Horizon center of Caylán, in the Nepeña Valley, Perú (800–1 B.C.). Ceramic
fragments constitute a large portion of excavated artifacts, bringing information on chronology, cultural traditions, and exchange networks. Most are
undecorated body sherds that are typically ignored in ceramic analyses. Here, we present the macroscopic analysis of ceramic wares from excavated
contexts to shed light on patterns of production and potential exchange networks. Discrete categories of pastes are identified based on the composition,
size, and frequency of inclusions in each sherd. The results suggest that Early Horizon wares at Caylán were produced by distinct potters using materials
from different areas. This emphasizes the possible interactions between multiple foreign and local potters in the manufacture and use of ceramic wares
during the Early Horizon.
Miller, D. Shane (Mississippi State University)
[218]            Late Pleistocene-Early Holocene Adaptations in the Lower Mid-South, United States
The Lower Mid-South has a rich history of archaeological research and provides a valuable dataset for exploring the relationships between climate and
culture. Here, we provide an overview of the available paleo-environmental and archaeological data in this area, and argue that there were significant
changes in diet, landscape use, and technological organization. The possibility that localized territories are established in the southeast prior to the onset of
the Holocene is critically evaluated. We argue that analyses of site distributions indicate an expansion of settlement into areas previously largely ignored,
probably a result of population growth during the Younger Dryas and Early Holocene. Temporal trends in regional biface technologies and tool stone
selection decisions reflect continual modifications of behavioral strategies into the Early Holocene, further indicating that the colonization process was still
underway. We conclude by highlighting recent, ongoing research in the region, and provide some future directions for continuing research for this time
interval in the Mid-South.
[218]            Chair
Miller, G. Logan (Illinois State University)
[232]            Earthworks as Landscapes: An Examination of the Sampling Issue in Lithic Microwear Analysis
Lithic microwear analysis remains a powerful tool for anthropological archaeology by providing insights into stone tool function. As the method continues to
mature, practitioners have recently made important advances in documenting and quantifying variation in wear patterns. Since its inception, however, little
discussion has focused on the role of sampling in microwear studies. As a result, sample sizes in published microwear reports vary widely. A related issue
involves generating a representative sample from the spatial area and temporal period under investigation. Often studies utilize a type site, rather than a
landscape, approach that makes it difficult to capture the full range of variation present. A case study from two Middle Woodland Period Hopewell
earthworks in southwestern Ohio demonstrates that these issues of sample size and spatial coverage could impact archaeological interpretations. Results
reveal a significant positive correlation between sample size and the number of distinct functional tasks identified in an assemblage. Sampling multiple
locations within and around each earthwork captured a great deal of variation only discernible through this landscape approach.
Miller, Sarah
[260]            Engaging the Living in Honor of the Dead: the Cemetery Resource Protection Training (CRPT) Program across Florida
The flagship program to come out of FPAN’s Northeast Regional Center, hosted by Flagler College in St. Augustine, is the Cemetery Resource Protection
Training (CRPT) workshop. CRPT developed in an effort to curb the mass deterioration of historic cemeteries across the state, particularly in Jacksonville,
Palatka, and Fernandina Beach where municipal governments are responsible for their preservation and maintenance. Outcomes of CRPT were the
subject of a recent AAP article (Miller 2015:275-290) but the challenges are on-going and subject to great change after local elections. This paper will
describe the CRPT program, present the most challenging cases to date, and deliberate how to stay the course through political and economic change.
[260]            Chair
Miller Wolf, Katherine [130] see Wolf, Marc
Miller Wolf, Katherine (Indiana University East) and Timothy Pugh (Queens College, City University of New York)
[291]            The Bioarchaeology of Colonization and Missionization at San Bernabé, Lake Petén Itzá
The Spanish established the San Bernabé Mission in the heartland of the Itzá Maya area at Tayasal in the Petén Lakes region around 1710. Census data
suggest that the mission was at the center of a multi-cultural community of 126 individuals in 1712, yet within three decades the population size had
reduced by 70% potentially due to epidemics and flight. Excavations by the Tayasal Archaeological Project have recovered 46 individuals from 33 graves
in the mission’s cemetery that shed light on what occurred after the arrival of the Spanish to the region. The skeletal remains of those interred within the
walls of the mission highlight the impact of cultural contact, colonization, and the subsequent missionization of an indigenous group. The bioarchaeological
analysis of the San Bernabé sample reveals that life in San Bernabé was one of sickness, disease, and a short life expectancy. Skeletal data that informs
us about colonization is not often available, especially for Mayanists, and the case of San Bernabé provides clear data about the deleterious impact that
colonialism had on the Maya.
Miller-Atkins, Galen and Luke Premo (Washington State University, Max Planck Institute )
[272]            Local extinctions and regional cultural diversification in time-averaged assemblages
Modern human behavior, including regional cultural differentiation, has traditionally been characterized as a relatively recent phenomenon despite evidence
of modernity before 50,000 years ago from the Paleolithic record of Africa. Researchers interested in how demography might improve our interpretation of
the archaeological record have shown that the rate of local group extinctions can affect neutral cultural diversity and the rate at which copy errors
accumulate in structured populations. However, it remains unknown whether a high rate of local extinction affects time-averaged archaeological
assemblages—not just populations—in such a way as to inhibit what archaeologists might recognize as regionally distinctive cultural traditions. Here, we
discuss results from a spatially explicit agent-based model designed to address the effect of local extinctions on regional differentiation in selectively
neutral culturally transmitted traits in artificial archaeological landscapes. We employ local indicators of spatial association at multiple spatial scales to
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 300
assess the extent to which the spatial scale of the regional “traditions” recovered from the archaeological data expand or contract as a function of local
group extinction rate. We also assess the extent to which time-averaging regulates the effect of local extinctions on regional cultural differentiation in
assemblages.
Miller-Sisson, Misha [20] see Matsumoto, Mallory
Miller-Sisson, Misha (University of California San Diego)
[88]              Identity and the Maya Mid-level Elite as a Proxy for Political Change
The nuances of identity theory can be a helpful in determining social stratification within a site and determining intrasite political processes. Archaeology is
specially suited for identity studies due to the nature of material culture as an integral part in social practices. While individual identities are difficult to parse
out under the best circumstances, analysis of artifact distribution across a site can yield insight into group identities and the practices that follow them.
Designation of group identities along both vertical and horizontal hierarchical axes can allow for larger analysis of political processes by noting changes
within both alignments. The Maya site of Uxul presents an appropriate case study for utilizing identity theory to examine shifts in political power across
hierarchal axes within a site due to the documented changes in political structures that occurred at the site in the Late Classic (650 A.D.). These political
shifts are documented in the hieroglyphic record of the site when with the incursion of the Ka’an polity in the Late Classic. Analysis of the changes in
archaeological assemblages between different groups in Uxul highlight the intrasite shifts in power and identity that coincided with the larger political
change.
Millhauser, John K. [27] see Antorcha Pedemonte, Ricardo
Millhauser, John K. [86] see Alcantara, Keitlyn
Mills, Barbara (University of Arizona)
[17]              Chaco and Hopewell: Redefining Interaction Spheres through Multiscalar Network Approaches
Chaco and Hopewell are two of the most well studied archaeological regions in North America. Although Chaco is often compared to Cahokia, comparison
to Hopewell brings out important ways in which extensive regional connectivities were formed through the intersection of religious, political, and economic
networks. Both societies show evidence of periodic, eventful monumental construction; spatial connectivity through roads/causeways; long-distance
procurement of materials; production and deposition of large quantities of inalienable objects; spatially distinctive collective burials; and the replication of
architectural units and spatial communities across large areas. Although they differ in many ways, the term “interaction sphere” has been applied to both
regions but this term is amorphous and sidesteps the ways in which materials and practices were embedded within multiple kinds of networks and their
historical relationships. Current relational approaches in archaeology, including formal network analyses, offer alternative ways of looking at social and
spatial connectivities, especially when combined with theoretical approaches that foreground how religious ritual, ideology, territoriality, social diversity, and
inequality intersect. The participants in this session address these connections to provide multiscalar interpretations of the Chaco and Hopewell worlds,
their origins, and their transformations.
[201]             Discussant
[17]              Chair
Mills, Barbara [17] see Peeples, Matt
Milne, Brooke [214] see Gamble, Julia
Minc, Leah, Jeremias Pink (Oregon State University) and Veronica Perez Rodriguez (University at Albany - SUNY)
[169]             Evaluating the Evidence for Ceramic Exchange with the Valley of Oaxaca during the Late to Terminal Formative
In the Mixteca Alta region of Oaxaca, Mexico, ceramics resembling those found in the Valley of Oaxaca are a common component of Late to Terminal
Formative assemblages. Prior compositional analyses indicated that at least some of these wares represent actual imports, and further, that ceramic trade
between the two regions was possibly two-way. More recently, our knowledge of ceramic compositional variability in the Valley of Oaxaca has expanded
greatly, allowing us to refine our understanding of potential source areas for ceramics exported to the Mixteca Alta. Here we report on a sample of 53 Late
to Terminal Formative ceramics from Cerro Jazmin; these represent wares traditionally thought to be Valley of Oaxaca imports or imitations (gris and café
fino) and wares thought to be of local manufacture. In order to identify possible imports and their sources, compositional data for these materials were
evaluated against contemporaneous ceramics from the Valley of Oaxaca as well as a valley-wide database of natural clays previously analyzed at the OSU
Archaeometry Laboratory. The project serves to expand the compositional database for Formative ceramics from the Mixteca Alta region, and contributes
to research on ceramic trade and exchange between the two regions.
Mires, Ann Marie and Claire Gold (Lecturer, Clark University and Bay Path University)
[187]             Being Found: A Fundamental Human Right
The National Institute of Justice (NIJ) database lists approximately 100,000 missing persons in the United States. Many of the people who go missing in
the United States are victims of homicide. In many cases, the investigation begins only when human remains are found. DNA technology has helped
decrease the number of unidentified cases but still, many “unfound” cases remain unsolved. Victims of homicide have no choice as to where their bodies
are placed and often suffer violations before and after death. They suffer an injustice to their basic human right to live. Families of the unfound often suffer
from physical ailments due to the unresolved fate of their unfound loved one. The number of unfound individuals in the United States surpasses the scale
of a mass disaster and should be viewed more accurately as a crisis in human rights. Forensic Archaeologists are specialists who provide technical
assistance in the recovery of human remains at forensic scenes, mass disasters, and human rights violations. Specialists in this field can add information
to unfound cases normally handled by law enforcement. Legislation that addresses the plight of the thousands of unfound cases should be given priority.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  301
Misarti, Nicole [204] see Alfonso-Durruty, Marta
Missal, Kele [214] see Monnier, Gilliane
Mitchell, Ammie (SUNY at Buffalo Anthropology Department)
[41]               A Petrographic Examination of Early Ceramic Crushed Rock Tempers
As part of her ongoing dissertation research, the author conducted a series of experimental tests to examine the physical properties of coarse crystalline
rocks. Common coarse crystalline rocks in the Northeast include granite, granodiorite, and gabbro. Earlier petrographic studies by the author identified
these rocks as common tempering agents in early ceramic vessels in New York. The author hypothesized that these rocks were intentionally collected by
potters from glacial land formations and the rocks were actively processed into temper through intense heating and crushing actions. Rocks may have
been collected, placed and later recycled from high-temperature features, such as hearths and earth ovens for the purpose of creating temper. The null
hypothesis of this study is that potters selected previously eroded and weathered rocks because they were easily obtainable and crumble with minimal
effort into grit for temper. The author used petrography to examine individual mineral weathering, alteration and fracturing within each sample. Twenty
coarse crystalline rock samples were fired in both closed kiln and open pit firing at various temperatures and durations. The minerals within the
experimental samples were compared to archaeological samples of grit-tempered Vinette pottery from various sites across New York State.
Mitchell, Juliette (University of Aberdeen) and Gordon Noble (University of Aberdeen)
[103]              Mapping, Monumentalizing and Protecting the Barrow Cemeteries of Eastern and Northern Scotland
In later Iron Age Scotland, the Picts begin to bury their dead under barrows and cairns, but the social, ideological, and political triggers for this change in
burial practice are unclear. One of the reasons is that the archaeological data has never been properly synthesized. No written sources exist in Scotland at
this time so the archaeological data represents an important untapped resource. This talk will look at monumentalisation of Pictish barrow cemeteries and
their relationship to routeways and settlements. It will include GIS analysis of transcribed aerial photographs showing crop mark data, which enables a
much more robust assessment of routeways, boundaries and territories around the cemeteries.
Mitchell, Peter
[223]              'I Rode through the Desert': Equestrian Adaptations in Southern Hemisphere Arid Zones
The ‘Columbian exchange’ set in motion by Europe’s fifteenth- to nineteenth-century expansion overseas has produced some of the most far-reaching
biological and cultural changes of the entire Anthropocene epoch. One of the most widespread aspects of its exchanges was the introduction of the horse
to parts of the world where it had previously been absent. Alongside the internationally well-known Plains of North America, these regions included several
southern hemisphere arid zones: Patagonia; the Karoo and Kalahari of southern Africa; and the deserts of Australia. This paper explores the equestrian
adaptations developed by the Indigenous inhabitants of these three areas and tries to explain the variability apparent in the timing, scale, nature, and
consequences of their adoption of the horse.
[295]              Discussant
Mitchem, Jeffrey (Arkansas Archeological Survey), Jami J. Lockhart (Arkansas Archeological Survey) and Timothy S. Mulvihill (Arkansas
Archeological Survey)
[225]              Investigating Mississippian Site Layout and Architecture in Northeast Arkansas
In June 2015, the Arkansas Archeological Society Training Program was held at the Richards Bridge site. This Parkin phase village lies along the Tyronza
River and was contemporaneous with the Parkin site, located about 16 km away. Geophysical studies revealed well-preserved structure floors at Richards
Bridge and four of these were chosen for excavation to see if their construction was identical to those at other Parkin phase sites. A search for fortifications
revealed a wooden palisade, but no defensive ditch or moat was present. The lack of a surrounding ditch makes Richards Bridge the first known Parkin
phase site without one.
[260]              Discussant
Mixter, David W. [125] see LeCount, Lisa
Mixter, David (Washington University in Saint Louis)
[235]              Activity Area Analysis of Terminal Classic period Civic Architecture at Actuncan, Belize
Researchers have long hypothesized that the 9th century Maya collapse resulted in the end of divine kingship as the dominant political form in the southern
Maya Lowlands. In post-royal settlements, tall pyramids and labyrinthine palace spaces are deemphasized in favor of more publically-accessible open
courtyards and broad platforms. Some scholars have argued for the increasing prevalence of council houses based on architectural layouts and the
iconography of sculptural programs. However, little research has confirmed this interpretation with data on the actual activities that took place within post-
royal public architecture. Traditionally, archaeologists who study the Maya have had difficulty understanding the daily function of public architecture due to
the paucity of artifacts recovered in situ on occupation surfaces. Recent studies of geochemistry and microartifacts from occupation surfaces indicate that
microscopic proxies can be used to reveal the activities that took place in these spaces. This study draws on the spatial interpolation of geochemical and
microartifact data to understand activities that occurred on a civic platform constructed during the Terminal Classic Period. By comparing the results of this
research to similar studies of activities in Classic period palaces, I elucidate changes in the role of leaders after the failure of divine kingship.
Mizoguchi, Koji (Kyushu University, Japan)
[10]               Heritage in Post-Modern Settings: The Case of Japan
The 'post-modern' condition can be characterized by reflexivity, by which is meant that every social fact is scrutinized as socio-historically constructed. The
spread of this 'attitude' fundamentally destabilize the sense of the authenticity of heritage. However, as long as we have to accept this constitutive element
of social reality, we have to consider how to come to terms with this and how to better utilize this for the betterment of our relationship with heritage and of
our life-world. This poster introduces some innovative attempts of achieving that goal from Japan, and proposes some future directions in the 'use of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               302
heritage' for the future.
Moates, Jeff [260] see Rudolph, Nigel
Moates, Jeffrey (FPAN)
[260]            Understanding Archaeological Site Protection at the Local Level in Florida
Archaeological sites face many threats in Florida. While both natural and cultural forces are at play the most destructive threat might be inaction at the local
level from the professional and amateur archaeology communities. Local preservation programs began in earnest with the passage of state laws aimed at
managing and regulating growth in the state and have continued largely through the implementation of the Certified Local Government Program. However,
an apparent lack of a clear understanding of archaeology and best management practices at the local level has left archaeological sites to be sorely
underrepresented in local government preservation programs and woefully unprotected under local ordinance. This presentation details some of the
initiatives undertaken by FPAN to bring together information on local level preservation ordinances throughout the State of Florida, work with local
governments on their management of archaeological sites, and create a clearing house for preservation ordinances and locally designated sites and
resources.
Moe, Jeanne (Project Archaeology-BLM)
[71]             Archaeology Education for Children: Measuring Success and Avoiding Pitfalls
In the past 30 years, archaeologists have taught children and youth about the processes of archaeological inquiry and the results of archaeological
research. Hundreds, if not thousands of education programs have sprouted over the last 30 years; some have endured while others have faded away.
Some efforts and programs are aimed at formal learning in school classrooms while many others are based in informal settings such as museums, outdoor
learning centers, after-school programs, and many others. A few of these programs have been assessed for learning outcomes, while many others have
not. For example, all Project Archaeology education materials are intensively assessed in classrooms and peer reviewed prior to release. Program
assessment is critical for the long-term success and sustainability of archaeology education. This paper will examine the history of archaeology learning
assessment in both formal and informal settings. Based on these data the efficacy of formal and informal learning venues will be compared. Development
of assessment instruments, guidance for implementing materials with fidelity in specific learning venues, effective piloting, and formulating research
testable questions will be provided.
Moffett, Abigial Joy [107] see Chirikure, Shadreck
Mol, Angus [220] see Hofman, Corinne
Mol, Angus
[247]            The Deep Structure of Dependency: Relational Data and Heuristics in Archaeology
The last decade has seen a rise in archaeological studies addressing network concepts, models and dynamics. These studies cover a range of
archaeological approaches and subdisciplines, from the conceptual, like Actor Network Theory (ANT) to the formalized, like Agent Based Modelling (ABM),
as well as frameworks that have connected archaeological theory and network methods, like Knappett’s Archaeology of Interaction and Hodder’s
Entanglement.
What all of these studies have in common is an emphasis on relations and, more specifically, the analysis or interpretation of the dependencies between
archaeologically observable phenomena. With this comes an heuristic that is often obscured, but is itself based on a multi-scalar and pluriform set of
dependencies: mutually supportive hypotheses or theories built on multi-disciplinary data-sets, applicable to scales of analysis from microscopic to
interregional.
By examining a number of classical and more recent studies taking a network approach, this paper will review how archaeology has handled this “deep
structure of dependency” and seeks to provide an answer to the question how disparate studies seeking to understand the connected past can lead to
consilience of knowledge.
Molano, Shaina (UC Merced)
[276]            A Geometric Morphometric Analysis of Cranial Vault Modification in Ancash, Peru
Cranial vault modification is a cultural practice used throughout much of the Andes and study of body modifications is a powerful tool for understanding
group identity, social structure, and status. Different modification types have been found in the prehistoric Ancash region of north-central Peru, although the
significance of this practice has yet to be further explored in the area. As cranial modifications are variable by nature, quantitative assessment of different
vault shapes allows for the determination of presence of modification and may also allow assessment of types as well as the degree of variation within
modification type. Together, this information can help elucidate the potential identities being conveyed. Here, I present results from a small-scale metric
study based on crania excavated throughout Ancash. Geometric morphometric methods were utilized in addition to traditional metric approaches in order
to quantify the morphology using strategic landmark and semi-landmarks. Analysis of 100 modified crania shows significant variation in cranial shape
between modified and unmodified individuals, but also between types of modification as well as, most interestingly, internal to each type. Geometric
morphometric methods were particularly fruitful, and future research looks to encompass a large-scale examination of cranial modification in Ancash using
this approach.
Mollard, Belinda [254] see Bautista, Giovanni
Mollenhauer, Jillian (Metropolitan State University of Denver)
[209]            Materiality and Meaning in the Formative Gulf Lowlands
In Formative Mesoamerica the built environments of San Lorenzo and La Venta became unique topographic assemblages combining local and regional
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               303
materials drawn from riverbeds, salt domes, nearby hills, and distant volcanic peaks. These sites can be viewed as microcosms of their regional
landscapes, incorporating natural forms and geographic referents as a way to manifest elite authority over the natural and human worlds. Integrated into
these architectural settings were large-scale sculptures crafted of various stone types and sources. The material properties of these sculptures served to
connect Olmec centers with the regional sacred landscape while simultaneously harnessing and transforming its spiritual power into political authority. In
the ephemeral environments of earth, sand, and clay that comprised most Olmec site architecture, the stones imported to these centers persisted through
time and space to reify and naturalize the histories of the Olmec elite. The materiality of Olmec sculptures and their settings will be explored in this paper to
demonstrate how Gulf lowland elites manipulated the ideological and phenomenological properties of stone as a means of exercising their control over the
landscape and its inhabitants.
Monaghan, G. William [285] see Pike, Matthew
Mongelluzzo, Ryan (San Diego Mesa College)
[27]               Variation in the Architectural Morphology of Ancient Maya Palaces
Ancient Maya palaces from the Classic Period exhibit a high degree of similarity in terms of architectural layout. While the significance of the similarities
has been explored previously, the differences have not been understood as well. This paper attempts to explicate differences in morphology and begin to
understand their meaning.
Monjeau, Adrian [272] see Lanata, Jose
Monnier, Gilliane (University of Minnesota), Kele Missal (Department of Anthropology, University of Minnesot) and Ellery Frahm (Department of
Anthropology, University of Minnesot)
[214]              Non-Destructive, In Situ Lithic Residue Analysis via FTIR Microspectroscopy: First Results
Lithic residue analysis is undergoing a methodological shift as analysts introduce new methods designed to improve the objectivity of residue
identifications. Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR) microspectroscopy has been shown to have tremendous potential in this regard. This method is
nondestructive, can provide precise identifications of molecular compounds and minerals, and can be carried out in situ—directly on the residues—without
removing them from the stone tools. However, the optical properties of residue materials, such as their absorption coefficients and refraction indices, affect
the resulting FTIR spectra, making it difficult to compare them with existing standards. In addition, when residues are thin enough that the beam
penetrates through to the underlying stone substrate, the optical properties of the underlying stone affect the resulting spectra. In this paper we present
the initial results of a project designed to 1) produce a set of FTIR reflectance spectra standards on 15 common organic and inorganic residue types, and
2) document the changes that appear in the spectra of residues placed on a variety of different stone substrates.
Monroe, J. Cameron (University of California, Santa Cruz)
[177]              "More Field Than Habitation, AND Far More Fallow than Field": Settlement Patterns, Farming Practices, and Demographic Change on the
                   Abomey Plateau, Republic of Bénin
Archaeologies of urbanism in West Africa have long focused on major cities associated with expansive kingdoms and empires of the second millennium
A.D. In recent decades, however, archaeologists have turned to the countryside for an alternative view on urban dynamics in this period. Yet, for most of
the forested region this shift has been hampered by the problem of identifying sites, both large and small. This difficultly arises from the combined effects of
dense vegetation, poor site preservation, and farming practices that generate low density blankets of artifacts around sites. Archaeological survey recently
completed on the Abomey Plateau of the Republic of Bénin adopted an artifact and feature-based approach to redress this issue. Adopting GIS-based
spatial analytical tools, this paper presents a method for distinguishing low density settlements from intensive farming practices, significantly advancing our
understanding of settlement patterns, farming, and demographic change on the Abomey Plateau in the second millennium A.D.
Monroe, Cameron [183] see Simon, Katie
Monteiro, Patrícia (NAP - Universidade do Algarve)
[49]               Charcoal Analyses Unraveling Cabeço da Amoreira Muge Shell Midden (Portugal)
Cabeço da Amoreira is a Mesolithic shell midden located near the Tagus river, 60 km from Lisbon, central Portugal. Charcoal analyses are an important
tool to identify the wood used for fuel and therefore, understand the relationships between human societies and their landscape. Charcoal is abundant in
the Cabeço da Amoreira shell midden. It is present in every context of the site, being part of its occupation horizons and formation processes. Here we
present the results from charcoal analyses carried out in several contexts of the shell midden as well as preliminary results on charcoal distribution. The
results show that although the main pattern of use of Pinus and Quercus seems to occur during the occupation of the site, minor taxa vary in
some contexts. The variation in charcoal distribution also indicated some concentrations in well preserved areas of the shell midden.
[49]               Chair
Montero García, Ismael Arturo [294] see Helmke, Christophe
Montero Mejía, Gabriela [264] see Pool, Christopher
Montgomery, Shane (University of Central Florida)
[270]              On the Back of the Crocodile: Extent, Energetics, and Productivity in Wetland Agricultural Systems, Northern Belize
Wetland agricultural techniques have been successfully employed in a variety of environmentally and climatically diverse landscapes throughout prehistory.
Within the larger Maya region, these features figure prominently in the region comprised of Northern Belize and Southern Quintana Roo. Along the banks
of the Hondo and New Rivers, the ancient Maya effectively utilized wetland agricultural practices from the Middle Preclassic to the Terminal Classic
periods. A number of past archaeological projects have thoroughly examined the construction and impact of these swampland features; after four decades
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             304
of study, a more precise picture has formed in relation to the roles that these systems played in the regional development of the area. However, a detailed
record of the full spatial extent, combined construction costs, and potential agricultural productivity has not been attempted on a larger scale. This paper
will highlight these avenues of interest as obtained from high and medium resolution satellite imagery and manipulated through GIS. The research will
explore environmental factors and topographic elements dictating the distribution of such entities, the energetic involvement required to construct and
maintain the systems, and the efficiency of wetland techniques as compared to traditional milpa agriculture.
Montiel, Rafael [236] see Aguirre-Samudio, Ana
Montoya, Eduardo [57] see Delgado, Mercedes
Montoya, Amy (Museum of Indian Arts & Culture), Diana Sherman (Museum of Indian Arts & Culture), C. L. Kieffer (Museum of Indian Arts &
Culture), Julia Clifton (Museum of Indian Arts & Culture) and Maxine McBrinn (Museum of Indian Arts & Culture)
[265]             Exploring Archaeological Collections and Research Possibilities at the Museum of Indian Arts & Culture
The Museum of Indian Arts and Culture (MIAC) acts as the Repository for the State of New Mexico, curating archaeological materials from Federal, state,
and tribal lands, and private donations. The Archaeological Research Collections (ARC) is the museum’s largest collection, with Paleoindian through
historic material from New Mexico and the greater Southwest. The collection is housed at the Center for New Mexico Archaeology, a new state-of-the-art
facility shared with the Office of Archaeological Studies that allows for outreach, training and workshops, as well as a spacious laboratory for visiting
researchers.
The material is representative of a long period of collection by archaeologists, including sites excavated by Edgar Lee Hewett during the early 1900s,
through Works Progress Administration projects, to modern excavations. ARC contains an estimated 8 million artifacts and samples, approximately 35,000
individually cataloged artifacts, and more than 250 linear feet of accompanying notes, maps, and photos. In addition to the archaeological collection, the H.
P. Mera Room and the Archaeological Pottery Project offer comparative collections for ceramics, lithics, mineral specimens, and petrographic slides. MIAC
is also home to the Laboratory of Anthropology Library, which contains 35,000 items focusing on the greater Southwest and the Sylvanus Griswold Morley
Collection.
Monz, Lauren [219] see Hubert, Erell
Moore, Katherine (University of Pennsylvania) and Kurt Rademaker (Northern Illinois University, University of Tubing)
[62]              Hunter’s Paradise or Hypoxic Wasteland? Recent Research in the Pucuncho Basin, Peru
Mountain regions above 4,000 m have been considered marginal because of low temperatures and low primary productivity compounded by the physical
stress of hypoxia. Yet, the archaeological record of the puna (grasslands above 3,800 m) of the Andes demonstrates widespread, persistent occupations
by hunter-gatherers. The intensity and seasonality of these occupations offer insights into these regions of Peru and of the entry of people into South
America more generally. New excavations at the rockshelter of Cuncaicha (Arequipa) dating to as early as the Terminal Pleistocene are compared with
sites in Junín dating to the Early Holocene. Together, these sites attest to the procurement of food (especially animals) and lithic raw materials in an
environment strongly conditioned by the availability of water. Where rainfall or topography allowed a combination of natural pasture and wetland patches
to develop, the constraints of altitude and temperature seem to have been of minor importance. At Cuncaicha, exchange of materials to distant coastal
sites dated to the Terminal Pleistocene; this is a less obvious pattern in the Junín sites. These observations open larger questions about the sustainability
of local high altitude forager occupations and the complementarity of activities and resources with regions at immediately lower altitudes.
Moore, Lorna (University of Colorado Denver)
[62]              Genetic Adaptation to High Altitudes: What Genotypes and What Phenotypes are Involved?
The question of whether human populations have adapted genetically to high altitude (HA) has been of interest since studies began there in the early
1900s. Throughout the 20th century the dominant paradigm was that the major physiological attributes of HA residents were acquired during development
or reflected other shorter-term processes. With the advent of genomic technologies and statistical methods for detecting genetic evidence of natural
selection, a paradigm shift and an exponential rise in the number of publications reporting genetic adaptation in HA populations has occurred. Yet three key
questions remain. First, are the current inhabitants of HA regions genetically related to prehistoric inhabitants? Second, are convergent or divergent
evolutionary processes involved in genetic adaptation to HA? And third, what is the relationship between the genes (or genomic regions) and the particular
physiologic traits of HA residents? The latter is probably the most difficult of all and requires not only more complete, whole genome sequencing but also
more explicit testing of the particular pathways by which selected-for gene regions are acting.
Moore, Katherine [122] see Bruno, Maria
Moore, Christopher (SRARP-SCIAA), Mark Brooks (SRARP-SCIAA, USC--Retired) and I. Randolph Daniel Jr. (Department of Anthropology, East
Carolina Universi)
[218]             Late Pleistocene and Holocene Abrupt Climate Change and Human Response in the Southeastern United States
As a result of the analysis of high-resolution global and regional paleoclimate records, we now know that our “stable” Holocene climate has been
punctuated with periods of rapid and synchronous change, including rapid changes in temperature, available moisture, and vegetation. Far from being a
period of climatic stability, recent studies suggest abrupt climate change during the Holocene including departures in temperature and precipitation with
millennial-scale cyclicity that operates independently of glacial/interglacial climate. Recent geoarchaeological evidence from the South Atlantic Coastal
Plain has provided evidence for regional-scale burial processes likely operating on millennial time-scales and in response to regional if not global
perturbations to the climate system. This evidence includes a limited but pervasive signature of landform aggradation over the Holocene in a variety of
depositional environments and geomorphic settings. Periods of rapid climate change and resulting ecological and environmental disruption are implied. In
this paper, we examine the evidence and discuss the possible behavioral responses of Late Pleistocene and Holocene hunter-gatherers to rapid climate
change events in the Southeast.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 305
Moore, Elizabeth
[265]             Research and Collections at the Virginia Museum of Natural History
The Virginia Museum of Natural History (VMNH) is an AAM accredited museum that serves as the state repository for natural history collections and
occupies a purpose-built structure completed in 2007. As the state museum under the Secretary of Natural Resources, VMNH curates over 10 million
archaeological, biological, paleontological, and geological specimens in trust for the citizens of the Commonwealth. The archaeology department currently
curates over one million specimens. While the archaeology collection contains prehistoric and historic site assemblages from throughout Virginia’s past,
VMNH has several significant assemblages from Paleoindian and Archaic contexts. Archaeology collections have been acquired through VMNH sponsored
research, through the rescue of orphaned collections (primarily from universities), and from firms conducting CRM research and compliance projects. In
addition, the archaeology department has developed skeletal reference collections for zooarchaeological research using the in-house skinning lab and
dermestarium which includes extensive mammal, bird, bivalve, and gastropod collections and we are beginning to add herpetology and fish specimens.
Visiting researchers can arrange for space to work and access to the research collections, reference collections, a rapidly growing research library with ca.
8000 volumes, prep lab, and a variety of microscopes and digitization tools.
Moraes, Bruno (Universidade Federal do Amazonas - UFAM (Brazil))
[23]              The Middens, the Terraces and What Lies in Between: A Test for the Middenscape Model of Terra Preta Formation at the Mouth of the
                  Xingu River
Remarkable marks of an intense occupation in precolumbian times, the Amazonian Dark Earths are spread ubiquitously over a large area in the Amazon
River basin. Despite being products of human interaction with the landscape, the differences between each one of them can be significant in terms of its
physical and chemical properties, probably reflecting a diversity of both cultural and natural processes which they were exposed. As the increasing studies
in Amazonian Archaeology the processes of formation of ADEs constitutes an important case to understand how these groups interacted with their
environment, intensively transforming their landscape. This presentation aims on the spatial analysis of the data collected in two ADE sites, in the mouth of
Xingu River, testing a hypothesis that accumulated and processed refuge from the daily activities from households (middens), in opposition to the ever
swept public areas (terraces) was responsible for the actual features seen in these places.
Moralejo, Reinaldo (CONICET-Argentina. División Arqueología, Museo de La Plata, UNLP.) and Milagros Aventín Moretti (División Arqueología,
Museo de La Plata, UNLP. )
[233]             The Inkas and the Sacred Landscape of The Shincal of Quimivil, Nortwestern Argentina.
Throughout history, societies have had a particular worldview and a sense of what’s sacred, so that in each time and space they have expressed in
different ways their own awareness of an origin and a destiny. The objective of this paper is to describe and to analyze the sacred Inka landscape in one of
the southernmost “New Cuzco” capital of the Kollasuyu: The Shincal of Quimivil, located in the province of Catamarca, Northwestern Argentina. The
mythical stories of the Inkas tell that there was a sacred coexistence and a balance between nature and mankind, giving both meaning and organization to
time and space, providing foundations and coherence to society. In The Shincal of Quimivil one can see several indicators of this principle of landscape
organization. The approach we used consists of the micromorphological analysis of each site component. This analysis not only allows us to grasp each
element in detail, but also to understand it as part of an integrated system that had as it main purpose to symbolically replicate the Cusco capital as a
model of hegemonic and territorial appropriation.
Morales, Pedro [20] see Casar, Isabel
Morales-Arce, Ana
[275]             An Ancient Mitochondrial DNA Approach to Explore Precolumbian Inhabitants Ancestry at Paquimé, Casas Grandes
The genetic analysis of different periods in specific spatial territories could contribute to understand patterns of interactions for pre-Columbian populations
that lived in northwest Mexico. Especially for those sites that show debated cultural traits such as Paquimé, the use of all possible bioarchaeological
approaches may be key to identify their population ancestry, affinities, and to evaluate possible migrants origin. This research analyzes ancient
mitochondrial DNA, HVI and HVII, of 14 individuals from Paquimé to assess their biological affinities in contrast with ancient DNA reports from
southwestern United States and southern Mexican populations. The corresponding achievements and challenges of this method for these specific samples
will be exposed. This research’s intention is to contribute to the understanding of theoretical patterns of migration and/or cultural fusion populations through
contrasting material culture evidence of social changes and genetic consequences, especially for the Medio Period.
Moran, Elizabeth (Liz) (Christopher Newport University)
[15]              Sacred Consumption: Food and Ritual in Aztec Art and Culture
This paper is about food, its depiction in Aztec art, and its ritual use in Aztec culture. Integral to a society on many levels, food is often a cultural reflection,
mirroring what is significant to a particular group. The representation of food and its consumption is prevalent in the surviving artworks created in various
media by the Aztecs of Central Mexico in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The symbolic use of food and consumption is also evident in Aztec ritual,
another subject recorded in several sixteenth-century sources of both native and European origin. This study focuses on the series of eighteen public
ceremonies that the Aztecs performed throughout the year. Called veintenas by Spanish chroniclers, these ceremonies are connected to both the
agricultural cycle and the 365-day solar calendar. The way food was incorporated in veintena ceremonies is significant; sixteenth-century sources record
the use of food not only as a part of the feasting, but as a part of the ritual performances organized by the Aztecs. This investigation hopes to examine and
compare the use and depiction of food as ritual in various sixteenth-century written and painted manuscripts. Additionally, the question of audience will be
addressed.
Moran, Kimberlee (Forensic Outreach)
[187]             Chair
Morehart, Christopher [236] see Pacheco-Fores, Sofia
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               306
Morehouse, Rebecca (Maryland Archaeological Conservation Laboratory), Sara Rivers Cofield (Maryland Archaeological Conservation
Laboratory) and Erin Wingfield (Maryland Archaeological Conservation Laboratory)
[265]             Yes! You Can Have Access to That! Increasing and Promoting the Accessibility of Maryland’s Archaeological Collections
Eighteen years ago, the State of Maryland’s archaeological collections were moved into the Maryland Archaeological Conservation Laboratory (MAC Lab)
at Jefferson Patterson Park and Museum in Southern Maryland. This was an important step towards improving the storage conditions of the Maryland
collections, but it did little to make the collections more accessible. Understanding the need for better access to archaeological collections, MAC Lab staff
spent years rehousing, inventorying and conserving collections to make them more available to researchers, students, and other institutions for study,
education, and exhibit. This poster will highlight the various approaches the MAC Lab has taken to not just increase, but to also promote, access to the
Maryland collections through outreach programs, exhibits, and online research tools.
Moreiras Reynaga, Diana (The University of Western Ontario)
[236]             What Did the Sacrificed Subjects Eat? A Stable Isotope Study of Individuals Sacrificed by the Aztecs during the Late Postclassic period
This poster introduces my doctoral research project which entails a stable isotope analysis of human sacrificial subjects recovered from the Aztec capital
city of Tenochtitlan and its sister city Tlatelolco (present-day Mexico City) dating to the Late Postclassic period (A.D. 1400–1519). The collections include
adult and subadult sacrificed individuals from the Templo Mayor and Templo R. This research focuses on expanding our knowledge about dietary and
mobility patterns of sacrificial subjects during Aztec times. For the purpose of this poster, I focus particularly on the dietary component of this study by
introducing specific research hypotheses and discussing preliminary stable isotopic results in relation to the diets of those who were once offered to the
Aztec gods.
Morell-Hart, Shanti (McMaster University)
[212]             Cuisine at the Crossroads
Investigations at sites across Northwestern Honduras—inside and outside of the Maya area—have uncovered diverse food practices and ingredients. As
with other more durable goods, there is evidence of transformation over time, and the movement of elements across the landscape. Some foodways were
never adopted in regions where they came to be readily available (considering the general flow of species and materials) while others were quickly adopted
but in novel ways. Evidence points toward dynamic overlap between northern and southern societies, with northwestern Honduras serving as a sort of
regional crossroads.
In this paper, I compare cuisines from several ancient communities within and near the Copán area, drawing primarily from a rich archaeobotanical data
set that includes both microbotanical and macrobotanical residues. I briefly address the political and historic context of each community, and provide
abridged biographies of the main taxa addressed. Of particular interest will be maize, palms, lerén, sweet potato, and manioc, as well as several
herbaceous species. I pay close attention to shifts in food traditions, as well as the persistence of certain aspects of cuisine over time, addressing how they
are tangled in broader political and economic currents.
Morello, Flavia [204] see Alfonso-Durruty, Marta
Morello Repetto, Flavia (Instituto de la Patagonia, Universidad de Magallanes), Jimena Torres (Université de Paris I, France), Victor Sierpe
(Instituto de la Patagonia, Universidad de Magallan) and Manuel San Roman (Instituto de la Patagonia, Universidad de Magallan)
[207]             Offing 2 Locus 2 Archaeological Site (Dawson Island, Patagonia, Chile), Marine Hunter-Gatherers and Interaction during the Late Holocene
The results of Offing 2 Locus 2 archaeological excavation are presented and used to discuss broader implications for Patagonia hunter-gatherer contexts
of the Late Holocene. The site is located near Dawson Island, within a strategic geographical position between Fueguian-Patagonian archipelagos, South
American. Radiocarbon dating states occupation around 800 years B.P. Evidence is characteristic of shellmidden deposits and chronological evidence
indicates a short occupational sequence. Lithic technology includes use and transport of green obsidian with predominant use of local rocks, and a wide
typology of instruments as end-scrapers, side-scrapers and knives, common along the macro-region. As for projectile points they are predominantly
stemmed but varied in typology and small size points are identified with bow-arrow weapons similar to those described for ethnographic collections.
Bone instruments consider wedges, retouchers and awls, among others, but the key characteristic instruments are harpoon points of one barb and simple-
tenon base that are detachable, also described in historic-ethnographic times. Other fauna elements include guanaco bone remains (Lama guanicoe) and
scallop shells (Chlamys sp.) both of exotic origin and decorated bird bone pendants. Subsistence strategies are dominated by pinniped exploitation, sea
birds and fishing. Results are discussed in relation to cultural traits and interaction evidence.
Moretti, John (Museum of Texas Tech University)
[16]              Preliminary Analysis of Extinct Box Turtle Remains from the Late Pleistocene of the Southern High Plains
A diverse and abundant latest Pleistocene vertebrate fauna is currently being investigated at Macy Locality 100 on the southeastern edge of the Southern
High Plains, Texas. Remains of an extinct box turtle (Terrapene carolina putnami) are common among the recovered material from the site's alluvial
deposits. Believed to have been a mesic form, the extirpation of the eastern species from the region and the extinction of the T. c. putnami are ostensibly
linked to ecological changes of the terminal Pleistocene. Morphological characters are utilized to demonstrate identification of Macy Locality 100 material to
this extinct taxon and population dynamics are examined. The spatial distribution of T. c. putnami material is plotted and considered against the range of
radiocarbon dates from the locality, as well as from the known temporal range of the taxon itself. This study is undertaken in a context of exploring regional
abiotic change and biotic response during the Pleistocene-Holocene transition. Such explorations are a major component of the career of Eileen Johnson.
Current investigations operate within the Lubbock Lake Landmark Regional Research Program, a venue for discovery and research opportunities.
Morgan, Molly [55] see Lohse, Jon
Morgan, Christopher (University of Nevada, Reno), Loukas Barton (University of Pittsburgh) and Bayarsaikhan Jamsranjav (National Museum of
Mongolia)
[180]             Paleoenvironment and the Hunter-Herder Transition in Northwestern Mongolia
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                307
New paleoenvironmental proxy data indicate a series of changes in hydrology and environment from the terminal Pleistocene through middle Holocene in
Uvs Province, Mongolia. Recent archaeological surveys, excavations and GIS-based analyses suggest these changes may correlate with alterations in
technology and land use that are arguably consistent with the temporal span thought to represent the adoption and/or in situ development of pastoralist
economies across the region. These correlations are explored with a set of hypothetical models designed to explain the fundamental behavioral changes
taking place within this span of time that take into account the interplay between environment, technology, settlement, and social structure.
Morgan, Michele (Peabody Museum, Harvard University), Jane Rousseau (Peabody Museum, Harvard University) and Christina Hodge (Stanford
University Archaeology Collections)
[284]             Early 19th Century Anatomical Instruction at Harvard Medical School: A Bioarchaeological Study of Human Remains from Holden Chapel,
                  Harvard University
This paper reports recent study of anatomized human remains and artifacts from a trash feature beneath Holden Chapel in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
once home to Harvard University’s medical school. The building housed medical instruction from 1801 until 1825 and was used for periodic anatomical
lectures until the 1860s. During a 1999 renovation, archaeologists recovered more than 2700 objects, including scientific equipment, domestic artifacts,
and faunal remains, from a defunct dry well in Holden’s basement. Mingled with this debris were over 900 fragments of human remains representing at
least four juveniles and twelve adults. Analysis of these remains in conjunction with archived lecture notes of the first medical school faculty, institutional
records, and instructional works on anatomy permits us to connect the condition of material remains and instructional purpose. Observed cuts on sectioned
bones are consistent with amputation techniques and methods of anatomical preparation. X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy documents heavy metals used
for preservation. Evidence of material interactions between scholar and cadaver also reveal the social impacts of anatomization. The Holden Chapel
collection offers unique insights into the practice of early modern anatomical instruction, as well as ways in which medical authority was bound with notions
of ethics and personhood.
Morgan-Smith, Maggie (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill)
[127]             Fringe Benefits?: Historical Household Investigations at Rancho Kiuic, Yucatan, Mexico
This paper presents preliminary findings from recent research at Rancho Kiuic, an eighteenth–twentieth century landed estate in the Puuc region of
Yucatán, México. Occupied by generations of Maya-speaking landowners and laborers during the Colonial and Republican eras, the Rancho represents a
site type with that has seen little archaeological or ethnohistoric investigation. Drawing on household-level excavation data, oral histories among the
Rancho’s descendant community, and archival research, landowner-laborer relationships among Maya-speakers will be explored. Furthermore, the
Rancho’s temporal and physical position, on the cusp of historical political shifts and at the edge of centralized political authority, will be considered as it
relates to the critical issues of socioeconomic status and tenancy patterns among laborers and landowners at the site.
[127]             Chair
Moriarty, Ellen [26] see Moriarty, Matthew
Moriarty, Matthew (Castleton University), Antonia Foias (Williams College) and Ellen Moriarty (Community College of Vermont)
[26]              Articulating Economies in the Land of the Ik’ Lords: Evidence for Marketplaces and Multiple Modes of Exchange in the Late Classic Motul
                  de San José Polity
More than a decade of research in the Motul de San José area has produced a rich corpus of household middens and domestic artifact assemblages
reflecting a wide range of social statuses and occupations at a diverse set of local centers. This body of data permits a detailed bottom-up consideration of
patterns of production, consumption, and distribution for a wide range of goods within and between member communities in the Late Classic Motul polity.
This paper examines the evidence for marketplace exchange in the Motul area through the lens of household-level obsidian and ceramic consumption
data. These data strongly support the identification of markets within the Motul polity, and, further, suggest likely locations; however, these data also
highlight the complexity of local economics and provide evidence for multiple modes of exchange.
Moriarty, Ellen and Matthew Moriarty (Castleton University)
[291]             Household Economies in the Petén Lakes Region: Late Classic Ceramic Assemblages from Trinidad de Nosotros and Xilil
In this paper, we present a detailed view of ancient Maya domestic economy from the perspective of household midden ceramic assemblages at two sites
along the north shore of Lake Petén Itzá: Trinidad de Nosotros and Xilil. A highly successful method of midden prospecting was employed over the course
of three field seasons, resulting in the excavation of more than 20 middens in 15 Late Classic residential groups across the two sites. Analyses of ceramics
from these middens, including type-variety, functional, modal, and petrographic, shed light on behavioral patterns and activities carried out in and around
households of all socioeconomic levels. Through comparisons with middens clearly created through public ritual activities, this paper provides a working
definition of a typical Late Classic household midden in the central Petén Lakes region.
Morris, John (Institute of Archaelogy, Belize) and Jaime Awe (Northern Arizona University)
[58]              Exhibiting Maya Archaeology in the Developed World: A Developing Country Perspective
Mounting exhibitions that highlight the achievements of Mesoamerican civilizations can be a daunting task for curators of even the most affluent museums
in America, Europe or Asia. In the case of smaller museums with ever decreasing budgets, the challenges posed by these projects are greater, and
sometimes even cost-prohibitive. But what about the situation faced by the lending institutions in the developing world? Are there challenges and benefits
that result from their collaboration with museums interested in exhibiting their cultural heritage? In an effort to address this very question, this paper
examines the ethical, political, social, and financial challenges and benefits that participation in international exhibitions provides to the Belize Institute of
Archaeology.
Morrison, Kathleen (University of Chicago)
[138]             Other Archaeologies of the Present: Enduring Legacies of Past Land Use
Some scholars take the label 'archaeology of the present' to refer to the study of very recent archaeological records and material remains, but here I use it
to refer to the ways in which even ancient human action has ongoing significance for the present and the future. One of the many arenas of the
contemporary significance of the 'archaeological' past is the legacy of past land use, including that of irrigated agriculture, on regional and global
vegetation, landforms, and even climate. I discuss a new working group, Landcover 6k, designed to study how land use and land cover (vegetation)
changes throughout the Holocene have been linked and how these changes have had an impact on regional and global climate.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               308
Morrison, Alex [296] see Allen, Melinda
Morrow, Juliet (Arkansas Archeological Survey)
[21]              Clovis Origins: A Global Perspective
I review the archaeological record of northern Eurasia and North America from 15,000 to 12,000 cal B.P. to better define the Clovis cultural complex and
identify its most likely area and time of origin. Evidence including a clinal pattern of point style changes indicates migration southward and eastward
through North America south of the ice sheets. Diagnostic attributes permit discrimination of early, middle and late Paleoindian assemblages. These data
support a relatively simple and parsimonious model of the peopling of the New World.
[21]              Discussant
[21]              Chair
Morsink, Joost [220] see Haviser, Jay
Morsink, Joost, Jay Haviser (SIMARC, Leiden University), Ruud Stelten (Leiden University) and Dr. Corinne L. Hofman (Leiden University)
[222]             Coastal Resource Exploitation during the Late Ceramic Age on Bonaire, Dutch Caribbean
Leiden University recently initiated a long-term field project on Bonaire, Dutch Caribbean, which focuses on the human exploitation of resources in dynamic
coastal environments. The location of the Den Bon site - behind a large inland bay bordered by mangroves and on the edge of a tidal flat – suggests an
explicit interest in resources that derive from such environments. Previous research has indicated that island-specific resources were fundamental in the
creation of larger regional networks in the Lesser Antilles and wetland resources likely played an equivalent role in producing such networks through
exchange. The practices involved in the exploitation, manufacture and exchange of local resources are entwined, producing a web of relations between
materials and people. As such, unraveling the complexities of resource exploitation at Den Bon requires a multi-disciplinary approach in which resources,
the site context, and its larger regional embedding are analyzed in tandem. This research provides a unique opportunity to explore indigenous realities and
ontologies of daily life by focusing on the exploitation of local wetland resources and their regional significance.
Moseley, Michael
[219]             Discussant
Moser, Duane [63] see Hamilton-Brehm, Scott
Moses, Victoria (University of Arizona) and Ugo Fusco (Sapienza University of Roma)
[80]              From Iron Age Settlement to Etruscan Urban Sanctuary: Zooarchaeological Analysis at Veii (Campetti-Southwest Excavation)
Veii (Veio) was one of the most significant urban centers in central Italy during the Etruscan Period. The Campetti-Southwest excavations at Veii have
uncovered more evidence from this site pertaining to its Iron Age settlement (Period I), the Etruscan period urban sanctuary (Period II), and later
occupations. The focus of this research is Period I (late ninth to mid-seventh cent. B.C.E.) and II (mid-seventh to fourth cent. B.C.E.). The faunal remains
from these time periods add to our understanding of the changes that accompanied the shift from medium-sized settlement to urban center. In Period I, the
faunal remains are primarily consumption waste, serving as evidence for the role of animals in subsistence during the earliest occupation of the site. Later
deposits are associated with votive offerings at the urban sanctuary, reflecting animal sacrifice. The contexts from Period I differ from the votive deposits of
Period II in multiple aspects, including proportions of taxa present, age of animals, skeletal elements, and modifications such as burning. The faunal
assemblage reflects variation in utilization of animals both diachronically and based on activity.
Moses, Sharon (Northern Arizona University)
[187]             Life among the Tombstones: Forensics Crosses Paths with Hoodoo
African magic rituals among the graves of the recently dead in the south and elsewhere may not be as rare as one might think. This paper is an exploration
of a case wherein the author was called in as a forensic archaeologist and consultant to law enforcement investigating a case of cemetery desecrations
with supernatural overtones. Further, during the course of this investigation, possible connections between the author's historical archaeological research
excavation of a slave street on a former plantation and its descendants came to light. Faced with the dilemma of assisting law enforcement yet maintaining
confidentiality of descendant populations, this is also an examination of ethics when forensics, religious culture, and research cross paths.
Moss, Patrick [295] see Haberle, Simon
Most, Rachel [287] see Lerner, Shereen
Mosteller, Kelli [266] see Sievert, April
Motta, Laura (University of Michigan)
[103]             Cultural Choices and Exchange Networks: Cereals in Iron Age and Archaic Italy.
Staple foods offer an ideal opportunity to investigate cultural identity and socio-economic interactions. In Iron Age and Archaic Central Italy several kinds of
cereal staples were grown, consumed and possibly exchanged. Different patterns shown by recent archaeobotanical research suggest interesting
implications for the understanding of the cultural and political landscape of central Italy in a period of rapid tranformations. A new method has been
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              309
developed to detect directly the movement of cereal staples across the region and the very first preliminary results of Sr isotopic analysis on charred seeds
from Gabii will be presented.
Motz, Christopher F. [27] see Wright, Joshua
Mountjoy, Joseph (Universidad de Guadalajara, México), Fabio Germán Cupul Magaña (Universidad de Guadalajara, Mexico), Rafael García de
Quevedo Machain (Universidad de Guadalajara, Mexico) and Martha Lorenza López Mestas Camberos (Centro I.N.A.H. Jalisco, Mexico)
[101]            The Early Postclassic Aztatlán Colonization of the Coast of Jalisco, Mexico
Recent investigations at the site of Arroyo Piedras Azules on the northwestern coast of Jalisco have revealed much about the nature and the date of Early
Postclassic Aztatlán colonization of the Pacific coast of Jalisco. Excavations at this 3–4 hectare habitation site by a local enthusiast and follow-up
investigations that included stratigraphic excavations by the primary author have indicated a direct colonization of this site by people from coastal Nayarit
who arrived during the Cerritos phase (circa 1000 A.D.) possessing elaborate polychrome pottery, spindle whorls, figurines, metal and shell fishhooks,
prismatic obsidian blades and jewelry of metal, bone, stone and shell. Analysis of shell and bone refuse shows a broad-spectrum diet of coastal resources.
The reason for this colonization it thought to have been principally to obtain local spondylus shell for jewelry manufacture.
Moura, Guy
[203]            Discussant
Moy, Rachel [177] see Wendrich, Willeke
Moyer, Teresa (National Park Service)
[229]            NPS Archeology and Outreach: A Broad View of 100 Years
Over the past 100 years, a range of outreach and education activities have helped the National Park Service to meet its mission while engaging the public's
interest in the mystery, fun, and dirt of archeology. From field trips to public digs to web sites, the NPS has aimed to remain engaged and relevant in
multigenerational learning. This paper will outline the changing approaches to outreach and education by archeologists in the NPS.
[229]            Chair
Moyes, Holley (University of California, Merced), Laura Kosakowsky (University of Arizona, Tucson), Jaime Awe (University of Northern
Arizona, Flagstaff) and Erin Ray (University of California, Merced)
[294]            The Chronology of Ancient Maya Cave Use in Belize
The prevalence of Late Classic cultural material in ancient Maya ritual cave sites has led both researchers and lay people to characterize cave use as a
Late Classic phenomenon; yet, data collected by the Belize Cave Research Project under the direction of Holley Moyes and Jaime Awe demonstrates that
many if not most caves were initially used during earlier temporal periods and many sites demonstrate continued use beginning in the Preclassic period.
From 2011 to 2015, the regional project has investigated over 50 caves in northern, western, and central Belize. Of these, 25 sites were studied intensively
which included mapping, recording, conducting ceramic analyses, excavating, and radiocarbon dating. In this paper we present the results of our analysis
of the spatial and temporal aspects of ancient Maya cave use in Belize.
Mrasek, Kayleigh [94] see Lamkin, Sarah
Mueller, Natalie
[98]             Seeds as Artifacts: Investigating the Spread of Agroecological Knowledge in Eastern North America, c. 1000 B.C.E.–1300C.E.
For crops to spread successfully, transmission of knowledge about how, when, and where to grow them is just as important as the seed itself. Seed
morphology can be used as a proxy for this knowledge in two ways: 1) Domesticated seeds have been shaped by many generations of human cultivation,
and agricultural practices can be reconstructed from their morphology; and 2) plasticity causes morphological variation that is a function of the growth
environment created by communities for their crops. I integrate data from field collections, greenhouse experiments, and analysis of archaeobotanical
assemblages of one seed crop, erect knotweed (Polygonum erectum L.) to investigate agricultural practices through space and time in eastern North
America. I then turn to ethnography for insights into the institutions that may have facilitated the spread of crops and agricultural knowledge from one
community to another.
Mullen, Kyle (University of Kentucky)
[216]            Classic Period Dune Settlement in the Eastern Lower Papaloapan Basin (ELPB), Southern Veracruz, Mexico
The Tres Zapotes polity flourished in the Eastern Lower Papaloapan Basin (ELPB) between 400 B.C. and 300 A.D. As Tres Zapotes’ economic and
political power waned in the Early Classic, the ELPB became a political frontier (Stark 1997). Sites in the contested political landscape of the ELPB and
Tuxtla Mountains strengthened their ties to both Classic Veracruz and Central Mexico (Stoner 2011; Loughlin 2012; Santley 2007). This paper broadly
explores how the political and economic landscape of the ELPB evolved in relation to the resilience of the Tres Zapotes polity (ca. 1250 B.C.–A.D. 900).
More specifically, I examine 17 square kilometers of coastal paleodune occupation in the northern ELPB. Through systematic pedestrian survey, surface
artifacts were collected and analyzed over the course of two seasons. This paper presents the results of two seasons of research and explores the
processes that account for the primarily Classic Period dune occupation. I will shed light on the demographic, economic, and political changes occurring in
the region at this time.
Mullen, Kyle [264] see Pool, Christopher
Muller, Miriam (Joukowsky Institute, Brown University)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                310
[75]               Discussant
Müller, Lais [255] see Eigenherr, Gustav
Mullins, Patrick [205] see Smith, Ryan
Mullins, Patrick (University of Pittsburgh)
[228]              Hilltop Visibility Networks and Empire in the Moche Valley
Prehistorically used in contexts ranging from mountain deity veneration to imperial conquest and warfare, hilltops serve as excellent platforms for staying
connected to and informed of the surrounding social, political, and ritual landscape. This being said, how can the characteristics of visibility networks
between hilltop sites help inform archaeologists of the ancient socio-political and ritual settings on which they were situated? Featuring dozens of hilltop
sites that temporally correlate with the expansion of the nearby Chimú Empire, the Late Intermediate Period (A.D. 900–1470) settlement patterns of the
Moche Valley in Peru provide a relevant case-study for this analysis. This paper applies social network theory to inter-visibility networks in the Moche
Valley in order to understand how different stages of the Chimú Empire’s involvement in that region may have influenced the organization and placement of
such sites. In particular, the visual centrality of certain sites can be seen as being the related to their economic, defensive, and ritual importance. Only
through interweaving local traditions of apu veneration, imperial interest in canal construction, and the defensive necessities of living on a volatile imperial
frontier can the visual interconnectedness of these hilltop sites be understood.
Mulrooney, Mara (Bishop Museum), Mark D. McCoy (Southern Methodist University) and Thegn N. Ladefoged (University of Auckland)
[296]              Returning to the Gardens of Lono: New Investigations in the Kona Field System, Hawaii Island
Hawai‘i Island’s Kona Field System is the largest dryland field system in the Hawaiian Islands. The chronology for the development of this system has been
addressed through several major studies, including the landmark volume ‘Gardens of Lono’ which described intensive survey and excavations on the
grounds of the Amy Greenwell Ethnobotanical Garden in Kealakekua. Since its publication, radiocarbon dates from this and most other excavations in
Kona have been rejected due to a lack of control for short-lived taxa, and new excavations of fields in Kealakekua suggest a much more recent chronology
for the development of the fields. In 2015, we returned to the Amy Greenwell Ethnobotanical Garden and conducted new excavations of a kuaiwi (field wall)
aimed at recovering appropriate material for radiocarbon dating and new paleoethnobotanical studies. In this paper, we outline the results of excavation
and discuss their implications for the development of agriculture in Hawai‘i.
Mulvihill, Timothy S. [225] see Mitchem, Jeffrey
Muñiz, David (El Colegio de Michoacán) and Kimberly Sumano (El Colegio de Michoacán)
[101]              The Construction of Prehispanic Landscapes in the Santiago Bayacora Basin, Durango
Northern Mexico has traditionally been underrepresented in received archaeological scholarship on Mesoamerica, and in this sense the Guadiana branch
of the Chalchihuites Culture in Durango is no exception. Nonetheless, in recent years archaeological research in the region has produced a body of new
data that permits a deeper understanding of the ancient inhabitants of Durango. This paper explores archaeological evidence from the Santiago Bayacora
basin, a riverine watershed whose lower portion encompasses Durango’s Guadiana Valley. A hypothetical regional settlement pattern for the period of
Chalchihuites occupation (A.D. 550–1150) is suggested through a consideration of architectural types and their distribution, site visibility and situation
within the landscape, and ceramic analysis—data that also point to the sociopolitical organization of the groups inhabiting this landscape. Finally, utilizing
the frameworks of landscape archaeology, the author explores the dynamics of the processes of landscape appropriation in which regional groups were
likely involved. This paper thus contributes to contemporary debate by highlighting a series of key questions and suggestions for continuing investigation
that are critical to augmenting our burgeoning understanding of the archaeological record of northern Mexico.
Munkittrick, Jessica (Memorial University of Newfoundland), Alison Harris (Memorial University of Newfoundland), Kelly-Anne Pike (Memorial
University of Newfoundland) and Vaughan Grimes (Memorial University of Newfoundland, Max Planck In)
[190]              “They are One with the Tides of the Sea”: Diets of Settlers and Sailors in Newfoundland during the 17th to 19th Centuries
From the mid seventeenth to early nineteenth centuries the lucrative cod fishery drew sailors and settlers from the British Isles and continental Europe to
the shores of Newfoundland. Poor agricultural prospects and a dependence on imports challenged permanent settlement; as a result, the life- and
foodways of these early ‘Newfoundlanders’ differed from those that developed at other North American colonial settlements. Through palaeodietary
analysis, we investigate the different subsistence-based adaptive strategies devised by these settlers to both cope with Newfoundland’s harsh environment
and to maintain important sociocultural ties with their homelands. We examine the δ13C and δ15N values of bone and dentine collagen of individuals
(n=46) recovered from seven historic sites and cemeteries in Newfoundland to explore how limited terrestrial resources and imported food supplies
affected the diets of settlers. We further compare these results to stable isotope values from British Royal Navy sailors buried on Newfoundland whose
diets were not subject to the same restrictions as those settled in Newfoundland. The findings of this study emphasize the ability of the early settlers to
overcome the limits of the terrestrial environment and the critical role of the sea for sustaining life and community.
Muñoz, Victoria [131] see Roberts, Jerod
Munro, Kimberly (Louisiana State University)
[31]               Localized Formative Traditions in the Upper Nepeña River Valley, Ancash, Peru: The 2015 Excavations at the Cosma Archaeological
                   Complex
This paper will explore the development and use of a localized ceremonial complex at the base of the Cordillera Negra Mountains, in coastal Ancash.
Located at the headwaters of the Nepeña River valley at an elevation of 2,650 masl, the Cosma Archaeological Complex shows a repeated occupation
from the Pre-Ceramic through Late Horizon. This paper will cover the chronology and ritual use of the two main ceremonial mounds: Karecoto, and
Acshipucoto, which date from the Pre-Ceramic through Final Formative. Not surprisingly, based on its location, Cosma shares elements of coastal and
highland influence through its architectural components, ceramics, and other trade items. Excavations during the 2014 and 2015 season revealed a
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 311
tradition of circular walls associated with the burning of animal bones, as well as a final capping of the Karecoto mound with infant interments during the
Final Formative. Focusing on chronology, construction, and the ritual use of the mounds, this paper will cover the preliminary findings from the 2014 and
2015 field seasons.
Munro , Kimberly [276] see Witt, Rachel
Munson, Marit (Trent University)
[13]              Life Histories of Ochre and Related Pigments in the Ancestral Pueblo Southwest
What defines an ochre: its chemical composition, its color, or both? The Ancestral Pueblo people of the U.S. southwest used a range of red and yellow
pigments, some of which fit strict scientific definitions of ochre and some that do not. Ancestral Pueblo people also created a variety of paints by mixing
these pigments with clays and other materials. In this paper, I consider the use of mineral pigments and paints through time and space, drawing on
material from Chaco Canyon, Mesa Verde, ancestral Hopi and Zuni sites, and a variety of other locations. I argue that that ochres recovered from
archaeological sites are most productively treated as artifacts that document stages of use, from the acquisition of raw materials to the production and
application of paints. As such, these materials preserve traces of the life histories of pigments, from modification and use wear to evidence of storage and
curation over time. These examples remind us that documenting the color and composition of ochres is not always sufficient; rather, the source, history,
and materiality of these pigments was often crucial to their significance, efficacy, and power.
Munson, Jessica (Lycoming College), Jonathan Scholnick (University of California Davis), Matthew Looper (California State University Chico),
Yuriy Polyukhovych (California State University Chico) and Martha Macri (University of California Davis)
[272]             Diversity and Divergence of Classic Maya Ritual Traditions: A Lexical Perspective on Within-Group Cultural Variation
To study the Classic Maya is to at once recognize the shared material representations and practices that give coherence to this cultural category as a unit
of analysis, as well as to critically examine the diversity and idiosyncrasy of specific cultural traits. Maya hieroglyphic writing, in particular the tradition of
inscribing texts and images on carved stone monuments, offers evidence for widespread and mutually intelligible cultural practices that were neither
unchanging nor uniform in their semantic content. As conduits of linguistic and cultural information, Maya hieroglyphic monuments offer detailed records of
Classic Maya dynastic history that included the names, dates, and specific rituals performed by elite individuals. In this paper we analyze the distribution
and diversity of these inscriptions to examine ritual variation and the divergence of dynastic traditions in Classic Maya society. Diversity indices and
methods adapted from population genetics and ecology are applied to quantify the degree of ritual differentiation and evaluate how these measures vary
over time and are partitioned within and between elite populations. Results of this research refine our understanding about the variation of Classic Maya
ritual traditions and make substantive contributions to examining the population structure of cultural diversity within past complex societies.
Muntoni, Italo [146] see Freund, Kyle
Muro, Luis (Stanford University) and Elsa Tomasto Cagigao (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú)
[99]              Ontologías Corpóreas: Transfiguración, ancestralización y “muerte” en el mundo Moche
En las últimas cuatro décadas decenas de tumbas de élite Moche (200–900 A.D.) han sido descubiertas a lo largo de la costa norte del Perú, develado
importante información sobre la vida física, la identidad y el status de los antiguos Moche. Sin embargo, y paradójicamente, la gran cantidad de datos
recuperados contrasta con los pocos intentos de teorizar cómo el cuerpo pudo haber sido construido y conceptualizado por esta sociedad. Integrando la
fenomenología de Merleau-Ponty y el perspectivismo amerindio de Viveiros de Castro, esta ponencia expande el debate sobre el estudio de la fisicalidad y
materialidad del cuerpo en el pasado. Utilizando como caso de estudio a San José de Moro, un importante cementerio de élite Moche en el valle de
Jequetepeque, exploramos cómo la transfiguración corpórea: de una entidad humana a divina, y de divina a ancestral, tuvo un rol fundamental en los
espectáculos rituales en el sitio y, últimamente, en la negociación y legitimación de poder político en el valle. Esta investigación interconecta datos
arqueológicos, bio-arqueológicos y etnográficos para descifrar cómo el cuerpo Moche fue inscrito en el mundo material, social y el landscape;
contribuyendo así al estudio de los diversos “being-in-the-world” presentes en el mundo andino pre-hispánico.
Muro, Luis [206] see Perea, Ema
Murphy, Kimmarie (Dept. Anthropology, Kenyon College) and Guðný Zöega (Archaeology Dept, Skagafjörður Heritage Museum)
[24]              Life on the Northern Frontier, Bioarchaeological Reconstructions of 11th century Households in the Skagafjörður Region, North Iceland
Iceland was settled in the ninth century by people of Norse and Celtic stock. Located on the margins of the Viking world, the Skagafjörður region was, by
the eleventh century, home to a large number of independent households forming core social units in a country without a king or central government.
Although they maintained close ties with their old home world, ship arrivals were erratic and individual households were largely dependent on their own
produce for survival. Early settlers lived in a perpetual state of flux due to their sub-arctic environment. Seasonal weather fluctuations affected harvests and
livestock viability. Volcanic eruptions and sea-ice posed additional hardships. Their pagan religion was being replaced with Christianity, leading to potential
changes in social stratification and identity. Evidence for their biocultural responses to this stressful environment may be gleaned from early Christian
household cemeteries. This paper will discuss the bioarchaeology of the Viking-age/medieval households interred in the earliest Christian cemeteries in the
Skagafjörður region. Unlike earlier pagan burial fields, the first Christian cemeteries were "all-inclusive," including both sexes and all age groups. What do
these cemeteries tell us about the social realities, health and survival of frontier populations at the edge of the arctic?
Murphy, Nell
[30]              Chair
Murphy, Nell [30] see Watson, Adam
Murphy, Shannon (Eckerd College)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              312
[142]             Discovery of Plantation Row Housing on Cat Island, Bahamas
Multiunit housing for enslaved populations was introduced to estates in the West Indies at the dawn of the nineteenth century during the broader British
movement to improve habitations of both free and unfree rural laborers. Planters attempted to counter abolitionist criticism by installing housing that
incorporated new layouts and more durable materials. Material culture studies of plantations in the Bahamian archipelago, however, have long recognized
an absence of row house architecture. This has led to speculation that some recommendations of British reformers were not adopted in the Bahamian
colony due to local conditions that were different from those of the sugar colonies. Recent surveys at Cove Creek and Golden Grove, two plantation sites
on Cat Island, have at last revealed structures with floor plans and dimensions that are consistent with contemporaneous row house architecture in other
parts of the British Caribbean. The evidence for row housing suggests that the Bahama Islands were not outside the influence of the agrarian reform
movement. The findings force a reconsideration of previous claims about the role of agency and demography among the enslaved.
Murphy, Charlene (University College London, Institute of Archaeology)
[147]             Finding Millet in the Roman World
Examining the evidence for millet in the Roman empire, during the period, circa 753 B.C.–610 A.D., presents a number of challenges: a handful of scant
mentions in the ancient surviving agrarian texts, several frescoes, only a few fortuitous preserved archaeological finds and limited archaeobotanical and
isotopic evidence. Ancient agrarian texts note millet’s ecological preferences and multiple uses but disparage its lowly status. Recent archaeobotanical and
isotopic evidence has shown that millet was being used throughout the Roman period. The compiled data to date suggests that millet consumption was a
more complex socio-economic issue than the ancient sources alone would lead one to believe. Combining multiple lines of evidence, including the ancient
sources, isotopic, archaeological and archaeobotanical evidence the status and role of millet in the Roman world is examined and placed within its
economic, cultural and social background across time and space in the Roman world.
Murphy, Joanne (University of North Carolina Greensboro)
[257]             The Value of All that Glitters: Beads in the Tombs around Pylos, Greece
This paper aims to explore the value of faience and glass in Bronze Age Pylos with a view to reconstructing the wealth and status of the people with whom
they were buried.
These beads must have been imported to Pylos as finished objects since none of the raw materials are found locally and we have no evidence for their
manufacture or production at Pylos. Indeed our analysis of a sample of the vitreous beads shows that some of these beads, or at least their substance,
originated in Egypt and Mesopotamia. As imported substances these beads connect to recent discussions on the Mycenaean political economy that stress
control of trade and access to exotic and highly crafted objects as major power strategies in legitimizing elevated social positions.
In contemporary Egypt and Mesopotamia, glass and faience had very different values with glass having a higher value and more limited distribution than
faience. By examining the distribution of the beads in the tombs and the value of other objects found with them, we will be able to recreate a more nuanced
understanding of the relationship between the value to these objects and the wealth and status of the people buried around Pylos.
Murphy IV, Timothy J. [131] see Lindsay, Audrey
Murray, Matthew and Bettina Arnold (University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee)
[60]              A “Landscape of Ancestors”—Looking Back and Thinking Forward
In 2002, we completed the excavation of two early Iron Age burial monuments in southwestern Germany as part of the “Landscape of Ancestors” project.
After more than a decade of restoration and laboratory analysis, the project is now being prepared for publication. Our research is focused on a complex
mortuary landscape from 720 to 400 B.C. and our perspectives on that landscape have been substantially influenced by ideas of landscape, time, and
society that we absorbed as graduate students from Carole Crumley and William Marquardt’s Regional Dynamics: Burgundian Landscapes in Historical
Perspective (1987), which presented an innovative multiscalar approach to human history in a particular place, as well as from other contemporary works
such as the edited volume Social Relations and Spatial Structures (1985) by geographers Derek Gregory and John Urry, and the now classic Postmodern
Geographies (1989) by Edward Soja. These pioneering works fueled a career-long interest in the intersections of historical ecology, critical social
geography, and experiential human geography. In this paper, we reflect on these connections and on how they continue to open pathways of
understanding today.
Murray, Seth (North Carolina State University)
[60]              Expanding Historical Ecology from Interdisciplinary to Transdisciplinary Objectives
The approaches and perspectives of Historical Ecology are solidly grounded in interdisciplinary objectives. Wide-ranging projects, such as the one Carole
Crumley initiated and has sustained in France, demonstrate the utility of integrating interdisciplinary objectives into research that seeks to understand long-
term changes in a landscape. As the original set of archaeological objectives in Crumley’s project changed over time, Historical Ecology emerged as a
robust conceptual framework that facilitated a multitude of local and international collaborations, and enabled the pursuit of new interdisciplinary objectives.
This paper presents results from a historical ecology research project in southwestern France that sought to parallel or reproduce some of Crumley’s
interdisciplinary investigations in Burgundy, and then discusses an example of how and why recent lines of inquiry in historical ecology are shifting from
interdisciplinary to transdisciplinary objectives.
Murray, Emily Jane and Keith Ashley (University of North Florida)
[164]             New Approach to the Shields Mound: Recent Testing of the North Side Ramp
Shields Mound is one of two large burial mounds that compose the Mill Cove Complex, an early Mississippian period site located near the mouth of the St.
Johns River in northeast Florida. First excavated by C. B. Moore in the 1890s, the sand mound held hundreds of burials as well as exotic goods such as
copper, galena, mica, and two ground stone spatulate celts. More recently, the University of North Florida has investigated nearby components of the
complex, including several habitation middens and a feasting or ritual area situated about 50 meters from the mound. This paper explores the results of
testing of a ramp-like feature that approaches the Shields Mound from the north—a section of the mound that Moore did not excavate.
Murray, John [191] see Yu, Pei-Lin
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  313
Murray, Tim
[258]             Discussant
Murrell, Monica [64] see Heilen, Michael
Murrieta, Rui [125] see Cascon, Leandro
Murtha, Timothy (Penn State), Ann Cyphers (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México) and Gerardo Jiménez (Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México)
[44]              The San Lorenzo Geospatial Project: Mapping the Olmec City and Landscape
For the past decade, we have applied a series of nested geospatial techniques to better understand the development and evolution of the Olmec city of
San Lorenzo and the surrounding regional landscape. Built on a foundation of more than two decades of traditional archaeological excavation, settlement
survey and artifact analysis, the geospatial project expands the coverage and confirms much of what is known about San Lorenzo’s evolution and
settlement ecology. The project also provides opportunities to re-examine the spatial and temporal patterns of architecture and artifacts, as it relates to San
Lorenzo’s cultural history. In this paper we first review the results of the digital sub-surface survey, a project wherein the entire site was referenced, gridded
and cored for soil. We then describe how remote sensing, including LiDAR and low aerial high resolution imagery have been applied to broaden
interpretations of San Lorenzo and its regional landscape. While these new technologies provide an enhanced picture of San Lorenzo’s past, we offer that
these data are far more useful and informative when coupled to the decades of traditional archaeological research.
[44]              Chair
Muzzall, Evan (Human Evolution Research Center, UC Berkeley) and Alfredo Coppa (Dip. Biol Ambient., La Sapienza Università di Roma)
[24]              The Borders of Space and Time: Biological Continuity at Campovalano
     Territorial and cultural boundaries remain some of the most elusive and compelling areas of anthropological study. We examine biological continuity at
Campovalano (Teramo, Abruzzo, Italy) to highlight ways that biology can be used to elucidate interpretations of frontiers and borderlands. We test the
hypothesis that geographic location strongly influenced biological continuity in Italian history.
     Eighteen cranial (n=278) and five maxillary dental (n=377) metric traits, and dental morphological (n=492) data from four groups were used in this
study: Campovalano Iron Age (750–200 B.C.), Medieval (eleventh C. A.D.), and Recent (modern era), and Alfedena Iron Age (L’Aquila, Abruzzo, Italy;
600–400 B.C.).
     Results of metric analyses indicate similarity between Campovalano Iron Age and Medieval samples—only interlandmark distances between bregma,
lambda, and left frontotemporale differ significantly between these groups. Alfedena shows numerous differences with both Campovalano Iron Age and
Medieval series, and principal component analyses of geometric group means reflect these distinctions. Neighbor joining methods of the dental
morphological data suggest that Alfedena is the outgroup compared to the Campovalano Iron Age, Medieval, and Recent series.
     Although the political boundaries of these neighboring groups were often in flux, their biological borders were perhaps governed by different sets of
rules.
Myers, Emlen, Hector Neff (California State University at Long Beach) and Mike Glasscock (University of Missouri)
[91]              Compositional Study of Pre-Hispanic Ceramics from Eastern Bolivia
Ceramics from three archaeological areas in the dry lowlands of eastern Bolivia were analyzed by instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA). The
resulting compositional data were analyzed statistically to identify potential patterns of manufacture and distribution. Samples were selected from three
archaeological areas investigated prior to construction of the Bolivia-Brazil Natural Gas Pipeline in 1997–1998: 1) Rio Grande; 2) Bañados del Izozog; and
3) an inter-riverine area in the Gran Chaco National Park some 180 km east of the Bañados del Izozog. Radio Carbon dates associated with the potter
finds indicate dates between A.D. 900 and A.D. 1300, an unexpectedly early date for pottery use in this dry and presently inhospitable zone. Results of the
data analysis are most consistent with a hypothesis that ceramic circulation along the study area was rare during the time periods represented at the
sampled sites. In each of the three archaeological zones, all pottery samples fall into a single compositional group, and the most parsimonious
interpretation is that each of the three groups contain ceramics that were produced using local raw materials.
Nadeau, Jaclyn (University at Albany)
[85]              Reevaluating the Archaic/Woodland Transition in the Northeast
This paper is the result of an ongoing research project into the technological and social changes occurring in northeastern North America from the Late
Archaic to the Late Woodland. This dynamic period in the region’s prehistory is traditionally marked as the boundary between mobile hunter-gatherer-
fishers and ceramic-producing horticulturalists. The overall effect of these changes on regional populations is still, however, unclear. I argue that to better
understand this period we must couple technologically oriented research with a renewed interest in cultural contexts. Combining these paradigms offers
much needed insight into changing economic and social patterns.
[85]              Chair
Nagaoka, Lisa [65] see Brown, Andrew
Nagarajan, Sudhagar and Christian Davenport (Palm Beach County Government)
[140]             Terrestrial Laser Scanning: A Methodology for Documenting Existing and Extrapolating Past Setting on Archaeological Sites
The Jupiter Inlet I (8PB34) site is one of the most investigated prehistoric sites in Palm Beach County, Florida. Like many of the ancient shell works sites
across the state it was partially destroyed for road fill during the first half of the twentieth century. Only a sketch map of the site from 1883 depicts what the
site looked like prior to destruction. Since then there have been attempts to reconstruct the mound form but these relied on verbal accounts and limited
stick and scope survey methods. In 2007–08 LiDAR was flown over the coast and eventually made into a DEM. Both the raw LiDAR and DEM files were
employed to determine if differences in elevations observed in the field corresponded to features depicted in the 1883 map. The results of this analysis
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 314
were encouraging but to improve the accuracy, the mound was 3D scanned using Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) technique. This lecture will present the
results of the scanning including a calculation of the volume of the remaining shell mound along with the volume estimate change between 1883 and 2015.
[140]             Chair
Naji, Stephan [146] see Rendu, William
Nakagawa, Nagisa [102] see Seki, Yuji
Nan, Puheng (Institute for Cultural Heritage and History of Science and Technology, USTB), Wugan Luo (University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences), Virginie Renson (University of Missouri), Michael D. Glascock (University of Missouri) and Wei Qian (Institute for Cultural Heritage
and History of Sci)
[180]             Lead Isotope Study of the Jin State Bronze Artifacts from Wayaopo Site, Shanxi Province, Northwest China
The Jin State was one of the most important countries in the Spring and Warring Sates period (771 B.C.~221 B.C.). Before the middle Spring period (~576
B.C.), it shared the bronze cultural tradition with the central dynasty (Zhou Royal family). After that, the bronze culture of Jin state was established and is
characterized by different types of vessels, decorations and sometimes, manufacturing techniques. Wayaopo site is one of the typical noble family
cemeteries of Jin state. In this work, 45 bronze samples from seven tombs were collected for lead isotopic study. The study attempts to provide a new
perspective to examine the relationship between Jin state and the Zhou royal family, as well as other important states during that period. It also examines
the source of the different vessel types from the same tomb and compares the source of ritual artifacts (such as ding vessels) with that of daily life artifacts
(such as bu vessels). It finally discusses the hypothesis of a change in the bronze artifact source through the chronology of the Jin state.
Napoleon, Taylor (Indiana University of Pennsylvania), Alyssa Hyziak (Indiana University of Pennsylvania), Scott Rivas (Indiana University of
Pennsylvania), Emily Falk (Indiana University of Pennsylvania) and Ben Ford (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[90]              Beyond Fort Walls: Geophysical and Archaeological Investigations of Fort Haldimand, Carleton Island, New York
During the American Revolutionary War, Carleton Island was home to the British naval base Fort Haldimand. Located on the St. Lawrence River in upstate
New York, the base served as an important connection between Québec and British interior forts. The Thousand Island Land Trust protects Fort
Haldimand, but the area immediately outside the fort is privately owned. During June 2015, archaeologists from Indiana University of Pennsylvania
implemented a variety of geophysical and archaeological techniques to determine if intact features existed outside of the fort. The area was surveyed with
an electromagnetic profiler, a dual gradiometer system, and ground penetrating radar. Based off of the geophysical results, 13 excavation units were
placed in areas showing anomalies. The 1 m by 1 m units yielded two features, as well as a variety of 18th century artifacts, with the majority of the
artifacts being found in units closest to the fort. This poster will highlight how the geophysical techniques helped in planning our archaeological excavation,
the artifacts recovered from the site, and their importance in interpreting activities.
Napolitano, Matthew (University of Oregon), Traci Ardren (University of Miami), Scott Fitzpatrick (University of Oregon), Victor Thompson
(University of Georgia) and Michelle LeFebvre (Florida Museum of Natural History; Leiden Universi)
[133]             Subsistence Strategies and Small Island Adaptations: New Evidence from the Florida Keys
Archaeological research on prehistoric settlements in the Florida Keys has been largely sporadic and diffuse. To help improve our understanding of when
the Keys were settled and their relationship to Calusa and other groups regionally, we revisited the well-known site of 8MO17 on Upper Matecumbe Key in
the central Florida Keys and conducted preliminary subsurface investigation. Preliminary results from the newly established Matecumbe Chiefdom Project
have revealed dense, stratified midden deposits dominated by vertebrates, with smaller quantities of invertebrates. These data have allowed us to evaluate
the similarities and differences to other groups in southern Florida. Our research provides initial insight into the historical trajectories of subsistence
practices for groups that ultimately paid tribute to the Calusa in the sixteenth century. This work and our ongoing research seek to illuminate the
Matecumbe or Keys Indians and their place in the social geography of southern Florida.
Napora, Katharine (University of Georgia), James Bonsall (Institute of Technology Sligo) and Stuart Rathbone (Achill Archaeological Field
School)
[80]              Geoarchaeology of a Dunefield Shell Midden Site in County Sligo, Ireland
This paper presents the preliminary results of a geoarchaeological investigation of an expansive shell midden site in a dunefield blowout area known as the
Shelley Valley in Carrowdough, Co. Sligo, Ireland. Based on the results of the various geophysical and archaeological methodologies we employed at this
site during the summer of 2015, we examine changes through time in the ways people utilized the seashore and its resources. Western Ireland is an ideal
location in which to study temporally diverse human-marine interactions because of the long-standing reliance on coastal resources in the region. This
research focuses on temporality of subsistence and usage practices at the site to examine long- and short-term processes of human-environmental
relationships. We present zooarchaeological analyses of core samples and surface counts as well as the radiocarbon dates we obtained from burnt hearth
material and animal bones from the site. We also present our geophysical survey results, which illuminate the ancient landscape buried under this
dunefield and illustrate the use of such technologies for sand dune site zonation studies.
Nash, Carole (Geographic Science, James Madison University)
[2]               Topography and Territoriality in the Virginia Uplands
The western slopes of the Virginia Blue Ridge contain limited evidence of prehistoric activity, in stark contrast to the eastern slopes where prolific sites
model seasonal upland mobility patterns for the southern Middle Atlantic. Fewer than 80 prehistoric sites, the majority identified as small lithic scatters
bereft of diagnostics, are documented for the 105 miles of the western slopes of Shenandoah National Park; five times that number are documented for the
eastern slopes. Attributed by some researchers to differences in topography and edaphic factors, the lack of western sites is contrasted with a rich
regional archaeological record that demonstrates the regular movement of tool stone in the form of quartzite and chert from the Shenandoah Valley in the
west across the Blue Ridge and eastward into the Piedmont. This presentation examines the distribution of known western Blue Ridge sites, including
quarry sites used throughout prehistory, and proposes a more structured use of this region by mobile foragers, beginning in the Late Archaic. Hypotheses
concerning the control of quarries and the regions around them by groups with attenuated mobility patterns are presented.
[2]               Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                315
Nash, Donna [91] see Williams, Patrick Ryan
Nash, Donna (UNCG)
[219]             Colonization as Imperial Strategy: the Wari Settlement of Moquegua, Peru
When Wari colonists arrived to Moquegua (ca. 600 C.E.) there were several groups occupying different valley ecozones but a relatively small population. In
order to establish the colony Wari officials invested a great deal of labor and resources in the upper drainage, which engaged local and colonial
populations. In this paper, I consider imperial expansion as a process, which was a multi-generational affair. I examine the construction of three major
sites: Cerro Baúl, Cerro Mejía, and Cerro Petroglifo, as well as the timing of these projects, which may represent different waves of colonization or regional
transformations resulting from long-term interactions.
Nathan, Smiti (New York University)
[107]             Midnight at the Oasis: Past and Present Agricultural Activities in Oman
Since the Early Bronze Age in Oman (ca. 3100 B.C.E. to 2000 B.C.E.), oasis agricultural communities have held social and economic importance in
Southern Arabia. Throughout the Arabian Peninsula there are varying microclimates. This paper focuses on northeastern Oman, where an arid landscape
is a defining environmental characteristic. In order to successfully maintain an agrarian lifestyle in these environs, strategic decision-making was key. This
paper brings together previous work on agricultural activities and the author’s recent ethnoarchaeological research to explore how select nightly activities,
including irrigation and plant propagation, were integral in the maintenance and success of Omani oasis communities.
Nathan, Rebecca [123] see Herrmann, Edward
Naudinot, Nicolas (University of Nice)
[242]             Lithic Production, Managment and Mobility Strategies Adaptation during the GS-1 and Early Holocene in North-Western France
The second half of the Late Glacial is marked in north western Europe by a major climatic instability with clear consequences on the vegetation and in
resources density and distribution. At the end of this period, the GS-1 cooling is well recorded and is one of the most important of these events. During this
period, hunter-gatherer groups experienced major changes in a large part of Europe extended from Spain to Scandinavia. This period is marked by the
rapid spread of a phenomenon characterized by a massive return of blades associated with a particularly invested technology. This period is in clear
rupture with the previous millennia (GIS-1) marked by the “azilianization process” of the Magdalenian societies and illustrated by a progressive reduction of
technical investment in lithic productions. The development of this new lithic equipment goes with changes in mobility patterns, tool management strategies
or symbolic system. Did the GS-1 cooling and the rapid Holocene warming play a role in these changes? Some of our data would suggest that it is the
case. The situation is however probably much more complex and it is impossible to explain such a complicated phenomenon by a simple deterministic
equation.
[242]             Chair
Naumann, Elise (Department of Archaeology, Conservation and History)
[192]              Diet and Slavery in Viking Age Norway—The Potential of Isotope Analyses of Human Remains in Studies of Social Differences
Viking Age Norway was a society structured by clear social differences. Archaeological finds from burials and settlements show a hierarchical distribution
of material goods among the Norse, although the distribution of food has traditionally been difficult to trace. In the last few decades, advances in isotope
analyses of human remains have made possible a discussion of these aspects, providing information on individual dietary variation. Considering the harsh
climate of Scandinavia, the control over and access to different food sources is likely to have been of great significance. By comparing individual dietary
composition, it is possible to discuss both the food distribution in relation to social position and the nature of such a distribution.
Six Viking Age burials from Flakstad in northern Norway have been analysed for isotopic composition, three of them containing remains from more than
one individual. The results illuminated a possible differentiation between individuals treated in different ways in the burial context, and also a probable
variation in food consumption connected to social position. In this paper I will discuss the possibility of identifying slaves in Viking Age Norway through
dietary studies of human remains, exemplified by the isotopic results from the Flakstad study.
Naumec, David [61] see McBride, Kevin
Navarro Rosales, Mariana (PACJ)
[169]             Terraza 504, aproximaciones a su función y conformación dentro de Cerro Jazmín
El pasado prehispánico de la sociedad Ñuu Savi ha sido explorado por diversos investigadores desde la década de los sesenta del siglo XX. A pesar de
sus valiosas contribuciones, existen aún muchas interrogantes en torno a sus modos de vida, su organización social y urbana. Durante la temporada 2014
del Proyecto Arqueológico Cerro Jazmín se excavó una terraza fechada por radiocarbono en la fase Ramos temprano (100–200 a.C). La exploración
parcial de la Terraza 504 reveló importantes diferencias entre los elementos que caracterizan a una unidad doméstica, expresadas en su arquitectura,
costumbres funerarias y material cultural cerámico que permiten inferir sobre las actividades realizadas en esta área, las cuales apuntan a que T504
fungió como un área de posible producción artesanal y/o de almacenaje. El análisis de los vestigios arqueológicos que se presentan en esta ponencia nos
permitirá además, ahondar en la función de dicho espacio en la conformación espacial y funcional de la antigua ciudad mixteca.
Navarro-Farr, Olivia [145] see Robison, Jade
Navarro-Farr, Olivia (The College of Wooster), Michelle Rich (Los Angeles County Museum of Art) and Stanley Guenter
[256]             Queens and Statecraft: Royal Women as Agents of Kaanul at El Perú-Waka’
Recent research has shed tremendous light on the impact of two generations of royal women of Kaanul on the classic Maya city of El Peru-Waka’. Lady
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 316
Ikoom and Lady K’abel facilitated royal bonds through marriages to Waka’ rulers, and reigned there during the Early Late and Mid-Late Classic periods,
respectively. In this paper, we address the wide ranging sources of evidence from Waka’ that speak to these linkages, including monuments with preserved
texts, and royal burials from three of the site’s primary ceremonial locales: the Northwest Palace, the city’s main civic-ceremonial Fire Shrine, and the
restricted Mirador Complex. We also present fine-grained analyses of materials deriving from these mortuary contexts, which underscore that multi-
generational marital ties were critical to Kaanul’s socio-political traction at Waka’, a strategic city along the north-south oriented “royal road” that connected
Calakmul to vassals and allies to the south. The legacy of enduring ceremonial reverence shown to these Kaanul Queens illustrates their importance in the
creation and maintenance of the Kaanul hegemony.
Navarro-Farr , Olivia [184] see Hubbard, Eric
Navel, Jeffrey [84] see Dennison, Meagan
Neff, Hector (California State University-Long Beach)
[292]            Luminescence and Radiocarbon Dates from Plumbate Production Contexts
Plumbate, the most widely distributed pottery of Pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, has been sourced to the Pacific coastal region of Soconusco, near the
present international border between Mexico and Guatemala. In recent fieldwork, several Plumbate production contexts were excavated. In addition to
large volumes of Plumbate and Plumbate wasters, these deposits contain large amounts of wood ash and solid ceramic cylinders of various sizes, from
finger-size up to rolling-pin size. Complicating interpretation of the deposits, salt production by the sal cocida technique was undertaken at some of the
production locations both prior to Plumbate production and subsequently, during historic times. Luminescence dates on Plumbate, solid ceramic cylinders,
and salt-production vessels together with radiocarbon dates on charcoal from the deposits help unravel the sequences of production activities and provide
absolute dates for the temporal span of the Plumbate industry.
[57]             Discussant
Neff, Hector [91] see Myers, Emlen
Negrino, Fabio [211] see Riel-Salvatore, Julien
Neiman, Fraser [36] see Ptacek, Crystal
Neiman, Fraser (Monticello)
[272]            How can Evolutionary Models and Archaeological Evidence Help us Understand Change in the Household Economies of Slave Villages on
                 Nevis and Kitts?
Early-modern slave village sites in the eastern Caribbean are littered with both locally-made "Afro-Caribbean" and imported European ceramics.
Archaeologists have focused on the former as an expression of identity, while ignoring copious variation in time and space in both classes of ceramics and
the causal mechanisms that might be responsible for it. This paper embeds evolutionary models of costly signaling and markets in a larger multi-level
selection framework to offer a tentative explanation for ubiquitous household production of Afro-Caribbean ceramics and a previously unrecognized sudden
increase in the abundance of imported ceramics in the late-eighteenth century on Nevis and St Kitts. The evidence is drawn from recent STP surveys on
slave village sites and neutron activation analysis of "Afro-Caribbean" sherds. The models show how archaeological patterns can be traced to the
disruption of food imports from North America, which caused mass mortality among enslaved people and led governing coalitions of slave owners to
introduce new institutions from Jamaica to support independent food production by the enslaved and their participation in state-supported market
exchange.
[202]            Discussant
Neitzel, Jill (University of Delaware)
[195]            His Life before He Died: Pueblo Bonito's Burial #14
More than a century of intensive archaeological investigations in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, has produced a vast literature on all types of remains and
alternative theories about the development, organization, and collapse of Chacoan society. But often missing in this overwhelming amount of information is
the lived experiences of the prehistoric Chacoans themselves. This paper synthesizes Chacoan archaeology from the perspective of one of the canyon’s
residents. Pueblo Bonito’s Burial #14 is best known for his violent death and subsequent internment with the Southwest’s most lavish mortuary
assemblages. Here, his life in Chaco Canyon is reconstructed.
Neivens, Nina (Tulane University)
[109]            Discussant
Neller, Angela (Wanapum Heritage Center, Grant County PUD)
[266]            Collaboration and Partnership: The Columbia Plateau Inter-Tribal Repatriation Group
The Columbia Plateau Inter-Tribal Repatriation Group consists of the tribes and bands in the Pacific Northwest states of Washington, Idaho, and Oregon.
The Colville, Umatilla, Yakama, Nez Perce, and the Wanapum Band of Priest Rapids have come together to undertake the repatriation of human remains
and funerary objects from the Columbia Plateau. The Plateau tribes have an inherent responsibility under their religious beliefs and practices to care for the
ancestors buried within their homeland. These practices form the basis of identity and value systems for Plateau Indians. As descendent communities of
the people that have lived on the Columbia Plateau for thousands of years joint efforts began in 2005 with the repatriation of human remains and funerary
objects from the Smithsonian Institution. The right thing to do is to work together to achieve repatriation goals in the most expedient manner. In the past
respective tribes made counter claims that were detrimental for repatriation of the ancestors. Today as we work together repatriation decisions are made
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              317
by tribal policy and religious leaders. The benefits we gain include building trust, forming strong working relationships, and pulling resources together
during the preparation, reburial, and ceremonial aspects of repatriation.
[202]             Discussant
Nelson, Margaret [40] see Kamp-Whittaker, April
Nelson, Kit (New Orleans Center for Creative Arts) and Paul Reed (Archaeology Southwest)
[43]              Reassessing Taos Area Archaeology: What We Still Don’t Understand in 2015
Like many areas of the American southwest, the Greater Taos region has a long history of research, spanning over 100 years. The majority of
investigations have focused on either end of the research spectrum. Some being very narrowly centered on specific issues or sites usually resulting from
the particular interests of a researcher, while others are very generally focused on data collection resulting from CRM research. This dichotomy of data
collection/research has resulted in a highly variable picture of prehistoric archaeology in the region. In this paper, we assess the current state of
knowledge, provide a synopsis, and suggest research directions to fill the data voids.
Nelson, Shaun (Utah National Guard)
[73]              Discussant
Nelson, Elizabeth (Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History), Emily Sharp (School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizo)
and Tiffiny Tung (Department of Anthropology, Vanderbilt University)
[206]             Epidemiological Crisis with Imperial Collapse? Investigating the Osteological Evidence for Bacterial Infections among post-Wari
                  Communities in the Peruvian Andes
The socio-political decline of the Wari Empire and a severe drought ca. A.D. 1000/1100 led to significant changes in health among those who lived in the
former imperial core. The political turmoil, social upheaval, and prolonged drought coalesced to create poor community health. Infectious disease appears
to have been an aspect of morbidity that dramatically changed relative to the preceding era of Wari rule. Here we examine the skeletal evidence for
bacterial infections among post-Wari populations from the former capital city (Huari). Because human remains were commingled, we observed each
category of skeletal elements for lesions, documenting that, among all ages combined, 11/2532 ribs (.4 percent) and 82/1777 thoracic vertebrae (5
percent) exhibit lesions suggestive of brucellosis and/or tuberculosis. Juvenile remains present a higher prevalence: 79/342 thoracic vertebrae (23 percent)
exhibit those lesions. Consistent with expectations of how socio-political decline and ecological stress can contribute to negative health outcomes, these
lesions appear only in the post-Wari samples; they are absent in the approximately 300 individuals from the preceding Wari era (Tung 2012). This suggests
the development and/or increased transfer of these infectious diseases in response to changes in political and environmental conditions.
Neme, Gustavo [94] see Gil, Adolfo
Neme, Gustavo, Adolfo Gil (IANIGLA-CONICET-Museo de Historia Natural de San R), Miguel Giardina (IANIGLA-CONICET-Museo de Historia
Natural de San R) and Clara Otaola (DIPA-CONICET-Museo de Historia Natural de San Rafa)
[204]             Wild Resources and Domestic Plants in the South American Farmer’s Frontier
Southern Mendoza region has been considered the meridional boundary of South American farmers, which arrive at this region ca 2000 years B.P. At the
time of the Spanish arrival, there was coexistence among north Patagonian hunter gatherers and southern Andean farmers along Atuel and Diamante
basins. However the real impact of the first domesticates (corn, squash, quinoa, and beans) as well as how their latitudinal distribution could vary through
time are still on debate.
Different lines of evidences had been employed to discuss this topic giving an ambiguous picture of the archaeological record. This made difficult our
interpretation about the variability of subsistence strategies along the region. In this poster we present different archaeological proxies (stable isotopes,
archaeofauna, archaeobothany, and lithics), with the aim of clarify the distribution of domesticates and the relationship with the regional ecology.
Neri, Francesca (Northern Arizona University)
[195]             Cross-Cultural Examination of Mortuary Practices of the Southern Sinagua and Prescott Culture
The burials from the Oak Creek Valley Pueblo and the Dewey Archaeological sites provide data for interpreting the mortuary practices and burial rituals of
the Southern Sinagua and Prescott cultures. The variability exhibited in the burials uncovered at these sites, which include the remains of an adult male,
two adult females, infant burials, and one dog, allows for an examination of mortuary practices as they relate to social structure and the role of children,
symbolism, environmental influences on ritual, and the utilization of space. This presentation addresses the methods used for documenting the skeletal
remains and practices of interment, a discussion concerning examination of associated funerary objects, and the locations of these burials as related to site
layout and overall spatial context. Studying these sites will yield data important to the mortuary rituals of these cultures and allow for a review and
comparison of the cultural behaviors between the loci.
Nesbitt, Jason [31] see Matsumoto, Yuichi
Nesbitt, Jason (Tulane University)
[31]              Variations in Initial Period Ceremonial Architecture at the Caballo Muerto Complex
The Caballo Muerto Complex is well known for the presence of numerous Initial Period platform mounds thought to have functioned as temples. What is
less known, is that some of the mounds, including Huaca Herederos Grande and Huaca Cortada were associated with smaller-scale buildings that also
seem to have functioned as religious structures. In this paper, I discuss investigations of a square abode building found at the base of Huaca Cortada.
Excavation of the structure demonstrated that the floor of the building was completely clean, with no evidence for associated artifacts or internal features.
Furthermore, examination of the stratigraphy showed that prior to abandonment the building was intentionally buried, probably as a form of “temple
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                318
entombment.” I argue that this building and others like it at Caballo Muerto functioned for specific types of rituals restricted to certain segments of society.
To demonstrate this point I compare the Huaca Cortada building with similar structures present at Initial Period centers in the Lurín and Casma valleys.
[31]              Chair
Ness, Kathryn (Peabody Museum, Harvard University)
[51]              “Reverse Colonialism”: The Multi-Directional Nature of Cultural Exchange in the 18th-Century Spanish Atlantic
In 1492, Spain “discovered” the Americas and proceeded to lay claim to as much of the New World and its natural resources as it could. The colonization
and territorial expansion that followed has been fodder for clergy, scholars, historians, and archaeologists throughout the intervening centuries. The
majority of these discussions, however, address the impact of Spain’s imperial activities in the Americas, specifically during the “Golden Age” of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. In this paper, I explore the multi-directional nature of this trans-Atlantic cultural exchange by considering the impact
the Americas had on daily life in Spain, especially during the eighteenth-century Bourbon dynasty. This period was one of intense cultural refashioning
throughout the Atlantic as the new French-based dynasty gave rise to an increase in non-Spanish, European fashions and philosophies in the Spanish
Empire. Similarly, exotic American goods like chocolate permeated from the Spanish upper classes to middle-class households, indicating that significant
portions of Spanish society had access to and consumed foreign goods and ideas. Using the eighteenth-century Spanish Atlantic as an example, I aim to
emphasize the importance of considering how a colony can influence the motherland.
[51]              Chair
Neubauer, Fernanda (University of Wisconsin-Madison, CAPES Foundation)
[232]             Chipped Stone and Hot Rock Technology: A Late Archaic Example from the Upper Great Lakes
This study combines a detailed analysis of hot rock and chipped stone technologies in order to investigate behaviors related to subsistence and settlement
strategies, domestic life, and knapping activities. This paper contributes to the research of Late Archaic lithic technology on Grand Island in Michigan's
Upper Peninsula (UP). There, fire-cracked rocks (FCR) dominate the archaeological assemblage, yet relatively little is known of the roles that they played
in the lives of the island's ancient inhabitants. This comprehensive analysis of over 40,000 lithics from six sites on the island will more than double the
current number of c. 34,000 lithics analyzed in the entire UP from dated Late Archaic habitation and raw material extraction sites. The goal of the study is
to contribute to a new appreciation of FCR beyond current approaches that are often limited to basic quantification or presence/absence reporting. With
such massive quantities of the material available for analysis at many hunter-gatherer sites, the recontextualization of FCR may lead scholars to a better
understanding of the ancient diets and the behaviors associated with food production and site formation processes.
Neumannova, Klara [146] see Kvetina, Petr
Neusius, Sarah [9] see Styles, Bonnie
Neusius, Sarah (Indiana University of PA)
[176]             Faunal Database Preservation and Collaborative Zooarchaeology by the Eastern Archaic Faunal Working Group
The newly formed Eastern Archaic Faunal Working Group (EAFWG) has brought zooarchaeologists together with funding from the US National Science
Foundation. Our group is seeking to preserve Archaic period faunal databases from the interior portions of the Eastern Woodlands in tDAR (the Digital
Archaeological Record), an international digital repository for archaeological databases and records of investigations. Members of the EAFWG have
uploaded over 28 separate datasets representing more than 14 archaeological projects into tDAR, and additional relevant faunal databases are being
sought for inclusion. Our collaboration first explores the comparability of the existing databases by modifying taphonomic and contextual protocols
developed by Southwestern zooarchaeologists in order to make them broadly applicable within the Eastern Woodlands. Ultimately we intend to use the
tools available in tDAR to conduct integrative analyses at multiple scales that focus on how to interpret the use of aquatic resources such as fish,
freshwater mussels, waterfowl, and aquatic mammals by Archaic hunter-gatherers. Working group meetings held as 2–3 day workshops when participants
are free of their normal responsibilities and can focus on shared experiences and issues are fostering our collaboration. Our approach models new ways
for zooarchaeologists to address macro scale archaeological questions.
[9]               Chair
Neusius, Phillip (Indiana University of PA), Ben Ford (Indiana University of PA), Bill Chadwick (Indiana University of PA) and Sarah Neusius
(Indiana University of PA)
[208]             Partnering for Preservation: IUP’s Role as a State University
Since its inception in 1987, as an applied research center at Indiana University of Pennsylvania (IUP), Archaeological Services has had a mission of
providing educational opportunities for IUP students and service for private and public entities in cultural resource management. As a state university, IUP
has been in a position to create unique partnerships with local, state and federal agencies. These have ranged from co-operative agreements with county
and city governments to memoranda of understanding with agencies such as the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the National Forest Service,
and the National Park Service. These arrangements have utilized IUP’s role as a state owned entity to create flexible and cost effective means towards
preserving cultural resources in Pennsylvania. In addition to providing service to the region, these opportunities have also provided hands on training for
hundreds of IUP students over the last 28 years.
Neves, Eduardo Góes [49] see Hilbert, Lautaro Maximilian
Neves, Eduardo (University of São Paulo)
[282]             Discussant
Neville, Holly (Florida Institute for Hieroglyphic Research)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                319
[92]             3D Digitization of Spindle Whorls from Pre-Contact Central Mexico
Three-dimensional digitization technology is opening up a new world of opportunities for the analysis and manipulation of artifacts without the risk of
extraneous handling of the original, which could compromise preservation. This poster examines the practice of digital scanning on a collection of
Mesoamerican spindle whorls at the South Florida Museum in Bradenton, Florida, discussing the hardware and software used for digitization, as well as
the process of creating accurate three-dimensional scans of each item in the collection. Digital scanning technology can be used to better understand how
spindle whorls were used, and what designs were better for certain fabrics and why.
These scans detail intricate facets of the design and structure that might not be visible to the naked eye, and which can assist in the identification of cultural
and/or religious themes represented in the construction and decoration. The spindle whorls in this collection are from the general area of pre-contact
Central Mexico, and I hope to conclude what type of fabric each whorl was used with, and whether this indicates use by elites in the society or in a more
agrarian or household context.
[92]             Chair
Newburry, Diane [63] see Thompson, Katlynn
Newlander, Khori (Department of Anthropology & Sociology, Kutztown University)
[114]            Using Analytical Nodules to Assess the Integrity of Paleoindian Surface Lithic Scatters in Eastern Nevada
Minimum analytical nodule analysis is a useful tool for recognizing the variability present within a lithic assemblage. In turn, this type of analysis permits a
more complete understanding of lithic technological organization. Typically, lithic analysts use macroscopic and microscopic characteristics, as well as
spatial associations, to partition lithic assemblages into subgroups, or analytical nodules, that we assume reflect a limited set of production episodes or the
role of a particular type of raw material within a technological system. In this study, I do not use analytical nodules to achieve a better understanding of
technological organization, as is common. Instead, I use chert analytical nodules, defined on the basis of macroscopic, microscopic, and chemical
properties, to investigate the integrity of Paleoindian surface lithic scatters in eastern Nevada. I demonstrate how the spatial analysis of analytical nodules
may help us address a long-standing problem—namely, establishing the spatiotemporal integrity of the surface lithic scatters that dominate the Great Basin
archaeological record.
Newsom, Lee (Penn State University)
[222]            Islands as Gardens: Plant Translocations by Caribbean Indians as a Dynamic and Multiscalar Form of Cultural Niche Construction, with
                 Emphasis on Puerto Rico and the Evidence for Psychoactive/Ritual Plant Use
I consider pre-European plant introductions of exotic fruit trees and other useful plants as a multi-faceted reflection of indigenous plant use, culminating a
mosaic of vegetative components in a constructed environment. I focus in particular on the plant constituents of the cajoba ritual complex, drawing
especially on recent data from Tibes and Jácana (Puerto Rico), along with relevant ethnographic records from mainland South America that describe
ethnobotanical practices associated with psychoactive plants. The resulting analysis lends new insights into Caribbean Indian ritual practices and cultural
niche construction.
[290]            Discussant
Newsom, Lee Ann [290] see Ostapkowicz, Joanna
Newton, Matthew (Aucilla Research Institute)
[164]            A Good Place to Be: 2015 Phase I Investigations at Wakulla Springs State Park, North Florida.
Preliminary archaeological investigations took place at Wakulla Springs State Park, in Wakulla County, Florida, during August to September of 2015. The
project’s primary objective was to locate areas containing dense artifact clusters, in an effort to proceed with Phase II and Phase III investigations. The
abundance of cultural materials found at previously documented sites within the park is a testament to this rich archaeological site, and warrant continued
research efforts. Furthermore, few sites are known to exist which show several human occupations spanning from 14,500 years ago to the present. This
paper discusses in detail the evidence recovered during these most recent investigations, as well as the innovative recovery methods employed for the
project. Research will continue throughout 2019 at multiple locations in the park, using new evidence to achieve narratives which show the relationships
between humans and this beautiful habitat, showing why Wakulla Springs has always been “A Good Place To Be.”
Neyland, Robert and Alexis Catsambis (Naval History and Heritage Command)
[83]             2016 Navy Sunken Military Craft Act Regulations—32 CFR 767
The Sunken Military Craft Act (SMCA) was enacted on October 28, 2004. The SMCA preserves and protects from disturbance all sunken military craft
owned by the U.S. government, as well as foreign sunken military craft submerged or buried in the seabed within U.S. territorial waters. The Navy's sunken
ship and aircraft wrecks remain U.S. property regardless of their location in U.S, international, or foreign waters. Ownership is not changed by the passage
of time. These wrecks may not be disturbed without a permit under newly crafted Navy regulations--32 CFR 767. This presentation considers the new
regulations, the permitting program under the SMCA, enforcement, and these new and unique responsibilities of the Navy. Naval History and Heritage
Command (NHHC) is the manager of the Navy's 3,000 ship and 14,000 aircraft wrecks and implements the Act and regulations on behalf of the
Department of the Navy. The new regulations will raise the bar for preserving and interpreting these important cultural resources, many of which are also
war graves and the final resting places for those who have sacrificed their lives for country throughout the United States history.
Neyt, Bert [79] see Vandam, Ralf
Nials, Fred L. [55] see Vint, James
Niccolucci, Franco [261] see Richards, Julian
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                320
Nicholas, George (Simon Fraser University)
[10]             Pragmatism at the Intersection of Indigeneity, Cultural Property, and Intangible Heritage
When descendant groups are denied direct and meaningful engagement in decision making, heritage management policies are ineffective at best and
harmful at worst. Access to and control over one’s own heritage is a basic human right essential to identity, wellbeing and worldview. The historic
separation of Indigenous peoples from their heritage not only results in considerable economic and cultural harms, but is a form of violence. Community-
based heritage initiatives are capable of challenging colonial structures in the research process without compromising the integrity of archaeology. Local
and international approaches to negotiated practice are discussed, as is an example of activism to protect ancestral burial grounds and sacred sites.
Nicholas, George [144] see Gaudreau, Mariane
Nichols, Teresa [30] see Thomas, Jayne-Leigh
Nichols, Kristi Miller (Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.), Clint Laffere (Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.), Laurie M. Steves (Raba Kistner
Consultants) and Richard A. Sample (Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.)
[78]             The Use of 3-D GPR As An Aid in the Rediscovery of Spanish Colonial Acequias in San Antonio, Texas
Archaeologists at Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc. (RKEI) have been utilizing 3-D ground penetrating radar (GPR) surveys to rediscover the locations and
document the construction techniques of irrigation ditches in San Antonio, Texas. Using 3-D GPR, in conjunction with EM-31 surveys, archival research,
and archaeological backhoe trenching has allowed us to determine under what geomorphological and burial conditions the GPR yields reliable results. This
paper reviews recent RKEI projects involving GPR surveys, highlighting the processes and final results during acequia rediscoveries.
Nichols, Teresa (Indiana University), April Sievert (Indiana University), Jayne-Leigh Thomas (Indiana University) and Anne Pyburn (Indiana
University)
[112]            Learning NAGPRA: Nationwide Survey Results
Although the Native American Grave Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) was passed as federal legislation in 1990, it seems that many students do
not receive comprehensive coverage of the law and its connections to the broader disciplinary histories of anthropology and museum studies and to
professional research ethics. Indiana University was awarded NSF grants in 2014 and 2015 to conduct a nationwide study on NAGPRA teaching and
training and to collaborate with specialists in preparing improved teaching materials. This poster will present some preliminary analyses of data collected
from interviews and two online questionnaires directed towards educators and students in anthropology and museum studies related college or university
programs. Students were asked about their coursework experiences, their knowledge of NAGPRA, and what sorts of internships or extracurricular
opportunities would contribute towards their future career. Educators answered questions on their educational and professional experiences relating to
ethics and NAGPRA, as well as their teaching interests and thoughts on student mentoring and professionalization. Both groups were also asked their
opinions on the respective benefits and harms of the law. The results of this research will be used in the creation of new pedagogical materials.
Nichols, Deborah (Dartmouth College)
[178]            Before Teotihuacan: The Origins of Complex Society in the Northeast Basin of Mexico
Teotihuacan grew explosively ca. 100 B.C. to become the most influential city in Mesoamerica. For several decades little research has been directed
toward understanding the origins of complex society in the Teotihuacan Valley. Recent archaeological investigations at the Early-Middle Formative site of
Altica provide a fresh perspective on dating the initial establishment of agricultural villages, early social and economic differentiation, and the development
of intra-and inter-regional exchange networks to test comparative models of political economy.
[129]            Discussant
Nicholson, Christopher
[146]            A Paleoclimate model of Neanderthal landscape-use during the last interglacial
Obstacles to our understanding of Neanderthal (Homo neanderthalensis) land-use patterns during the Last Interglacial (130kya-116kya, Marine Isotope
Stage 5e) include not only the scarcity of sites in Europe but also a lack of knowing what the landscape may have looked like during this time. This
research explores the influence of climate and seasonal variability on Neanderthal land-use. Recently developed global climate models are capable of
simulating past climate variables (e.g., precipitation and temperature), and geographic information system (GIS) tools can then be used to interpolate these
data to model the niches of past organisms into paleoclimate zones. This study uses Maximum Likelihood Classification analysis in GIS to create a mosaic
landscape of 22 paleoclimate zones to reconstruct what Europe may have looked like during the Last Interglacial Eemian. The modeled paleoclimate
zones show there was a preference for site locations in Warm Temperate and Mesic climates. It also shows that Neanderthals selected sites near climate
zone margins to exploit an array of food resources. The Warm Temperate and Mesic climate regime may have been preferred as a more climatically stable
region, leading to fewer fluctuations in a seasonal subsistence base, resulting in less biological stress and improved fertility rates.
Nicolas, Richard (California State University Los Angeles)
[93]             The Role of Lithic Artifacts in the Interpretation of RB-25-A5
In 2014, the California State University, Los Angeles Sacred Landscape Archaeological Project (SLAP) began investigation of a deep pit with a small grotto
at its northern end. In 2015, the pit was excavated to bedrock only to discover that the feature was a collapsed chultun. Noteworthy was a plastered
platform that encircled the collapse pit. A dense concentration of artifacts was associated with the platform and pit but this dropped rapidly only a few
meters from the platform indicating the complex was a heavily utilized activity area. Previous investigation of RB-25-A5 interpreted the feature as a trash pit
belonging to a lithic workshop because of what was thought to be a high concentration of chert flakes. SLAP recovered similar pieces still within their matrix
of soft dolomitic limestone. A thorough analysis separated the natural materials and confirming the presence of few formal artifacts.
Niell, Paul (Florida State University)
[3]              Heritage and City Foundations in Nineteenth-Century Havana, Cuba
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                321
According to national legend, Havana, Cuba, was founded under the shade of a ceiba tree whose branches sheltered the island’s first Catholic mass and
meeting of the town council (cabildo) in 1519. The founding site was first memorialized in 1754 by the erection of a baroque monument in Havana’s central
Plaza de Armas, which was reconfigured in 1828 by the addition of a neoclassical work, El Templete. Viewing the transformation of the Plaza de Armas
from the new perspective of heritage studies, my paper investigates how late colonial Cuban society narrated Havana’s founding to valorize Spanish
imperial power and used the monuments to underpin a local sense of place and cultural authenticity, civic achievement, and social order. Yet, this heritage
process at the ceiba tree contained a dissonance or a lack of agreement as to the significance and use of heritage based on the cultures of multiple
constituencies that comprised the colonial city and its signifying forms. In this presentation, therefore, I am calling into question the utility of Heritage
Studies for Spanish colonial contexts in the Caribbean.
[3]               Chair
Nielsen, Axel (CONICET Argentina)
[259]             The Role of Chullpas in the Inca Conquest of the Southern Altiplano: A Symmetrical Approach
I start with the premise that chullpas (architectural modules formed by a chamber which can be accessed by a narrow opening) are wak’as, persons with
higher ontological status than humans, capable of acting in different ways (housing the dead, storing crops, guarding territories, defending communities,
marking status differences among people, etc.) and settings (pukaras, villages, caves, or fields), as full members of altiplano society. I propose that
chullpas were important actors in the Inca conquest of the Southern Altiplano (Lipez), collaborating with the State in the reconfiguration of local landscapes,
memory, and political institutions. To justify this hypothesis, I present the changing forms, uses, and contextual associations of these architectural modules
in different types of sites, including caves, pukaras, non-defensive villages, and fields. Noting the differences between Late Intermediate and Inca period
chullpa characteristics and distributions, I discuss the roles these wak’as may have played in the local constitution of (or resistance to) the empire.
Nieves Colón, Maria (SHESC, Arizona State University), William J Pestle (Department of Anthropology, University of Miami) and Anne C Stone
(SHESC, Arizona State University)
[160]             Preliminary Ancient DNA Analysis Suggests a Complex Origins Scenario for Pre-Contact Puerto Rican Populations
Recent archaeological research suggests that indigenous groups in Puerto Rico stemmed from multiple and continuous migrations of continental
indigenous populations. This view is supported by contemporary genetic studies, which have found evidence of genetic affinity between multiple modern
Native American groups and the native ancestry components of modern, admixed Puerto Ricans. Overall, these findings challenge the traditional single-
migration model for the peopling of Puerto Rico, and suggest genetic continuity between the pre- and post-contact populations. Here, we further test these
findings by examining ancient DNA obtained from human skeletal remains (dated 590 to 1280 cal A.D.) from three pre-contact Puerto Rican sites: Paso del
Indio, Punta Candelero and Tibes. Preliminary results from analyses of nine complete ancient mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) genomes suggest that pre-
contact Puerto Rican individuals share genetic affinity with several South American and Mesoamerican groups (both ancient and modern). Additionally,
haplotype-sharing analyses suggest there is some continuity of ancient mtDNA lineages in contemporary Puerto Ricans, although the presence of unique
types among pre-contact individuals suggests some loss of ancient mtDNA diversity. These preliminary results support an origins scenario of complex and
continuous admixture for pre-contact Puerto Rican groups.
Nieves-Colón, María [160] see Martinez-Cruzado, Juan
Nightingale, Sheila [211] see Thompson, Jessica
Nightingale, Sheila (City University of New York, Graduate Center), Jessica Thompson (Emory University), Alex Mackay (University of
Wollongong), Flora Schilt (Universitat Tubingen) and Elizabeth Gomani-Chindebvu (Malawi Department of Culture)
[211]             Is Innovation Always the Solution? Examining Non-Specialized Lithic Technologies of the Malawian Middle Stone Age
Interpretations of specialized lithic technologies are based in part on the assumption that environmental change modifies local carrying capacities and
requires foragers to adjust their resource acquisition strategies in response. Such models often account for innovation, in the form of specialized,
standardized, and increasingly complex tool forms and foraging strategies, in environmental terms: environmental pressure produces demand for
innovation, and when pressure subsides, technological requirements are relaxed. During the African Middle Stone Age, innovations are asynchronous,
geographically disparate, and often ephemeral. The archaeological record from the later MSA of Malawi is notable for its lack of specialized technological
components—blades, points, and standardized tool forms are all absent from excavated assemblages. These patterns require a deeper interrogation of the
possible range of technological and foraging responses through the environmental variability of the Late Pleistocene. Using data from over forty
excavations and test pits, we question the assumptions of climate-driven models of technological elaboration, with particular focus on hyper-localized
acquisition of raw materials and intra-assemblage consistency in reduction systems.
Nigra, Benjamin [205] see Osborn, Jo
Niles, Hali [291] see Austin, Tucker
Nilsson, Maria (Lund University)
[224]             Gebel el Silsila (Upper Egypt): Introducing the Archaeological Project
Though long admired for its Pharaonic stelae, shrines, and Speos, the grand ancient site of Gebel el Silsila remains fairly unknown within mainstream
Archaeology. A general idea is that the site operated merely as a sandstone quarry, but few are aware of its rich archaeology that incorporates evidence of
millennia of human activity and cultural features that meet seven of UNESCO’s ten outstanding values. Since 2012, the Swedish-run archaeological project
works towards changing previous misconceptions, and in conducting a comprehensive archaeological study the aim is to increase the general awareness
of the site’s importance and unique legacy. The aim is here to present an introduction to the project, its new approaches, discoveries and results achieved
so far. Epigraphic reference will be made to the recent findings of the enigmatic boat scene in the rock-cut temple, a unique stela of Amun-Ra and Thoth,
and a quick summary of the complex non-textual marking system with 5000 documented signs. Archaeologically, we will explore the re-discovered Temple
of Kheny with its exceptional Thutmosid limestone fragments, an administrative building known to the team as Tiberius’ Stables, and round up with an
announcement of the discovery of a remarkable object from the reign of Amenhotep III.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               322
[224]             Chair
Nishimura, Yoko (University of Pennsylvania)
[173]             The 'Ritualization' of Comma-Shaped Magatama Beads from the Jōmon to Yayoi Periods in Japan
Comma-shaped magatama beads in their 'archaic' forms and materials first appeared in the Early Jōmon period (ca. 5000 B.C.) in Japan, and in their
'standardized' form and material became a major component of grave goods for the elite burials that began to be constructed from the Yayoi period (ca.
400 B.C.) onward. The contexts in which magatama beads recently excavated at Early/Middle Jōmon sites have been found indicate that they were most
likely ordinary body ornaments for everyday use. Their later essential role as grave goods in the elite burials after the Yayoi period was likely the result of a
'ritualized' process in which greater significance was attached to these beads through transformation from ordinary to more formalized contexts. Bridging
these two phases, magatama beads in the Late/Final Jōmon period (ca. 2500–400 B.C.) may reflect the transitional process in which they were
increasingly used in more formalized contexts, including domestic rituals, and their forms and materials progressively standardized.
Nissen, Zachary (Northwestern University)
[77]              Cosmic Vision: Queering Ancient Maya Scared Landscapes
As a method of deconstructing and disrupting what is normative, archaeologists have used queer theory to explore aspects of the formation and
intersection of identities. In this paper I illustrate how queer theory can be used beyond the study of identity by exploring the relationships between people
and places. Comprising 25 cenotes, or karstic sinkholes, Cara Blanca, Belize represents one of the highest concentrations of cenotes in the Southern
Maya Lowlands. A highly sacred landscape, Cara Blanca served as a pilgrimage destination during a period of several prolonged droughts (about 800–900
C.E.). Within this unique environment, Cara Blanca Pool 20 stands out as an exceptional example of the affective relationships between ritual practitioners
and sacred landscapes. Consisting of a cenote and a “modified” natural limestone hill, I argue that the landscape of Pool 20 would have connected the
human world to the supernatural realms of the heavens and the underworld. Breaking down this connection between people and place, I illustrate how
queer theory can be used to explore affect and how a focus on moments of disorientation or confusion in archaeological fieldwork can be used to queer, or
deconstruct, established interpretations of ritual and space.
[77]              Chair
Nitsch, Erika [171] see Bogaard, Amy
Nivens, Joelle
[13]              Discussant
[13]              Chair
Nixon, Sam (Sainsbury Institute, University of East Anglia) and Simon Kaner (Sainsbury Institute, University of East Anglia)
[152]             Global Perspectives on British Archaeology: ‘Engaging with East Anglian Archaeology through a Japanese Lens’
This presentation introduces a project providing a new examination of the relationships between local, national and global archaeologies, Global
Perspectives on British Archaeology. World Archaeology is a hugely active field of research for British archaeological institutions, with sustained field
programs worldwide. In contrast, research on British archaeology sees little involvement of non-British research institutions. Within an increasingly
globalised world of education and research, there appears a pressing need to engage the national archaeological agenda as fully as possible with
developing global currents. Indeed, a necessary component of the pursuit of World Archaeology is surely a World/Global Perspective on our own
archaeology. Our project is working in close collaboration with heritage authorities in the archaeologically-rich region of East Anglia to develop collaborative
research programs with archaeological institutions from outside the U.K. Building on long-standing links, this is being developed in association with
Japanese archaeologists. The key questions being investigated are as follows: What role does British archaeological heritage have beyond our borders?;
How is it perceived and presented, and what is its impact within global educational and economic arenas?; How is the perception of the past amongst
British communities informed by or reconceived through engagement with international perspectives on the past?
Noack Myers, Kelsey (Chippewa Cree Cultural Resources)
[29]              Preserving Our Past and Providing For Our Future: Heritage Management at Rocky Boy’s Indian Reservation, Montana
Like all Tribal Historic Preservation Offices, our staff are required to wear many hats. The diversity of projects undertaken by the Chippewa Cree Cultural
Resources Preservation Department (CCCRPD) includes on-reservation resource documentation and mitigation, educational programming for the local
community, development of governmental agency policies and procedures, and consultation on repatriation and current archaeological and museum
research. In addition, the CCCRPD has developed the Tribal106 digital consultation system in order to facilitate timely responses to project notices
received by the FCC and other agencies seeking to comply with Section 106 requirements. This program works in concert with the Tribal Field Technician
program that we have developed to standardize site monitoring and reporting by tribal members who participate as our representatives during construction
projects off-reservation in the nine states identified as the ancestral homeland of the Chippewa (Ojibwa) and Cree (Nei-yahw) people. All of these activities
are undertaken to reinforce the sovereignty of federally-recognized tribes as a whole, and to promote positive and productive ongoing relationships within
our tribal community and with non-tribal entities.
[203]             Discussant
Noble, Gordon [103] see Mitchell, Juliette
Noel, Stephan [100] see Perdikaris, Sophia
Nolan, Kevin (AAL, Ball State University), Christine Thompson (AAL, Ball State University), Shelbi Long (AAL, Ball State University), Erin
Donovan (Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis) and Erin Steinwachs (AAL, Ball State University)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   323
[112]             A Battlefield with a View: Visibility and Weighted Cost Path Modeling of the Battle of the Wabash
The Applied Anthropology Laboratories has conducted five years of research at the site of two of the most significant battles in the Northwest Territory:
Battle of the Wabash (1791) and the Battle of Fort Recovery (1794). A recent survey and GIS analysis has shed new light on the Battle of the Wabash and
particularly the Native American Confederacy’s (NAC) strategy and actions. Using visibility weighted cost paths we were able to predict the locations of
survey finds. The survey results were used to refine our GIS model of the NAC strategy. Significantly, our survey located the probable location of the NAC
staging ground and identified two or three avenues of attack. Further, our application of visibility analysis reveals the factors of the setting and terrain that
contributed to St. Clair’s defeat at the Battle of the Wabash.
Nolan, Kevin [285] see Hill, Mark
Noldner, Lara (Iowa Office of the State Archaeologist and the University of Iowa)
[266]             Attimoni (ah-jee-MOOUHN)—The Stories We Have to Tell: relationships among the Meskwaki Nation, tribes with historic ties to Iowa, and
                  the Iowa Office of the State Archaeologist
A long-standing relationship has existed between the University of Iowa Office of the State Archaeologist (OSA) and tribal entities including the Meskwaki
Nation. The precedent-setting burial law established in Iowa in 1976, 14 years prior to the passage of NAGPRA, has long required equal treatment and
reburial of Native American remains. The law gave the OSA statutory authority for upholding the law and established the OSA Indian Advisory Council
(IAC). Maria Pearson (Yankton Sioux) and Donald Wanatee (Meskwaki) were instrumental in passage, implementation, and success of the law and served
on the OSA IAC from the start. The OSA and its Burials Program (recently renamed the Bioarchaeology Program) has an exemplary record of collaboration
in the protection and proper treatment of human remains, its success leading to a variety of other tribal collaborations. The OSA, the IAC, and tribes took a
proactive approach to allow reburial of culturally unidentifiable remains prior to development of NAGPRA regulations, ultimately developing a NAGPRA-
approved process for the reburial of culturally unidentifiable remains in Iowa’s established cemeteries.
[266]             Chair
Nondédéo, Philippe (CNRS france), Cyril Castanet (Université de Paris 8), Louise Purdue (CNRS), Eva lemonnier (Université de Paris 1) and
Dominique Michelet (CNRS)
[96]              Introduction to Research at Naachtun: Archaeological and Paleoenvironmental Issues
The maya site of Naachtun is an important regional center of the Classic period, located in northeastern Peten. Founded after the decline of the Preclassic
Centers of the Mirador Region, Naachtun is occupied roughly during a millenary until its abandonment (ca. A.D. 950). This site, settled on the margins of a
huge bajo, is a good case study to understand strategies of resources management (water supply, soils, wood, fauna, and shells among others). All are
available in its immediate vicinity, but we must wonder to which extend environmental changes (anthropic or climatic) during the ClassiP period could have
affected the procurement of these resources. After presenting the Naachtun Project with its different lines of investigation, the site setting and the local
environment, and after a brief overview of the history of its occupation, we will expose the issues of the archaeological and paleoenvironmental studies and
propose a first general balance of the relationships between society and environment.
Noneman, Heidi [67] see VanPool, Christine
Norman, Scotti (Vanderbilt University)
[281]             Conversion and Revitalization in a Taki Onqoy Center of Highland Peru (Chicha—Ayacucho)
In the first generation after the Spanish conquest of Peru, indigenous Andeans and Spaniards entered into a period of change in which daily practices,
traditions, and religion were negotiated and reshaped. A local response to Spanish attempts at Christian conversion was the cultural revitalization
movement of Taki Onqoy (Quechua-dancing sickness). Primary sources suggest that this movement was practiced by local Andeans and manifested
through the rejection of Spanish religious beliefs in favor of a return to huaca worship. Conversely, secondary sources have debated the very existence of
the movement. This paper presents the preliminary results of the first large-scale excavations at Iglesiachayoq, an Inka and Early Colonial Period
settlement whose inhabitants were Taki Onqoy practitioners. As the first archaeological project to actively investigate Taki Onqoy practices, this project
provides insight into the material signatures of Taki Onqoy, and contributes physical data to a debate which has been only text-based to date.
Norton, Holly (History Colorado) and Eva Hulse (Archaeological Investigations Northwest, Inc.)
[243]             The Shovelbum Economy
It has long been common knowledge that “most” archaeologists attain gainful employment in Cultural Resource Management (CRM) related fields rather
than in academic institutions. By and large there is an accepted idea of what such a career trajectory looks like- there are many archaeologists who have
built successful careers in CRM while adding to scientific knowledge and policy, or who have built laudable businesses. The vast majority of those
employed in CRM, however, are low-level field and laboratory technicians. What do their lives look like? Are they able to contribute to the body of
archaeological knowledge or effect policy changes? Are they able to support themselves? Is there a general experience of upward mobility? To answer
such questions, this paper will present data from a variety of sources, including new nation-wide survey data collected by the authors.
[243]             Chair
Norwood, Alexandra (Arizona State University)
[39]              Formal Open Space and its Relationship to Governance in Premodern Cities
Formally defined open spaces in cities give people a designated forum for interaction and impact how common people perceive each other and their
authority. There is a critical lack of understanding of the origin of these spaces in the earliest cities and their social contexts. I will examine a sample of
premodern cities, including archaeologically and historically documented examples, to clarify why formal open spaces exist, both in ancient cities and
modern ones. This project stems from “Service Access in Premodern Cities” at ASU, a project dedicated to transdisciplinary research on comparative
urbanism. Each of the cities in this projects have been scored on a scale of governance based on that of Blanton and Fargher (2007). I will measure the
formal open space in these cities using GIS. Relating plaza area to the size of the city and the form of governance will show whether or not plazas can be
classified as a public good according to Blanton and Fargher’s classification and whether cross-cultural patterns exist regarding the relationship of
governance to public space. A more complex understanding of the dynamics of early cities and their governance is critical to understanding the evolution of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  324
both human society and the modern city.
Nossa, Eraina (Mark Twain National Forest) and William MacNeill (Mark Twain National Forest)
[267]             Partnerships, Preservation, and Public Archaeology: Working together to retrace the Trail of Tears across the Mark Twain National Forest
The Mark Twain National Forest manages slightly less than 1.5 million acres, accounting for approximately 5 percent of the landmass in the state of
Missouri. As a variety of factors continue to influence, and sometimes complicate, the Forest’s land management practices, it has become increasingly
important to work with other agencies and organizations in order to accomplish the shared goals of identifying, protecting and interpreting the significant
cultural resources held in the public trust. As the largest public landowner in the state, it is no surprise that all three of the major land routes of the Missouri
portion of the Cherokee Trail of Tears cross Forest Service land. However, the exact locations of several segments of the Trail of Tears have yet to be
identified in the field, and many other questions regarding the history of the trail remain unanswered. In recent years, the Forest has sought to develop
innovative strategies to manage this important historic resource. This poster examines the ways in which the Mark Twain National Forest has had success
working with other federal and state agencies, as well as educational and non-profit institutions to leverage funds, personnel, and volunteer hours to
retrace the Trail of Tears across Missouri.
Novotny, Claire (University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill)
[54]              Decision-making and the Practice of Community Archaeology in Southern Belize
In the Maya region, sometimes communities are not consulted about access to archaeological sites, research programs, or the management of local
heritage once research is completed. Consequently, one source of inequality between archaeologists and local communities is access to decision-making
as a form of cultural capital. By positioning ourselves as primary decision-makers, archaeologists can inhibit access to knowledge about the past. The
Aguacate Community Archaeology Project, conducted in southern Belize, addressed unequal decision-making processes by including community
members in the implementation of archaeological excavations at the site of Kaq’ru’ Ha’ and in planning for the storage of artifacts and dissemination of
knowledge to villagers through a heritage center. This paper explores the complex outcomes of altered decision-making; a balanced relationship between
archaeologists and Aguacate as a whole may also have reinforced latent inequalities between factions in the village. A critical evaluation of the practice of
community archaeology furthers the goal of fostering social change by increasing who has access to archaeological knowledge.
Novotny, Anna (Texas Tech University)
[288]             Cahal Pech Mortuary Practices in Regional Perspective
In Patricia McAnany’s influential work Living with the Ancestors, she argued that the practice of venerating ancestors by placing human burials in eastern
structures originated with commoners and was appropriated by the ruling elite as potent political displays. Within the Belize Valley, sites at all levels of the
settlement continuum had eastern structures that contained numerous human inhumations, suggesting ancestors may have been politically powerful for
elites and non-elites. However, ongoing research into ancient Maya mortuary practices shows distinct regional variability in mortuary treatment throughout
the lowlands. In this paper, I compare and contrast, first, inhumations from an eastern structure at Cahal Pech, Structure B1, with mortuary practices of the
Belize River Valley. Second, I contextualize Belize Valley practices within broader lowland Maya mortuary practices by looking to the middle and upper
reaches of the Mopan River Valley. Data are drawn from settlement patterns, individual mortuary contexts, as well as the bodies interred within eastern
structures along these rivers. The goal of this paper is to situate ancient Maya mortuary practices of Cahal Pech and the Belize Valley within broader
traditions of the eastern Maya lowlands.
Nowak, Jesse (Gilcrease Museum)
[7]               A World of Wrapped Symbols: Bundling and Iconography on Southeastern Ceramics from the Lemley Collection
Throughout the American southeast, prehistoric and contemporary indigenous groups have conducted ritual acts of wrapping and binding sacred objects in
spirit and medicine bundles. Previous researchers have also noted the concept of ritual encapsulation in other cultural expressions such as: settlement
design, mound building, pottery, and cosmology. This presentation will focus on the apparent bundling of iconographic motifs and designs present on a
ceramic vessel from the Gilcrease Museum in Tulsa, Oklahoma. The presentation of iconography in different stages of bundling on ceramics and its
implications on Caddo and Mississippian ideology as well as research potentials of the Gilcrease museum’s upcoming online collection database will be
explored.
Nowakowski, Joshua [65] see Burke, Chrissina
Nowakowski, Joshua (Northern Arizona University) and Chrissina Burke (Northern Arizona University)
[65]              Extreme Tooth Wear: Understanding Dog Diets in the American Southwest
Dogs have been described as a refuse management system in prehistoric villages across the world; in fact, much of their domestication has been
attributed to their ability to adapt to consume human garbage/waste. Recent research on prehistoric dog burials housed in the Museum of Northern
Arizona’s curated faunal collections illustrates unusual tooth wear patterns on both the upper and lower carnassials in a large number of the canids. The
wear does not appear to represent excessive gnawing on bones, as can be observed in larger predatory animals, nor does it conform to the typical wear
associated with age. Instead the tooth wear present on these animals suggests a diet potentially containing corn—presumably from the waste of their
human companions. While these canid remains come from sites in different cultural periods and regions, many of their dentition demonstrates similar wear
patterns. This poster presents preliminary data and results concerning the tooth wear of these dogs.
Nowell, April (Univ of Victoria-Dept of Anth)
[107]             An Archaeology of the Night
Archaeologists have been in the dark on the topic of the night for far too long. Like any other aspect of human behavior, the nighttime has firmly planted
itself in the archaeological record, ready for us to uncover it, if only we seek it out. Relying upon the material trails that humans leave behind, it is not only
possible but productive to pursue an archaeology of the night to enlighten and broaden our knowledge of the human past. Artifacts, features, structures,
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              325
and sites provide clues to dark doings, whether these are oil lamps from the Paleolithic, benches upon which the ancient Maya slept, or ancient
observatories that humans built for celestial observations. Sex, sin, sleep, slogging, ceremony, and struggles are only some of the nighttime activities that
ensued once the sun went down and the moon rose. This paper will introduce the topic of an archaeology of the night and provide cross-cultural examples.
All across the globe, humans simultaneously embraced and feared the night.
[248]              Discussant
[107]              Chair
Nowell, Sarah [124] see Barnett, Kristen
Nuevo, Amalia [139] see Méndez, César
Nuevo Delaunay, Amalia (Universidad Alberto Hurtado), Juan Bautista Belardi (CONICET-UNPA) and Flavia Carballo Marina (UNPA)
[205]              Tehuelche (Aonikenk) Site Variability during XIXth to XXIst Century in Southern Patagonia (Argentina and Chile)
Since the arrival of Europeans (XVIth Century) and their related economic activities in Patagonia, the different indigenous societies that inhabited the
region were forced to deeply modify their ancient ways of life. The incorporation of new raw materials (glass and stoneware) to produce traditional
instruments was one of several of modified aspects that have been archaeologically and historically (chronicles) recorded. We study and compare
Tehuelche (Aonikenk) data from XIXth to XXIst century sites in Southern Patagonia, focusing on site structure and artifactual frequencies (mainly glass
scrapers), in order to evaluate the variability spectrum of these historic archaeological sites. We analyze sites within Reservations, isolated familiar
dwellings and camps, all of which show internal variability also. Differences could be related to demography and mobility as well as to contact
contingencies. The resulting archaeological landscape arises as a diverse one, introducing a new scenario for Southern Patagonia in an unequal culture
contact frame.
Nugent, Selin (The Ohio State University)
[24]               Funerary Practice and Local Interaction on the Imperial frontier, 1st century AD: a case study in the Serur Valley, Azerbaijan.
Military campaigns and conflict defined the years leading to the f irstcentury A.D. in the South Caucasus. This mountainous frontier region acted as a buffer
zone between the Roman and Parthian Empires competing for territorial expansion. Local alliances were cyclically forged, broken, and mended for
territorial control. Yet, little archaeological evidence remains of these interactions. How are military campaigns being conducted in the eastern frontier?
How are foreign forces interacting with local communities? If foreign military presence and conflict had a long-term presence in this region, it is essential to
examine how local populations and armies interacted.
This project examines the case study of an unusual 1st century AD interment that integrates aspects of both Roman and Parthian burial practice and is
associated with large-scale feasting events excavated in Naxcivan, Azerbaijan by the Naxcivan Archaeological Project. This project incorporates
osteological and isotopic analysis of human remains and a regional approach to funerary practice to examine individual identity, status, and the varied
influences in mortuary space construction. By delving into the distinct biography of this interment and its regional mortuary context, this project sheds light
on the various aspects of how foreign campaigns influenced and integrated with local identities.
Nuñez, Lautaro [139] see Loyola, Rodrigo
Nuñez Aparcana, Bryan [283] see Avila Peltroche, Mary Claudia
Núñez Aparcana, Bryan (Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos)
[283]              Nectandra sp. Seed from Archaeological Contexts in Panquilma. An Approach Based on Morphological Features and Contextual
                   Information
One of the main socioeconomic characteristics during the late periods is the high and dynamic presence of exchange of foreign goods, many of them
coming from the amazon basin, including Nectandra sp., a seed with psychoactive properties, characteristic of moist woodlands, associated with offerings
and funerary contexts in the Andean region.
This study presents the preliminary analysis of Nectandra sp., including physical and chemical properties, such as the pharmacological features mentioned
in etnohistoric references, and anticoagulant attributes possibly related to the utilization in ceremonies that involved the use of blood, together with its
relation in ritual spaces and other artifacts associated such as Spondylus sp. in archaeological contexts at Panquilma.
Nyers, Alex [113] see Davis, Loren
Nystrom, Kenneth C. [189] see Zaro, Gregory
Nystrom, Kenneth (State University of New York at New Paltz) and Christina Hodge (Stanford University Archaeology Collections, Stanf)
[215]              Dissection as Social Process: Anatomical Products in the Nineteenth-Century United States
In the nineteenth-century United States, the number of medical schools increased significantly, which in turn spurred efforts to ensure a steady supply of
bodies for gross anatomy courses. Supply was largely derived from marginalized groups such as African Americans and almshouse inmates. Based on
available archaeological and skeletal evidence this paper approaches dissection as a multivalent process that transformed participants in radically different
ways. For the medical student, the process of cutting into the body was cast as a heroic journey and the triumph of reason over superstition. In this rite of
passage, the medical student was the novitiate, the dissection room the stage, and the body the focus upon which new identity and social bonds were
forged. Alternatively, many of the individuals appropriated for dissection were removed from their communities and isolated from process of
memorialization. Rather, their bodies were transformed into teaching tools, curated and displayed as specimens, or treated as trash. These material
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              326
outcomes underscore both the distance between social personhood and anatomical object and the unease practitioners sometimes felt with the “products”
of their work. Remnants of anatomized bodies occupied a shifting materiality between person and thing which further naturalized structural inequalities of
race and wealth.
Oas, Sarah (Arizona State University) and Mark Hauser (Northwestern University)
[100]             The Political Ecology of Plantations from the Ground Up
The domestic economies of households occupied by enslaved laborers are an important domain of analysis for understanding the political ecology and
environmental legacy of colonial empires. These households occupy an important intersection of environment, political economy, and culture, and provide
an opportunity to exploring both top-down and bottom-up processes of environmental and economic change. This paper presents preliminary research
onto households from excavations at Morne Petate in southern Dominica. These findings include botanical remains associated with houses of enslaved
laborers and provisioning grounds occupied from the last quarter of the 18th century until the mid-19th century. While results are preliminary and
comparison is hampered by the relatively few attempts to archaeologically explore the political ecology of sugar colonies, this research considers to what
degree empires shaped these conquered territories, and how these environments could also be mediums for agency, identity, and conflict.
OBrien, Lauren (Southern Methodist University)
[43]              Pithouses in the Taos Valley: What Don't We Know?
Pithouse occupations in the Northern Rio Grande, specifically the Taos Valley, occurred late in time and at high elevations. There is little evidence of a
transitional period from a mobile to sedentary lifeway in this area. Pithouse occupations also occurred during a time when, as little as 30 miles away,
multistory pueblo communities were thriving. This change has raised questions and sparked many archaeological investigations over the years. Why do we
see this transition from hunter-gatherer to sedentary occupation so late in time in the Northern Rio Grande? Are we in fact seeing a transition from a mobile
to a sedentary lifeway or did a new group enter the area? Even as the transition to living in pithouse structures occurred, does the evidence support
permanent or seasonal site occupation? This paper will explore these questions by using data gained when multiple pithouse sites were surveyed with
ground penetrating radar (GPR). This data, coupled with previous survey and excavation, is being used to create a database of sites across the Taos
Valley, thus helping to achieve a more complete understanding of the site occupation, movement across the landscape, and group identity of this time
period.
O'Brien, Emily [86] see Manahan, T.
Ochoa, Patricia [254] see Ochoa Castillo, Patricia
Ochoa Castillo, Patricia and Patricia Ochoa (Museo Nacional de Antropología, México)
[254]             Colecciones arqueológicas del Preclásico Mesoamericano en Museos Extranjeros
La presencia de colecciones mesoamericanas en museos extranjeros forman parte de la historia de la arqueología de México. El coleccionismo entre
anticuarios, arqueólogos incipientes, principalmente durante el siglo XIX y las primeras décadas del siglo XX fue una actividad común y legal y muchas de
estas colecciones fueron dispersas en distintos museos de Europa y de Estados Unidos. El recuperar estos materiales, en este caso del Preclásico del
centro de México, por medio de su registro es una forma de recuperar nuestro patrimonio que de una forma u otra se encuentra fuera de nuestro país.
Odess, Daniel (National Park Service), Julie Esdale (Colorado State University) and Jeffrey Rasic (National Park Service)
[217]             Lessons for the Modern Day: The Archaeological Legacy of J. Louis Giddings
Louis Giddings began work in northwestern Alaska long before the advent of radiometric dating, at a time when all but the most basic outlines of human
history in the region were unknown. Over the course of a relatively brief but remarkably productive career in Arctic Archaeology, he established a basic
culture-historical framework for the region that remains largely valid today. He did so by employing the best available sound science—borrowing
techniques and principles such as beach-ridge archaeology and dendro-chronology developed by colleagues in other regions and applying them as
opportunities presented themselves. Importantly, he was aided in this effort by a recognition that his initial interpretations were founded on very limited
data, and that being willing to change his views in light of new information was essential. In the process, he also demonstrated a consistent ability to
recognize the relevance of the data he collected to some of the bigger-picture questions of the day. Recent research in northwest Alaska by Giddings'
academic descendants has refined and largely corroborated many of his ideas. Giddings may have been interested to see the directions in site dating, raw
material analysis, and lithic technology his work inspired.
Odewale, Alicia (University of Tulsa) and Joshua Torres (National Park Service, Rock Creek Park)
[229]             Archaeology in America’s Paradise: Renewing Local and National Interests in Our Nations Parks
The national parks on the island of St. Croix (Christiansted National Historic Site, Salt River Bay Historic Park and Ecological Preserve, and Buck Island
Reef National Monument) engage thousands of visitors every year and stand out as some of the most historically and ecologically important sites in the
Caribbean region. Cultural resource management projects within these parks have a new focus on community outreach and local youth engagement
initiatives. Developing more inclusive programming, aids in the preservation and interpretation of these places that are paramount to the history and identity
of the largely African descendant Crucian population. NPS Archaeology is used to engage the community on multiple levels through daily sidewalk talks
with park archaeologists, community participation in excavations, providing resource management training, and giving monthly public lectures. Youth
engagement initiatives include internship programs, Youth Conservation Corps summer program, Youth Partnerships in Parks, and Earthangle’s Humane
Inclusion Camp. This shift towards increased inclusion of the local Crucian community has sparked a new level of collaboration between the park service
staff and local entities in St. Croix but has also cemented the future of NPS archaeology as a valuable tool for preserving cultural heritage in the Virgin
Islands.
ODonnell, Sharlene
[133]             Zooarchaeological Findings and the Importance of Seascape at Weeden Island Archaeological Site (8PI1)
Many indigenous and non-indigenous communities throughout the world depend on coastal and riverine environments for their livelihood and subsistence.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             327
The seascape is a setting of daily activities, and these communities have a detailed knowledge of their surrounding environment, the tides, and the
seasons, all of which influence their decisions for catchment locations of habitat-specific faunal assemblages. For this paper, ethnographic research,
zooarchaeology, biological salinity tolerances, GIS mapping, and Tampa Bay seasonal salinity data are used to recognize the importance of seascape for
the people inhabiting Weedon Island, Florida during the Safety Harbor period (A.D. 900–A.D. 1725).
O'Donnell, Sharlene [6] see Austin, Robert
Oemig, Alexandria (University of Wisconsin Oshkosh) and Jordan Karsten (University of Wisconsin Oshkosh)
[111]            Troubled Times in Late Prehistoric Wisconsin: Violent Skeletal Trauma Among the Winnebago Phase Oneota
Offenbecker, Adrianne (University of Calgary)
[275]            Isotopic Evidence for the Presence of Immigrants at Casas Grandes
Casas Grandes is widely recognized as having cultural characteristics of both Mesoamerica and the American Southwest. Although the presence of
objects and ideas from surrounding areas clearly demonstrates some degree of regional interaction, the nature and extent of Casas Grandes’ relationship
with neighbouring communities is largely unresolved. In particular, one of the key issues in Chihuahuan archaeology is whether Medio period complexity
arose from internal developments or external stimuli, such as an influx of people from surrounding regions. In this study, we address this question by using
strontium isotope analysis to determine the geographic origins of a subset of the individuals interred at Paquimé, the Convento site, and several sites from
the southern zone of the Chihuahua culture area. Our results suggest that over twenty percent of the individuals sampled (N=83) were immigrants to
Paquimé, while over 30 percent of the Viejo period individuals sampled (N=13) were classified as non-local. These findings are interpreted in relation to
demographic variables and mortuary treatment to evaluate various scenarios for the presence of immigrants at the site, including post-marital residence,
trade, pilgrimage, warfare, and captive taking.
[275]            Chair
Ogburn, Dennis (University of North Carolina at Charlotte)
[172]            Unraveling the Relationship between Color and Meaning of Cords in Matching and Related Inka Khipu
Colors of cords in Inka khipu are of great interest because it has long been understood that they were meant to convey specific meanings, namely
indicating the individual category being encoded in a particular position on a khipu. Colonial authors such as Calancha and Garcilaso de la Vega made
claims regarding what certain colors symbolized, but studies of extant khipu have yet to definitively correlate colors with specific meanings. Before we can
begin to understand the correlation between color and meaning, we need to assess to what extent color choices were standardized within and between the
different levels at which khipu were created and used within the empire. Here I discuss observations regarding the level of standardization of colors within
individual khipu, between those in matching sets, and between related khipu comprising an accounting hierarchy; these observations are derived from my
analysis of data tables for two large matching khipu from Coastal Peru and for a set of three khipu from Ica that make up an accounting hierarchy. Results
suggest that, at least for these khipu, color choice was consistent in some cases but variable in many others, and that pendant position was perhaps most
important for conveying meaning.
O'Hara, John (NYU)
[278]            Social Networks and Cultural Geographies in the Magdalenian: evidence from personal ornaments
The Magdalenian comprises one of the richest and most complex archaeological records known to archaeology, with extensive social networks stretching
across the landscape. Large quantities of ‘exotic’ goods, such as objects in stone, mineral, or shell found hundreds of kilometers from the material source,
attest to the wide-ranging mobility of these groups. On occasion, however, the distances are so great that archaeologists attribute them to complex
networks of interaction, procurement and exchange between separate groups spread across the landscape. This paper details an attempt to further our
understanding of these social geographies through analysis of personal ornaments.
Typological and technological aspects of the ornament record from Franco-Cantabria will be interrogated for insights into the nature, extent and
organization of social networks, such as the degree of regionalism within the study region and whether that changes, and the geographic axes of cultural
and material diffusion across the landscape. Additionally, a geochemical analysis of strontium and oxygen stable isotopes from a number of perforated
animal teeth will further our understanding of both the mobility of these groups, and the patterns of ornament exchange across the Magdalenian social
landscape.
Oka, Rahul (University of Notre Dame)
[4]              The Inclusion of Ethnographic Data And Controlling for Political Bias Leads to Robust Modeling in Archaeology
There have been multiple advances in recent approaches to modeling within archaeology. The power of advanced computational techniques including
agent-based modeling, Bayesian approaches, etc., have enabled archaeologists to hypothesize and describe complex multi-scalar processes affecting
past societies, while paying heed to multiplicity of variable factors. However, while anthropological archaeologists reject models within economics and
political science as "data-poor," recent archaeological modeling also stands accused of similar neglect and increasing reliance on assumptions of past
behaviors, that are often driven by the social and political training of the modelers. These can affect both the selection of necessary/sufficient data and
variables, and the assumptions made regarding the relationships between variables. I suggest that the careful inclusion of ethnographic data while
controlling for political and social bias confers robustness to modeling approaches. To showcase this, I combine ethnographic and archaeological data,
network dynamics, and engineering models to describe and test the evolution of trading behaviors, as traders respond to changing social and political
regulation. Cross-cultural ethnographic data on traders (n=576) and archaeological data from Asian and African port-cities is used to model and test global
trade interactions in the Indian Ocean, ca. 1000–1900 C.E.
Oka, Rahul [171] see Ames, Nicholas
Olesch, Dana (Beloit College) and Dr. Kylie Quave (Beloit College )
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               328
[204]             Camelid Designs and Community Dynamics in the Late Intermediate Period Andes (ca. A.D. 1000–1400)
Although domesticated camelids seem to be an important element of the prehispanic Andean economy and social structures, they appear inconsistently in
the iconography of ceramics, textiles, lithics, and other media. Recent archaeological excavations at the site of Yunkaray, Maras, Peru revealed a high
frequency of local style ceramics with camelid iconography. Found in domestic areas associated with high status individuals, these ceramics were possibly
used for feasting and as an avenue of demonstrating personal wealth during the Late Intermediate Period (LIP, ca A.D. 1000–1400). While the presence of
camelid iconography on Yunkaray pottery is unsurprising based on evidence for the importance of agropastoral activity within the Maras region, the
question remains as to why only certain areas incorporated camelid imagery and why it occurred during the LIP and not prior. Through this poster
presentation, we explore the distribution of camelid iconography in the Cuzco region and in the broader Andean region, both temporally and
geographically, in relation to the types of vessels on which this iconography appears. We argue that in Cuzco, this iconography functioned to define
identities that differentiated regional communities from the emerging Inka Empire.
Olguin, Laura (Universidad Católica del Norte), Carola Flores (Universidad de California, Santa Barbara), Sandra Rebolledo (Universidad de
Chile) and Diego Salazar (Universidad de Chile)
[76]              Date and Context of Early Mussel Shell Fishhooks (Choromytilus chorus) from the Southern Coast of the Atacama Desert, Taltal, Chile.
Fishing tools made on marine shells are an important aspect in the economy of prehistoric fishing groups around the world. The oldest shell fishhook along
the Pacific Coast of the American Continent dates around 10,000 years B.P. and comes from Baja California, Mexico. On the northern coast of Chile,
fishhooks on mussel shell (Choromytilus chorus) have been recovered from the archaeological site of Morro Colorado with dates between 8500 and 6500
cal B.P. The appearance of this technology marks the transition from coastal to maritime economies along the coast of the Atacama Desert. In this paper
we will present contextual data of the mussel shell fishhooks from Morro Colorado and compare this evidence with other early fishing technologies along
the Pacific coast.
[76]              Chair
Olguín, Laura [139] see Flores-Fernandez, Carola
Olivera, Paola [14] see Carvajal Contreras, Diana
Olsen, Sandra
[175]             Sacred Spaces vs. Public "Billboards" in Saudi Arabian Rock Art Placement
Saudi Arabia has a rich cultural heritage that is amply represented in the extensive rock art from north to south along the western half of the Arabian
Peninsula. Two petroglyph localities, Jubbah and Shuwaymis, were just awarded UNESCO World Heritage status. Representing a wide temporal range
and diverse styles, it is clear that the art is concentrated adjacent to ancient lakes, along wadis, and around other sources of ephemeral pools of rainwater.
This study examines the distribution of the petroglyphs and contrasts hidden alcoves and places with difficult access and low visibility with large cliff faces
in the open at Jubbah, Shuwaymis, and a southern region known as Bi’r Hima. The time periods and species represented on major panels at these
localities will be compared to resolve whether or not some knowledge was restricted to select members of nomadic communities.
Olson, Kyle (University of Pennsylvania)
[228]             The Political Economy of Qalas and Canals in Greater Khorasan
Neo-evolutionary models for the emergence of early complex polities propose a causal relationship between political centralization and the development of
large-scale irrigation networks. Decades of field research and historical analysis have made available a large dataset of settlement patterns and irrigation
networks in lowland Central Asia, but information regarding settlement and agriculture in the highlands of Central Asia during this time is less well
understood. The relationship between settlement distributions and irrigation networks can be studied at a coarse resolution using Google Earth. Systematic
documentation of a single river valley (Esfarayen) in Northern Khorasan demonstrates that there is a correlation between the size of fortified sites and their
location relative to the irrigation network. The largest sites are consistently located nearest to the sources of irrigation waters and presumably controlled the
downstream distribution of this water. This finding suggests that the khanate model proposed by Hiebert and Lamberg-Karlovsky may fit the patterns
observed, there is little evidence to support the purported connection between the development of complex irrigation systems and centralized states in the
study area until the Sasanian period at the earliest (224–-651 C.E.).
OMansky, Matt (Youngstown State University) and Thomas Delvaux (Youngstown State University)
[156]             Excavations at the Fresh Lake site (SS-7), San Salvador Island, Bahamas
More than three dozen prehistoric sites exist on San Salvador Island, Bahamas. These consist of small settlements and work areas of the indigenous
Lucayans. One of these sites, the Fresh Lake site (SS-7), has been the focus of research by Youngstown State University archaeologists each December
since 2012. No clear signs of habitation have yet been found, although over 100 shell beads, along with pottery, shell tools, and shells and fish bones,
have been recovered. In this paper, the nature of the site and its material record are discussed and related to previous research conducted elsewhere on
the island, particularly the nearby Storr’s Lake site (SS-4).
Omura, Sachihiro [75] see MacIntosh, Sarah
ONeil, Megan (Associate Curator, Art of the Ancient Americas, LACMA)
[121]             Insights into Maya Ceramic Techniques with Digital X-Radiography
Based on ethnographic comparisons and the study of ceramic materials, art historians and archaeologists have long inferred techniques of Classic Maya
ceramic production, such as the use of coils, slabs, and molds. This paper will review new analytical tools for imaging Maya vessels and what they reveal
about ancient ceramic production techniques. Digital x-radiography is one tool in a suite of other non-invasive techniques that are being used to a study a
group of ceramic vessels in LACMA’s permanent collection. The interpretations of the radiographs are made in conjunction with physical examination of the
vessels as well as other ceramics. Assumptions about how Maya vessels were built, including the use of handbuilding and wheel techniques, can now be
confirmed or refuted through digital x-radiography of vessels. Furthermore, the interpretation of radiographs in a digital format allows for vessels to be
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  329
grouped according to the degree of manipulation of clay bodies. This research is one part of the Maya Vase Research Project, an interdisciplinary
collaboration between curatorial and conservation departments. The implementation of these analytical tools both creates more context for these objects in
the LACMA collection and can in turn be used on excavated objects for further comparison and study.
[47]              Discussant
Oota, Hiroki [147] see Karsten, Jordan
Opitz, Rachel
[261]             A Matter of Priorities: Making a Future for Digital Scan Data
There are no real technical barriers to preserving scan data, nor are there any serious obstacles to making it broadly available now. The problems are
purely about resources. The resource required is skilled personnel, and a certain amount of infrastructure. If this really is, as I claim, a problem about
resources, then it can be resolved if we decide, as a community, to make the preservation and accessibility of our digital data a priority. And there, for
many archaeologists, is the rub. Given the choice between excavating a new site, conducting a new survey, or conserving a physical artifact, and
preserving a digital artifact, the potential gain from excavation and survey or the epistemic superiority of the physical object will win out almost every time.
For all the arguments that digital scan data can be a virtual surrogate, and all the proponents of the study of archival material, if we look at where we put
our resources, we clearly aren't buying it. If we truly wish for preservation of digital scan data to be a priority, and to invest in resources necessary to
facilitate access to it for research, our challenge is to elevate its value in the archaeological discourse.
[33]              Moderator
Orbegoso, Clorinda [219] see Baca Marroquin, Ancira Emily
Ore Menendez, Gabriela (Vanderbilt University)
[204]             Multiscale Geospatial Image Analysis of Agricultural Landscapes and architecture in Higland Peru
Large scale survey of anthropogenic landscapes using traditional methods requires considerable fieldwork time and effort. Diverse air- and space-borne
imagery enables registry of key data prior to the execution of field research. We present a multiscale imagery-based survey methodology to optimize
limited research resources and to broaden the scale of archaeological landscape research. This broader approach enables identification and mapping of
agricultural terraces, canals, and architectural features from the Lurin valley of the central Peruvian highlands. The identification of features enable
definition of the extent of agricultural infrastructure and how it changed over time. Of interest in this case study are the effects of compulsory urbanism
during the Spanish colonial era, towns as a large proportion of the population was resettled from more dispersed settlements to compact planned colonial
towns. By using a feature extraction routine using declassified Corona satellite imagery and high-resolution panchromatic aerial photography, we identify
and extract features of the agricultural landscape in the area. The integrated multiscalar approach enables identification of more cultural features over a
larger area than traditional methods, and provide more accurate preliminary data for fieldwork.
Orland, Ian [176] see Beasley, Melanie
Orozco, Joseph (CSULA), Michael D. Glascock, Ph.D (University of Missouri) and Cinthia Campos (California State University, Los Angeles)
[93]              Ritualized Shatter: Obsidian in a Ritual Context at La Milpa, Belize
During the 2014 and 2015 field seasons, the California State University, Los Angeles Sacred Landscapes Archaeological Project conducted an
investigation of a collapsed chultun at the ancient Maya site of La Milpa. The collapse pit had a small grotto at the northern end and excavation uncovered
a plaster and rubble cored platform enclosing the feature. The platform formalized the space and suggested that it had functioned as a sacred landmark.
During the excavations, a fairly dense concentration of sherds was encountered along with four dozen obsidian prismatic blades. The recovery of the
blades is not surprising in that obsidian blades have been reported from other sacred landmarks in the Maya area such as caves. What is unusual,
however, is the extremely fragmented condition of the blades which suggests deliberate breakage. Analysis of fracture patterns and use-wear has been
conducted to determine how the blades had been used and fragmented before being deposited in the hole. Obsidian blade fragments from this site have
been sourced to two Guatemalan highland quarries.
Orr, Caley [278] see Meyer, Dominique
Orschiedt, Jörg [52] see Schulting, Rick
Orsini, Stephanie, Carolyn Freiwald (University of Mississippi) and Keith Prufer (University of New Mexico )
[270]             Changing Food Choices from Paleoindian to Classic Maya Periods: A Zooarchaeological Analysis
Very little is known about Paleoindian and Archaic subsistence strategies of the people of Mesoamerica prior to the development of ceramics as food
processing, storage, and serving containers. Rockshelters with good preservation and stratigraphic deposits can provide excellent contexts for a
comparative faunal analysis though time. We examine subsistence patterns using the faunal remains from the Maya Hak Cab Pek (MHCP) rock shelter in
the Toledo District of southern Belize before and after the introduction of ceramics. Use of the rockshelter spanned the Paleoindian to the Classic Maya
periods. Preservation of the faunal remains at MHCP is unusually good and allows for a detailed analysis of early diet and animal processing. With over
thirty species identified in the faunal assemblage, we determine the potential effects that the introduction of ceramics had on the use of specific species
and elements of those species.
ortega, victor [78] see Gallaga, Emiliano
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             330
Ortega Cabrera, Verónica [129] see Sugiyama, Nawa
Ortiz, Veronica (Verónica Ortiz) and Thomas Lynch (Director Emeritus, Brazos Valley Museum of Natural)
[62]              Quishqui Punku (PAn 3-170), Early Use of High Altitude Sites in the Callejon de Huaylas (Ancash), Peru
In 1964 excavations at Quishqui Punku, Lynch described a diverse lithic industry, including small blades and elongated flakes, which I re-analyzed in
2014–15. Lynch did not take samples for radiocarbon dating because of severe mixing and contamination by later agriculturalists. Nevertheless, in this
study of the blades and debitage, I recognized two fragments of Fishtail points. Typological considerations suggest occupation from the Terminal
Pleistocene through the Early and Middle Holocene (Younger Dryas). Fishtail points on flakes and microblades span a broad time spectrum in South
America: Fishtail points occur in Fell's Cave, El Inga, and Río Negro, while microblade technology was found at Cueva de los Toldos, El Inga and
Manachaqui. Lynch identified 94,660 pieces of worked stone, including 1782 artifacts in 66 types. He found these and additional types at 31 other sites in
the Callejon, such as Guitarrero Cave and Pan12-58 near the headwaters of the Santa River. Lynch based his typology largely on shapes and dimensions,
paying little attention to technological factors. My methodology stressed technology and seeked to reconstruct the processes of production of artifacts
through an analysis of human intention, techno-typological determination, and the “operational chain.”
Ortiz Brito, Alberto (UNAM)
[136]             La relación ser humano-paisaje dentro de los grupos olmecas del periodo Preclásico mesoamericano
Mucho antes de que el término Mesoamérica fuera acuñado para definir un área cultural particular, diversos arqueólogos ya se habían percatado de la
amplia dispersión espaciotemporal de un gran número de manifestaciones plásticas correspondientes a un mismo estilo del periodo Preclásico al cual
denominaron olmeca. Si bien es un hecho innegable que el estilo olmeca fue adoptado por muchos grupos humanos asentados en las diversas regiones
de Mesoamérica, aún persiste la interrogante de qué tan homogéneos eran estos grupos en el ámbito religioso, político y social.
Así pues, la presente ponencia tiene como objetivo discutir la homogeneidad cultural de los grupos humanos participes del fenómeno olmeca a través del
análisis de seis rasgos fisiográficos en los cuales la presencia de manifestaciones plásticas dan cuenta de la estrecha relación entre el humano y el
paisaje, estos son: el cerro Manatí, Arroyo Pesquero y el Volcán San Martín Pajapan, Veracruz; el cerro Chalcatzingo, Morelos; y las cuevas de Oxtotitlán
y de Juxtlahuaca, Guerrero. Dentro de los estudios olmecas el análisis de la relación humano-paisaje es un tema que requiere mayor atención y debe ser
abordado desde corrientes teórico-metodológicas adecuadas, en este caso se utilizaran propuestas provenientes de la arqueología del paisaje.
Ortiz-Aguilu, Juan-Jose
[258]             The Caribbean and the Beginnings of American Archaeology and Anthropology
Both American and native Caribbean scholars and amateurs of different capacities and experience contributed to the formation of the discipline of
Archaeology in the region, especially in Puerto Rico and Cuba. Before 1920 came around, these islands had seen the likes of John Wesley Powell, William
H. Holmes, Jesse Walter Fewkes, John Alden Mason and none other than Franz Boas himself. The interesting thing is that these people not only did what
they did, but that the Caribbean, its data and the information provided by the local amateurs and scholars, contributed considerably to the formation of
these legendary figures and their eventual contribution to the discipline. Venturing into the Caribbean at this time was definitely due to the results of the
Spanish-American War of 1898 and the acquisition of Puerto Rico as war booty, the total control of Cuba (for a while) and geopolitical domination of the
whole region by the U.S. It has been a very little known chapter in the history of American Anthropology and Archaeology.
Ortiz-Aguilú, Juan [160] see Martinez-Cruzado, Juan
Ortman, Scott [17] see White, Devin
Ortmann, Anthony [132] see Kidder, Tristram
Osborn, Jo (University of Michigan) and Benjamin Nigra (UCLA)
[205]             Feasting and Ritual Reuse: Analysis of the Faunal Assemblage from Huaca Soto, Chincha, Peru
Huaca Soto, a monumental Paracas platform mound in the Chincha Valley, experienced centuries of post-Formative reuse that continued well into the Inca
Period. Two seasons of extensive excavation have yielded a massive assemblage of feasting debris within the mound’s uppermost sunken court dating to
the mid-first millennium CE. Communal feasting in the ancient Andes is widely acknowledged to have been both a ritually and politically charged practice,
and ongoing research examining the ritual reuse of Huaca Soto includes zooarchaeological analyses of feasting remains. This faunal assemblage
highlights the array of activities that may have been incorporated into feasting events, and provides evidence of animal sacrifice, divination, and food
consumption. These behaviors at Huaca Soto are consistent with ethnographic and ethnohistoric data in the region, and highlight the complex practice of
ritual reuse of mounds on Peru’s South Coast.
OShea, John (University of Michigan)
[249]             Moderator
O'Shea, John [55] see Lemke, Ashley
Osorio, Daniela (University College London), Calogero Santoro (Universidad de Tarapacá), Marcela Sepúlveda (Universidad de Tarapacá),
José Capriles (Universidad de Tarapacá) and Paula Ugalde (Universidad de Tarapacá)
[62]              Early Occupation of the Altiplano of Northern Chile: Activities, Technology, and Mobility
The problem of how and when the Andean highland (≥ 3,400 m above sea level) west of the Atacama Desert was colonized by humans has recently been
the subject of extensive interdisciplinary research. New information challenges traditional interpretations that occupation of this extreme environment
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                331
started relatively late in the process of peopling South America. Based on archaeological and paleoecological data from various sites in northern Chile, we
propose that the Altiplano, a mega-ecological patch, was occupied during the Pleistocene-Holocene transition (ca. 12,000 cal year B.P.) by mobile hunter-
gatherers. We describe the lithic technology, faunal remains, and other archaeological materials, such as pigments and ornaments (bone and shell beads),
present at the sites. We argue that mobility within this highland environment was logistically organized, and that early people curated their lithic tools, as
evidenced in diagnostic projectile points and other stone tools.
Osorio, Daniela [139] see Capriles, Jose
Ostapkowicz, Joanna
[290]             ‘Totem’ Owls, Otters and Pelicans: 14C Dating Central Florida’s Prehistoric Sculptures
Florida’s wealth of prehistoric wood sculpture includes three large zoomorphic ‘totems’ dredged in the 1950s and 1970s from the banks of Hontoon Island,
along the St Johns River, and a stylistically unusual anthropomorphic figure from the Tomoka River. Some, like the Hontoon owl, have had a long history of
museum conservation, display and interpretation. These central Florida sculptures form a unique corpus that can inform on the diversity of artistic
expression within a region long dominated by the remarkable wood carvings from the southern sites of Key Marco and Fort Center. Our new study aims to
establish their chronologies through AMS 14C dating and to investigate their provenance through strontium isotope analysis, in order to consider how the
carvings relate to one another, and more broadly, to determine their position within the wider Floridian context. The paper will provide an overview of some
of the recent directions in their study, including historiography, iconography, chronologies and material studies (wood identification and strontium isotope
analysis).
[290]             Chair
Ostenholtz, Anna [215] see Martin, Debra
Oster, Jessica [205] see Tung, Tiffiny
Osterholt, Amber (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Christopher Schmidt (University of Indianapolis)
[52]              Heads that Speak: Dividuals and Trophies from the Eastern Woodlands Archaic
The removal of human body parts after death is a diverse practice with many cross-cultural nuances. Trophy taking is just one means of body part removal.
Among the hunter-gatherers of the late Middle and Late Archaic (6,500–2,600 B.P.) of the U.S. Eastern Woodlands, heads were common trophies, though
any body part could be taken. A survey of over 20 sites shows that post-cranial trophies were often handled and kept for long periods of time. Trophy
heads however, were utilized for a short time before being disposed of, often as grave goods. While related to warfare practices during the Archaic Period,
trophy taking is infrequent and not every individual killed was a trophy victim. This suggests that the taking of trophy heads in the Archaic Period is more
particular than victims of warfare. The power and meaning of trophy heads are examined from a position that incorporates the partible body and notions of
dividuality, which underscore the ways trophies retain the identity of the individual to whom they belonged. Thinking about trophies in this way
contextualizes the meanings that trophies may have had during the Archaic Period and the ways they were used to traverse group and individual identity.
Osterholtz, Anna J. [24] see Bethard, Jonathan
Osterholtz, Anna (University of Nevada Las Vegas), Virginia Lucas (University of Nevada Las Vegas), Andre Gonciar (Archaeotek Canada) and
Angelica Balos (Ministry of Culture - Hinedoara County, Romania)
[24]              Mortuary Practices in the First Iron Age Romanian Frontier: the commingled assemblages of the Magura Uroiului
Frontiers are fuzzy spaces, allowing for cultural diffusion and the negotiation of cultural identities. Identity is defined both based on interaction and on
exclusion of surrounding groups. Located at the confluence of the Mures and Strei Valleys, the Magura Urioului rock formation stands as a natural fortress
dominating the built and natural landscape. The highly visible rock outcropping and surrounding terraces have been continuously used by various groups
including the Hallstatt, Celtic and Late Iron Age Dacians as fortified settlements. It would have served as a very visible focus for both economic and ritual
performance. The focus of this presentation is the First Iron Age funerary monument located at the base of the rock face. Multiple types of human mortuary
processing (both primary and secondary burials are present) as well as animal sacrifice and feasting activities are visible, suggesting increasing
stratification and differential burial based on gender and age categories. Only adult females and children were found in the monument, suggesting a very
complicated mortuary program likely reflecting rapid social hierarchy formation at a time when proximity to newly utilized metals such as copper, iron, tin,
gold, and coal would have significantly changed society and social interaction.
[215]             Chair
OSullivan, Rebecca
[260]             Archaeology in your Backyard: Successes and Lessons Learned from FPAN-Led Community Archaeology Projects
Over the past 10 years, staff from the Florida Public Archaeology Network (FPAN) have developed curricula, programs, and trainings that educate both the
general public and land managers about archaeology and Florida's unique past. While many of these initiatives might take place in a classroom or lecture
hall, FPAN archaeologists also get out in the field to organize community archaeology projects that engage the public with the discovery of their own pasts.
This presentation will highlight some of the successful strategies employed for these community based archaeology programs, as well as some of the
challenges of this type of work outside of a traditional academic setting. Participatory mapping, oral history work, and public archaeology days have been
useful in listening to and learning from the public about their local histories, but what happens when memories clash with archaeological interpretation?
How can "public archaeologists" bridge the gap while also respecting the layered and ever changing histories that communities are constantly building and
changing?
Oswald, Dana (Prescott College)
[258]             Creating Insiders and Outsiders through Language
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             332
Anthropologists use discourse analyses to study how language is used within cultures and across cultural boundaries as a way to distinguish between the
cultural “insiders” and “outsiders.” This study investigates how language creates insiders and outsiders in archaeology. Textbooks and primary literature
are used in the professionalization of students from undergraduate through doctoral programs, helping to drive the transition from novice to professional
status in archaeology. Scholars within the academy create theory and associated terminology within paradigms that is passed down to their students, a
cultural subgroup, and is disseminated throughout the professional literature. Language differences among avocational, applied and theoretical
archaeology are demonstrated through the analysis of how they discuss the data sets, such as artifacts, settlements and regional patterns, that are
common to all these groups. Newsletters, site reports, journal articles, public talks and conference papers are used in this analysis.
Otaola, Clara [204] see Neme, Gustavo
Otaola, Clara (IMHICIHU-CONICET), Fernado F. Franchetti (Department of Anthropology. University of Pittsbur) and Miguel A. Giardina
(IANIGLA-CONICET Grupo Vinculado San Rafael)
[207]            Distributional studies in the Diamante Valley, Mendoza, Argentina: a methodological approach.
We present a random sampling design for the Diamante Valley, Mendoza, Argentina. We selected 3 areas located in the highlands, the piedmont and the
                                                                                                                             2
lowlands. The aim is to test differences and variability in the use of the space. Each of the areas is constituted by 100 Km and was divided by GIS in
                                     2
10,000 sampling units of 10,000 m . 122 units have been selected randomly in each of the areas. From data available of neighboring areas we generated
expectations of material densities and archaeological sites. In this first stage, we show the results of 30 percent coverage in the piedmont and the lowlands
units. Finally, we compare these results with lineal transects done in the piedmont.
Otarola-Castillo, Erik [115] see Burnett, Paul
Otárola-Castillo, Erik [134] see Valentine, Benjamin
Otárola-Castillo, Erik (Harvard University), Max Price (Harvard University) and Jesse Wolfhagen (Stony Brook University)
[176]            Zooarch, A Statistical Package for Zooarchaeologists
Zooarchaeologists address some of today’s “big-questions” related to human evolution, social competition and exploitation, big-game hunting, and the
origins of domestication. These questions are frequently answered by systematically observing the appropriate zooarchaeological assemblages and
quantifying and analyzing suitable data. Techniques used throughout data collection and analysis include sampling, frequency distributions of bone counts,
butchery marks, taphonomic modification, and GIS analysis. Many of these techniques require sophisticated statistical tools. However, there is currently no
software package available across all computer platforms designed to deal with analyses specific to zooarchaeological problems. Here, we present
“zooaRch,” a statistical package within the R computing environment, which provides a means for flexibly integrating a broad range of analyses to conform
to project-specific goals. Functions in zooaRch allow users to import, manipulate, visualize, and analyze zooarchaeological data. Moreover, zooaRch is
open source, freely distributed, customizable, and its graphical user interface is easy to use within the R computing environment. We provide analytical
examples using survivorship and mortality analyses, skeletal part-frequency analyses and simulations, and taxa ratio analysis.
Otero, Clarisa [259] see Cremonte, Maria
Ots, María José [91] see Sugrañes, Nuria
Outram, Alan (University of Exeter)
[176]            Integrating Lipid Residue Analysis into Zooarchaeological Research
This paper considers the use of lipid residue analyses as an integral part of zooarchaeological research. It critically assesses the different types of
information that can be gained from the study of both animal bones and lipid residues. It is not the intention to provide detailed consideration of the
methods of lipid residue analysis, but instead to concentrate on zooarchaeological interpretation, drawing out, from examples, the different methodologies’
strengths and weaknesses in relation to a variety of questions. Key issues discussed with respect to both methods include identification, reference
material, inherent biases, taphonomy, quantification of the economic and cultural significance, association with material culture and context, dating, and
environmental reconstruction.
Overholtzer, Lisa (McGill University)
[75]             Producing an Empire: Household Production and Market Expansion at Postclassic and Colonial Xaltocan, Mexico
Archaeologists have long been interested in household production and consumption, regional economic interactions, and the development and expansion
of trade networks, particularly with the rise of states and empires. This research, however, has often focused on top-down political-economic processes in
which state-level elite actors condition economic activity. Put simply, “states”—and by extension, their leaders—intensify household craft production,
facilitate exchange, and redirect the flow of goods. In contrast, my research reframes our understandings of macro-level economic processes to include the
daily material practices of ordinary smallholders and the social relationships that drive production and exchange. In this paper, I take a precise, diachronic
approach to variation at the micro-level, examining how members of one commoner household at the central Mexican site of Xaltocan altered their
production strategies over four centuries, spanning the pre-Aztec, Aztec, and early colonial periods. Among the key findings is that many of the shifts in
material culture previously assumed to have been the result of the Aztec conquest—a narrowed focus on cotton textile production, for example—actually
pre-date the empire significantly and thus reflect anticipatory strategies of commoner agents. Assessing the effects of such strategies remains a
challenging, but I argue crucial, endeavor.
Owen, Steve [267] see Brown, Erin
Owens, Sheena [63] see Thompson, Katlynn
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   333
Ownby, Mary [66] see Van Keuren, Scott
Oyola-Coeur, Monica [253] see Beiter, Gary
Oyola-Coeur, RPA, Monica (National Archives)
[253]             The National Archives: Accessing Historical Resources for the Archaeologist
The National Archives is best known as a repository of the Charters of Freedom and less known for the wealth of historical resources from the vaults, many
accessible digitally. This paper discusses how U.S. government records of historical value such as documents, maps and early photographs are organized
to facilitate search of archival resources available for archaeological research. An overview of the National Archives collections, databases, and digital
information from selected federal agencies records is presented to assist the cultural heritage preservation professional as well as the scholar researcher
on preliminary ethno-historical or historical archaeology investigation.
Oyuela-Caycedo, Augusto
[263]             Where was the Forest in the Upper and Norwest Amazon before the Arrival of the Europeans?
This paper presents evidence that suggests a very different environment than the observed landscape tropical forest of today. A comparison of two
regions, the white waters system of the upper Amazon river (region of Iquitos, Peru) and the black water system of the Mesay river drainage (Chiribiquete
National Park, Colombia), illustrates the strong possibility that these areas were grasslands in the past. This is considered to be a byproduct of (consider
using anthopogenic activities) human action between at least 500 B.C. to the European conquest in the case of the upper amazon and the commission of
frontier limitation of Spanish and Portuguese territory in the case of the Mesay. These results are based on archaeological surveys, excavations, and GIS
projections conducted over the last 20 years. The conclusion from this work questions the biological and ecological assumption of the temporal distribution
of the tropical forest in Amazonia, proposing a model that accounts for the expansion of the forest to the present distribution.
Ozán, Ivana Laura [139] see Méndez, César
Ozorio De Almeida, Fernando (Universidade Federal de Sergipe), Brenda Bowser (California State University, Fullerton ) and Sachiko Sakai
(California State University, Long Beach)
[292]             Applying OSL Dating to Understand Relationships between the Teotônio Site and Surrounding Populations, Southwestern Amazonia
This study provides an example of the potential for optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating to resolve chronological questions that cannot be
adequately addressed using conventional radiocarbon dating alone. We have applied this method to ceramics from the Teotônio site, located beside the
Teotônio waterfall on the upper Madeira River in southwestern Amazonia. This site can be understood as a persistent place, with several occupations
ranging from at least 6000 B.P. to recent times, when the Teotônio village, inhabited by caboclo populations, was flooded by construction of a dam.
Occupations by ceramic producers date back to 3000 B.P. and are related to at least three different ceramic traditions. Teotonio may have been a regional
center during the Jamari period; differences in ceramics suggest the presence of material from neighboring sites, but some associations may be due to
stratigraphic mixing. Using OSL to directly date ceramics from the Teotônio site, our aim is two-fold: first, assign a chronology to the still undated
occupation by producers of ceramics related to the Jamari style, predominant in the thickest layer of the site, and, second, establish the chronological
relations between this style and what seems to be material coming from the surrounding sites.
Pacheco, Aryel [76] see Retamal, Rodrigo
Pacheco-Fores, Sofia (Arizona State University) and Christopher Morehart (Arizona State University)
[236]             Identity, ritual, and violence in the Epiclassic Basin of Mexico
The practice of human sacrifice has a remarkable time depth within Mesoamerica. However, it is often misunderstood as a social practice. In this project, I
investigate an Epiclassic (600–-900 C.E.) shrine site in the northern Basin of Mexico, where over 150 male, human crania showing evidence of
decapitation were unearthed. The Epiclassic period in the Basin of Mexico was a period of political fragmentation, migration, and warfare. I explore the
identities of the individuals using a combination of archaeological, biological, and ethnohistoric data in order to understand the social practices embedded
within their deposition. Using intra-cemetery biodistance analysis, I assess if kinship-based identities affected how particular individuals were targeted and,
ultimately, deposited as victims of ritual violence.
Packard, Ashley
[268]             It's a Slippery Slope: The Impacts of Erosion on the Spatial Distribution of Artifacts
This project looks at the spatial distribution of lithic and ceramic artifacts on slopes in Petrified Forest National Park to examine erosional impacts on
distribution. Archaeologists use the spatial distribution of artifacts to identify features and their functions. Therefore, it is important that the affect of erosion
moving artifacts out of their primary contexts is understood. It is hypothesized that patterns exist in the way artifacts erode downslope. Transects are put
across site slopes and the size and weight of artifacts is measured. Statistical methods are used to look at variation in the size and weight of artifacts
moving downslope. The utility of the results would be a measure to evaluate the degree to which a site has eroded. This research is applicable to the
greater Southwest because it can be used to distinguish between natural and cultural patterns in the spatial distribution of artifacts to better interpret ideas
about human behavior.
Padilla, Eliseo [230] see Schmidt, Paul
Padilla Gutiérrez, Eliseo [230] see von Nagy, Christopher
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                334
Pagan-Jimenez, Jaime [220] see Pagan-Jimenez, Jaime R.
Pagan-Jimenez, Jaime R. (Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University, Nederland) and Jaime Pagan-Jimenez (Leiden University)
[220]            On the Way to the Islands: The Role of Early Domestic Plants in the Initial Peopling of the Antilles
Indigenous people initiated their dispersal toward the Caribbean isles at sometime around 8,000 to 7,800 years before present. This time framework
coincides with the consolidation/aggregation and eventual transference of new dietary suites (domestic plants) to long distances, having been this process
one that initiated at least in two different and mutually distant regions of continental America. This presentation explores the feasibility of the ideal free
distribution (IFD) and diet breadth (DB) models for interpreting early human dispersal towards the isles and between them. Although the causes that
triggered the initial peopling of the isles are poorly understood, some outcomes of these early processes, such as the acquisition and factual use of
domestic plants in island locales, have been consistently registered. Together with the IFD-DB models we also explore other theoretical constructs derived
from archaeology, experiential philosophy, and phenomenology (e.g., transported landscape, experiential space, biography of things) aiming at weigh up if
domestic plants could have been a primum mobile around the initial peopling of the Caribbean islands.
Pagán-Jiménez, Jaime [223] see Field, Michael
Pageau, Hanna Marie (University at Albany)
[71]             Archaeology and Experiential Learning: The Unique Impact of Learning Experientially for the Field Sciences
This paper is an education and curriculum development perspective on hands-on research, including the process of evaluation of learning outcomes. Field
Schools are an integral part of education in the field sciences, and particularly in archaeology where field identification of artifacts and features is not
reproducible in other contexts. Field schools in general are targeted toward advanced undergraduate students, those already in graduate school, and
students able to pay thousands of dollars to attend. This paper will discuss the need for research about the long term educational effects of field
participation as a venue for training and assessment. The goal is to better understand the impact of the experiential learning process to help provide
incentives and data for educators, both in and outside of archaeology, to begin getting students involved in hands-on research at earlier career stages.
Pai, Mahealani [227] see Rossen, Jack
Paige, Jonathan (ASU, School of Human Evolution and Social Change)
[67]             Cultural Transmission and Lithic Technologies, a Case Study in the Late Prehistoric Tonto Basin
The past 5 years have seen new lithic studies inferring the degree of contact between and migrations of Pleistocene hominin populations (Tostevin 2013,
Scerri et al. 2014). Their methodologies are grounded in a rigorously defined middle range theory, but independent tests of the approach have only recently
begun. Bridging the gap between individual knapping events, and the trans-generational patterns we see in the archaeological record will likely require
multiple approaches, including applying these methodologies to carefully selected archaeological cases.
 Lithic data were collected from late prehistoric sites in the Tonto Basin of Arizona dating between A.D. 1250 and 1400. The contextual and chronological
control at these sites allow for us to measure variability in lithic technology within and between generations at sites across the basin. Here, we are able to
evaluate the match between those patterns and expectations based on existing theory and our prior knowledge of regional social networks. Well dated late
prehistoric and protohistoric lithic assemblages from intensively studied regions hold great potential in bridging gaps in our understanding of cultural
transmission of lithic technologies, and should be studied to compliment other experimental approaches.
Pailes, Matthew (University of Arizona)
[171]            Spatial and Temporal Variability in Hohokam Inequality
This paper will investigate synchronic and diachronic inequality among the Hohokam of southern Arizona. The Hohokam were an irrigation dependent,
middle range society that occupied the low Sonoran Desert from approximately A.D. 500 to 1500. Over this impressive temporal span there were
substantial changes, gradual and punctuated, to organizational systems, demographic pressure, and subsistence bases. The analysis presented in this
paper will draw upon available data sets from substantial CRM excavations and some survey projects. The Gini coefficient and Theil T measures of
inequality provide a means of analyzing inequality and quantifying at what organizational level it is most pronounced, e.g. household, settlement,
community, or basin. Changes in relative levels of inequality will then be compared to the established cultural history of the area to understand how
inequality contributed to substantial social change. This approach suggests some changes tied to environmental degradation or demographic pressure
may have had more proximate social drivers.
Paine, Richard (University of Utah)
[88]             A Demographic Perspective on Maya Collapses
Since John Bongaarts introduced it in 1978, demographers have used the concept of proximate and ultimate causality to understand fertility, mortality, and
other demographic events. Bongaarts distinguished between proximate causes of fertility, like contraceptive use or age at marriage, and ultimate causes
like socioeconomic class or education, which affect fertility through those proximate causes. The proximate-ultimate framework could provide Mayanists
with a more sophisticated, and ultimately more testable, means of exploring hypotheses of the decline of Classic and Preclassic Maya centers. Hazards
analysis would provide clear, statistically sound, means of testing hypotheses about Maya site abandonment within the proximate/ultimate framework.
Outcomes explored would be site abandonment, either on the household level or the polity level, perhaps in the presence of a possible proximate cause,
for example drought. The Maya experienced a series of droughts across the Preclassic and the Classic, which they survived with varying success. Why did
some Maya populations survive some droughts better than others? Drought could be expressed as either a proximate or an ultimate cause of
abandonment depending on the specific hypothesis being tested. Explanatory variables could include population density, land use factors, the presence of
drought, or military defeat, or an interaction between factors.
[88]             Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              335
Paja, László [149] see Kostrzewa, Agata
Palacios, Elsa Olimpia [168] see Sandoval, Cindy
Paling, Jason [234] see Sternberg, Evan
Pallán Gayol, Carlos [256] see Ek, Jerald
Palmiotto, Andrea (University of Florida)
[133]              Fishing Practices and Effective Seasons: An Evaluation of Zooarchaeological-Based Seasonality Studies in the Lower Suwannee Region
                   of Florida
This paper critically evaluates the concept of seasons as utilized in zooarchaeological studies of coastal settlements. The project aims to show that
"seasons," as a matter of perception, emerge from interplay between natural processes and human practices. Because processes and practices vary
geographically and historically, effective seasons are contingent on local circumstances and histories. This paper presents methods for utilizing data on
present-day fish populations in the Lower Suwannee area of the Florida Gulf Coast to model locally relevant seasons and apply them to interpretations of
coastal settlement over much of the last 4,500 years.
The research provides the first fine-screened zooarchaeological analyses for the lower Suwannee region. Assemblages are interpreted via taxa
abundances, allometric estimates, and diversity values. One key result suggests that mobile and sedentary practices co-existed among coastal occupants.
Through time, people have been sedentary within the region as a whole, but moved between locations based on cultural and environmental factors.
Interpretations are enriched through assessments of multiple coeval sites over single contexts.
Pálsdóttir, Lilja [210] see Feeley, Frank
Palsson, Gisli [261] see Strawhacker, Colleen
Palumbo, Scott (College of Lake County) and Laura Brodie (University of Wisconsin-Madison)
[97]               Mortuary Theatrics and Chiefly Power in Panama and Costa Rica
This paper explores the mechanisms by which sumptuary art was deposited in mortuary contexts in parts of southern Central America. Rather than signal
the existence of “eliteness” or chiefly office, it is argued that the production and procurement of mortuary art was one feature of a factionalized political
landscape. The burial of staggering quantities of this artwork may be interpreted as deflationary attempts to limit the capital available to rivals. Such
practices may have promoted a zeitgeist of conspicuous consumption that frustrated attempts at further political consolidation in the Isthmus.
Pan, Feifei [65] see Brown, Andrew
Panyushkina, Irina (Tree-Ring Lab, University of Arizona), Steven Leavitt (Tree-Ring Lab, University of Arizona) and John Zawiskie (Cranbrook
Institute of Science)
[218]              Annually-Resolved Environmental proxies in the Great Lakes Region, 14 ka to 10 ka BP: A Time of Paleo-Indian Hunters and Megafauna
                   Extinction
The last deglaciation was characterized by numerous abrupt climate shifts including the extended Bølling and Allerød warm periods and the Preboreal,
Younger Dryas, Older Dryas and Intra-Allerød cold periods, which caused loss of stability across the periglacial landscapes of the Great Lakes region. To
date, assessing the possible impact of abrupt late glacial environmental change in this area has been limited by paucity of high-resolution environmental
proxies that can be compared to the chronology of Paleo-Indians and megafauna. A Great Lakes Subfossil Tree Ring network (GLSTR) generated from
buried wood of the U.S. Midwest addresses this problem through: 1) increased precision of calendar dating of major changes in vegetation, and
geohydrology, and 2) tree-ring reconstruction of climatic variability. We use tree-ring proxies (ring-width index, δ13C and δ18O) to demonstrate the
possible impact of abrupt environmental change on the pre-Clovis hunters and megafauna of southeast Michigan. This case study provides a model for
evaluating this important transition elsewhere through detailed and finely-resolved temporal evidence of hydrological regime shifts during the last
deglaciation.
Papathanasiou, Anastasia [166] see Parkinson, William
Papathanassopoulos, Giorgos [166] see Parkinson, William
Pappa, Maria [189] see Vaiglova, Petra
Pappi, Cinzia
[12]               The Cultural Landscape of the Region of Koi-Sanjay (Koya)
The dynamics of the expansion of Assyria involved the creation of a network of infrastructures which enabled the movement not only of goods and people,
but also of technologies and ideas. Excavations at Satu Qala (Iraqi Kurdistan), the Assyrian provincial capital of Idu has highlighted the role of its region
within the network. This area, located along the valley of the Lower Zab, served as a multicultural borderland both between southern and northern Iraq and
between the valley of the Tigris and western Iran from at least the second millennium BCE on. The data gained by the excavations at Satu Qala combined
with preliminary data gained by the new archaeological survey project of the region of Koi-Sanjaq provides some working models which can be applied for
a better understanding of the regional infrastructural system. This paper will focus on the links between the regional infrastructural network of the region
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              336
and the transnational communication system discussing the still unsolved problem of the cultural and economic connections of the capital of Idu with its
hinterland.
Parcak, Sarah (The University of Alabama At Birmingham)
[53]              There and Back Again: A Space Archaeology Journey
This paper will discuss the range and type of studies possible based on past and current advances in the field of satellite remote sensing. It will focus on
work in the Middle East, North Africa, the Mediterranean, Europe, and North Atlantic. The paper will primarily focus on the range and type of questions is it
possible to ask (and in some cases answer) using a diverse range of satellite datasets combined with intensive ground survey and excavation. It will also
provide a range if possibilities about where the field of "space archaeology" is headed with new advances in technologies.
Parcero-Oubiña, Cesar [259] see Salazar, Diego
Parditka, Györgyi [149] see Duffy, Paul
Parditka, Györgyi (University of Michigan), Paul Duffy (University of Toronto), László Paja (University of Szeged), Ádám Balázs (University of
Miskolc) and Justine Tynan (Quinnipiac University)
[149]             Rogue Utopians or Bumpkins on the Margin? Bronze Age Mortuary Customs in the Marshlands of the Great Hungarian Plain
Many archaeologists argue that the emergence of a social elite in the Bronze Age of the Great Hungarian Plain is due to the parallel appearance of a
specialized trade network they were able to control. This poster focuses on the burial customs at the Békés 103 site, a Bronze Age cemetery in Eastern
Hungary. This area saw growth in population, the intensification of farming, and increases in metal production during the Bronze Age, but the settlements
lack any evidence for social hierarchy. Do mortuary practices reveal a different ideology and trajectory in this area? By analyzing the mortuary customs at
this site, we hope to determine whether the existence of exotic goods or other funerary displays indicate different patterns of participation in the trade
networks. By comparing the site to neighboring cemeteries, we will also investigate whether these burial practices are similar to the larger region's patterns,
or different and therefore indicate some kind of isolation from other settlements in the Carpathian Basin.
[149]             Chair
Parfitt, Anne [148] see Brown, James
Pargeter, Justin (Stony Brook University)
[177]             Cinciliths: A New Term Describing Systematic Small-Unretouched Tool Production
The term “microlith” has grown to include a range of small tool technologies beyond those for which it was originally intended (small retouched geometrics).
This definitional dilemma has resulted in a loss of precision in studies of technological miniaturization. Miniaturization includes the production and use of
small-unretouched flakes from small cores. This paper proposes a new term for this phenomenon, Cinci-liths (Cinci: isiXhosa for small) that solves the
problem of distinguishing these tools from those currently subsumed under the term "microliths." The term is neither region nor time specific, but is
intended to identify and describe broader processes of miniaturization in unretouched toolkits. The paper presents a case study detailing a Cincilith
assemblage containing small unretouched flakes (c. < 1 cm) and small cores (c. < 0.1 g) made during the terminal Pleistocene (c. 12-14 Ka cal B.P.) at
Ntloana Tšoana rockshelter in Lesotho. Analogous Cincilith assemblages are reported from elsewhere in this region suggesting that such toolkits were in
widespread use during the Late Pleistocene in southern Africa. The antiquity of these processes of toolkit miniaturization remains unknown, but not
unknowable. Using appropriate terminology combined with statistical and size-based approaches to defining and quantifying Cincilith assemblages easily
solves this problem.
Paris, Elizabeth (Wichita State University) and Roberto López Bravo (Universidad de Ciencias y Artes de Chiapas)
[88]              Surviving the Maya Collapse: A View from Moxviquil, Chiapas, Mexico
Although the famous “Maya collapse” in the ninth century A.D. destabilized many powerful Southern Lowland Maya Late Classic kingdoms, the small
polities of highland Chiapas not only survived, but thrived. Excavations in the Central Highlands of Chiapas suggest that the small cities and towns in this
region maintained their roles as political centers throughout the Late Classic-Early Postclassic Period transition. Recent excavations at Moxviquil provide
evidence for the economic and social foundations of households at the site during and beyond the ninth century, which suggest that this period was one of
stability and prosperity for its residents. Domestic structures were renovated and expanded multiple times during this period, in conjunction with the
expansion of residential settlement into new areas. Economic stability was likely derived from diversified local economies and relatively flexible and shifting
participation in long-distance trade networks. A micro-scale perspective on household life and activities can shed light on contributing factors to broader
political and economic stabilizing trends within the region during an otherwise turbulent period.
Park Boush, Lisa [222] see Berman, Mary Jane
Parker, Evan (Tulane University)
[127]             The Intermediate Elite of the Puuc Maya Suburbs: Excavations at Terminal Classic Escalera al Cielo
Seven years of extensive horizontal excavations at the Terminal Classic suburban hilltop complex of Escalera al Cielo have uncovered nearly the full range
of social and economic activities undertaken by a class of intermediate elites on the edge of the Kiuic polity. Rather than considering Escalera al Cielo as
simply another rung in the settlement hierarchy, we view it as a constituted community that formed and maintained ties of affiliation with the urban elite of
Kiuic and with the commoners who inhabited surrounding hilltops. A distinct community identity was formulated at Escalera al Cielo through several
practices, including episodic ritual events, the investment of wealth into stone houses, the construction of a civic-ceremonial center, and a variety of more
mundane economic activities. Around 1000 A.D., the inhabitants of this community rapidly abandoned the hilltop, but cached materials in such a manner as
to suggest an anticipated return. Given the demographic collapse of the Puuc around this time, Escalera al Cielo may serve as microcosm of the booming
Terminal Classic Puuc Maya economy, but also of the consequences of high population densities coupled with intensive resource exploitation.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                337
[127]             Chair
Parker, Evan [127] see Kohut, Betsy
Parker, Bradley (University of Utah)
[219]             Fragments of the Past: Applying Microarchcaeological Techniques to House Floors at Tumilaca, Moquegua, Peru
For decades archaeologists have been trying to develop methodologies that will help them determine what activities took place in and around domestic
structures. Since people tend to clean activity areas, especially those that are used repeatedly, visible artifacts like pottery, bones, and stone tools are
rarely discovered in the context where they were originally used. Instead, such artifacts are usually discovered in refuse heaps or other secondary
contexts. Microarchaeology, the study of the density and distribution of tiny fragments of pottery, bone, worked stone, and other microartifacts, offers a
potential solution to the problem of determining the nature and location of activity areas at archaeological sites. This paper presents the preliminary results
of microarchaeological research carried out during the summer of 2015 at the site of Tumilaca in the middle Moquegua valley of southern Peru. In it, I
enumerate some of the benefits and limitations of microarchaeological research and make suggestions about how microarchaeological research can be
integrated into on-going field projects.
Parker-McGlynn, John
[123]             Pre-Historic Archaeological Site Location Modeling Using Raster Overlay Analysis in GIS
The goal of this paper is to demonstrate the ability to create a viable site location model of pre-historic archaeological sites in the Columbia Plateau Region
that are older than 15,000 B.P. The site location model is created by analyzing several different variables: previously discovered archaeological sites in the
Columbia Plateau Region older than 10,000 B.P., Missoula Flood modeling, Bonneville Flood geological evidence, and prehistoric climate data. The
prehistoric site locations are used to determine habitation variability such as distance from water, slope, and elevation. The paleo climate data is used to
determine what type of environments people of the Columbia Plateau were willing to live in, and apply that to climate data from 15,000 B.P. to determine
habitation variability. Since no archaeological evidence would have withstood the Bonneville and Missoula Floods, a flood pathway shapefile is created as
a limiting variable. All of the data is compiled and imputed into a GIS program, and by using the raster overlay method, a site location model completed.
The process of creating this viable preliminary model also clarifies previously unforeseen steps needed to refine and improve it into a working model.
Parkinson, William (Field Museum of Natural History)
[166]             The Diros Project: Multidisciplinary Investigations at Alepotrypa Cave and Ksagounaki Promontory, 2010–2015
This paper summarizes the results of multidisplinary research conducted by The Diros Project in Diros Bay on the western Mani Peninsula of the southern
Peloponnesos. The project centers around Aleptorypa Cave, a massive cave that was used for burials and other ritual and domestic activities throughout
the entire Neolithic Period (ca. 6,000–4,000 B.C.). Under the direction of Dr. Giorgos Papathanassopoulos (Honorary Ephor of Antiquities), The Diros
Project was established by a team of international researchers in 2010 to catalog and publish the materials that had been excavated from Alepotrypa Cave
and to survey Diros Bay in an attempt to place the cave site into a regional context. Excavations also were conducted at the open-air settlement of
Ksagounaki Promontory, located adjacent to Alepotrypa Cave, where the team discovered evidence of an extensive settlement and burials that date
exclusively to the Final Neolithic Period. A rock-built Mycenaean ossuary also was discovered on the promontory, suggesting the locale had retained a
special importance into the Bronze Age.
[166]             Chair
Parris, Caroline (Tulane University)
[270]             Big Trash, Little Trash: A Comparison of a Late Classic Maya Feasting Deposit and a Household Midden
Feasting is often identified in the archaeological record based on the discovery of high ceramic frequencies and the presence of faunal remains in a
concentrated area. While these characteristics can prove useful an initial identification of feasting behavior, further examination of the potential feasting
assemblage and comparison with other types of archaeological deposits is necessary to fully support a feasting interpretation. This paper compares two
deposits from the Classic Maya site of La Corona, Peten, Guatemala: a potential feasting deposit and a contemporaneous household midden. Examination
of ceramic type frequencies, vessel forms, and rim diameters as well as analysis of non-ceramic materials, including chert, obsidian, and faunal remains,
demonstrates the similarities and differences between the deposits while highlighting the ancient Maya behaviors which created the deposits. This study
broadens our understanding of Late Classic Maya feasting and household consumption activity while emphasizing the importance of comparison when
examining potential feasting deposits.
Parrish, Ryan [218] see Miller, D. Shane
Parsell, Veronica [111] see Greene, James
Parsell, Veronica, James Greene (Cardno), Cathy Draeger-Williams (IDNR-DHPA), Paul Leffler (USACE-Chicago District Regulatory Branch) and
George Strack (Miami Tribe of Oklahoma)
[287]             One Project, Multiple Perspectives: An Example of Successful Section 106 Consultation in Northwest Indiana
When completing the Section 106 process, the parties involved often have differing opinions and goals regarding the consideration of cultural resources.
Recent completion of a Phase III data recovery of a prehistoric site in northwest Indiana highlights the Section 106 process as a successful tool for
communication between the federal agency, project applicant, SHPO, Native American tribes, and the CRM contractor regarding the consideration of
significant cultural resources. While each of the aforementioned parties had varied opinions and goals regarding the project, through the Section 106
process, successful mitigation was completed such that impacts to the resource were mitigated, prehistoric human remains were protected, and the project
proceeded with minimal delay. This presentation discusses aspects of the Phase III mitigation for the Singleton Quarry project from the perspectives of
different parties involved in the Section 106 process, including the Federal Agency, the SHPO, Native American tribes, and the CRM contractor. This
dialogue provides insight regarding the position and viewpoints of various entities often involved in projects pursuant to Section 106 of the NHPA.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                338
Parsons, Ted (University of Alaska Anchorage)
[39]              Practical and Affordable Alternatives to Terrestrial Laser Scanning
3D modeling to document artifacts, features, and sites is commonplace in archaeology today. The use of terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) is the standard for
creating 3D models. The limitation of this type of scanning is that the units are bulky and expensive, and archaeological work is often done in remote
locales under limited budgets. I present information on portable, affordable, and easily implemented alternatives to TLS. Three scanning methods are
assessed: photo modeling using Agisoft’s PhotoScan® software, desktop laser scanning with the NextEngine® short-range scanner, and infrared imaging
using Microsoft’s Kinect® depth-mapping sensor. Each alternative works well without the need for internet or reliable electrical connections. The goal is to
create a suite of field-deployable imaging equipment, procedures, and workflows. The methods were tested in well-lit and dark conditions indoors and
outside. The results of the tests are that these techniques permit successful 3D information capture in a wide variety of conditions. An additional benefit is
that output from each tested method is viewable in many standard file formats on conventional and tablet computers and smartphones.
Parsons, Alexandra (National Park Service)
[133]             A WEIRd Tale: 2,500 Years of Fishing in an Everglades Slough
In 1968, a dredging project alongside the Anhinga Trail in Taylor Slough, Florida unearthed an unusually large collection of worked bone objects. Peat
deposits in the slough afforded excellent preservation conditions—some of the bone tools still contain wooden shafts and pitch. Sometime after its
discovery, the collection was split between different institutions and lost. This important collection has recently been relocated and rejoined and is
described in this paper. The assemblage consists of over 250 worked bone artifacts including socketed bone points, bipoints, hafted shark teeth, utilized
stingray spines, and utilized sawfish teeth.
The Anhinga Trail site was an important place on the landscape that was used for over two-thousand years. During the dredging project, a pine log
structure was encountered that was likely a fish weir or raised platform. The worked bone assemblage contains objects that are suggestive of procurement
strategies well-suited to fishing from a weir or platform. The bone artifacts are currently being studied with 3D scanning, computed tomography (CT)
scanning and reflectance transformation imaging (RTI) to better understand manufacture techniques and use-wear patterns. This paper considers the role
of these bone items in the long-lived subsistence technology and practice in pre-Columbian South Florida.
[133]             Chair
Pascual, Daniel [259] see Pavlovic, Daniel
Pascual Soto, Arturo [154] see Rocha García, Raúl
Pascual Soto, Arturo
[264]             Divinos Señores de El Tajín, política e ideología en el Epiclásico local (ca. 800–1100 d.C.)
Los resultados derivados de nuestras investigaciones en el conjunto arquitectónico del Edificio de las Columnas, el emplazamiento por excelencia de las
actividades de la elite en el Epiclásico local, han sido de enorme valor para enfocar de mejor manera el estudio de las características culturales del último
florecimiento de la civilización de El Tajín. La ponencia muestra una serie de hallazgos efectuados en el curso de nuestras más recientes excavaciones en
un intento por explorar la ideología y el sistema de creencias sobre los que se construyó la etapa final de una de las civilizaciones más importantes del
México antiguo.
[154]             Chair
Pastrana, Alejandro (INAH)
[129]             Explotación teotihuacana de obsidiana verde en La Sierra de Las Navajas
Se analiza el proceso de explotación minera, talla y distribución de la obsidiana verde por parte de Teotihuacan en La Sierra de Las Navajas, con base en
las excavaciones arqueológicas y recorridos detallados de superficie. Hemos identificado en el yacimiento tres tipos de locus de talla, talleres familiares,
talleres especializados y áreas individuales de talla. La producción en general en el yacimiento comprende elaboración de instrumentos, armas, objetos
religiosos y de vestimenta además de la utilización de instrumental de obsidiana para la manufactura de artefactos de maderas y fibras locales.
Patch, Shawn [8] see Gale, Sara
Patel, Sneh
[252]             The Baazar Side of the Indus Valley: A Framework for Understanding the Merchant Economy of the Indus Valley Culture
The craft industries and trade networks of the Indus Valley are perhaps some of the most well understood and explored aspects of this early south Asian
civilization. While the nature of production and spatial distribution of certain commodities are known, it is still uncertain within what form of economic
structures these exchanges transpired. This paper proposes that the “bazaar” might provide a suitable framework through which to understand the
exchange of these commodities. While bazaars often invoke images of the exotic and the chaotic, these conceptions overlook the structures and values
organizing this type of marketplace. Drawing on research of both contemporary and historical bazaars, this paper show how our current knowledge of
Indus Valley sites and certain categories of archaeological evidence such as standardized weights, the Indus script, or various commodities support the
existence of a bazaar economy within this culture. Not only could this further our understanding of the marketplace within the core Indus region, but could
also lead to a better understanding of how bazaars connected local communities and merchants to larger economic networks.
Pateman, Michael (National Museum of The Bahamas), Kelley Scudder (Zemi Foundatoin) and Christopher Davis (National Museum of The
Bahamas)
[142]             Visions of Colonial Landscapes: Through the Eyes of African Caribbean Communities
The National Museum of The Bahamas/Antiquities, Monuments and Museum Corporation (AMMC) is the agency designated to identify, manage and
conserve tangible and intangible cultural resources throughout The Bahamas. The AMMC is in the process of developing a protocol model that will further
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   339
enhance the identification and conservation of identified and yet to be identified archaeological sites. An essential component of the development of this
process is the inclusion of members of each island community through the implementation of oral histories and ethnographic research. Through the
collection of oral histories and assessment of archaeological sites on Cat Island the model developed by AMMC will provide agencies and researchers with
a venue that will ensure a comprehensive approach to the identification and conservation of cultural resources throughout the Bahamas. This multi-faceted
approach will assist us in developing a better understanding of the variation in the classification of specific sites and other tangle cultural resources as
identified by archaeologists, government and non-government agencies, and members of the community and will play in integral part in the development of
long term resource management initiatives throughout the Bahamas.
Patnukao, Areerut (Areerut Patnukao (Louisiana State University))
[180]             Spatial Analysis of the Dharmacakras Distribution Associated with the Dvāravatī Period, Thailand
Dvāravatī (spanning late sixth–eleventh centuries C.E.) is one of the oldest religious cultures and artistic periods of Thailand and Southeast Asia. Dvāravatī
history cannot be written due to a lack of epigraphic evidence or chronicle. Its center, geographical extent, and political organization remain unclear. The
archaeological and geographical evidence suggests that moated sites were associated with the emergence of Dvāravatī civilization. Among Dvāravatī style
artifacts found within these sites, stone Dharmacakra (the Buddhist Wheel of the Law/the Wheel of Dharma) represents the most comprehensive surviving
evidence for early Buddhism in Thailand. Besides India, Dharmacakras were only found in Dvāravatī culture. Local environmental constraints suggest that
these Dharmacakras mainly found only at major Dvāravatī sites. This ongoing work focuses on the investigation of the problems and possibilities for
Geographic Information System (GIS) analysis in the Dvāravatī archaeology through archaeological survey and archives, as well as spatial analysis. The
objectives are to examine a correlation between intensification of Dharmacakras and the sizes or numbers of Dvāravatī’s sites, to analyze different
Dharmacakras’ artworks and their spatial locations, and to focus on the functions of Dharmacakras whether they were served as symbols of the regional
centers or indicated the kingdom margin.
Pattee, Aaron (Department of Anthropology at the University of Nebraska Lincoln), Bernhard Höfle (Institute of Geography at Heidelberg
University) and Christian Seitz (Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing )
[188]             Integrative 3D Recording Methods of Historic Architecture, Burg Hohenecken Castle from Southwest Germany
This paper explores the methodology and application of laser scanning and photogrammetric recording methods to a very complex castle ruin. These
methods allow for exact measurements to be made and the production of 3D digital models of the structure in question. The models built from the
respective data combine the measuring strength of laser scanning with the visual aesthetics of photogrammetry. The case study is the medieval castle
Burg Hohenecken in the city of Kaiserslautern in southwest Germany. Once digitized as a 3D model, the castle can be virtually controlled and examined,
providing an opportunity to determine the age and potentially to reconstruct the castle from the different periods of it construction and expansion. Future
analyses will include the identification of the different stone types and ages from the different building phases, the viewsheds from each respective building
phase and perhaps the discovery of structures which have been completely lost.
Patterson, Erin (Tulane University) and Carolyn Freiwald (University of Mississippi)
[86]              Mobility in the Central Maya Lowlands: Strontium, Oxygen, and Carbon Isotope Values from La Corona and El Perú-Waka’
The movement of Classic Maya people has been recorded in numerous epigraphic texts. These references, along with migration studies at Tikal, Copán,
and other smaller communities, suggest that there was a considerable amount of migration among Maya centers. We present the results of strontium,
oxygen, and carbon stable isotope analysis of 71 individuals buried at the sites of La Corona and El Perú-Waka’ in the northwest Petén, Guatemala. The
sample includes single and multiple burials, non-burial deposits, and individuals from residential groups on the outskirts of La Corona and El Perú. We also
describe the residential life histories of 14 individuals, including Lady K’abel. Initial analysis reveals little long-distance migration and suggests that most
movement occurred among Central Lowland centers, lending support to the history recorded in the epigraphic texts. We also discuss the use of elemental
data to differentiate populations in the Maya region.
Patterson, Jody (Montgomery Archaeological Consultants)
[104]             Formative Period Changes in Regional Interaction and Influence in Nine Mile Canyon, Utah
Fundamental issues regarding the interaction of the formative inhabitants of Nine Mile Canyon with their neighbors in Castle Valley and the Uinta Basin
relate to temporally distinct changes identified in the canyon’s archaeological record. Arguments pertaining to changes in land use patterns, artifact
assemblages, and the development of seemingly defensive structures hinge on connecting distinct material cultural characteristics with chronometric data
to develop a first approximation of shifting regional influences that likely occurred in the canyon between A.D. 200 and A.D. 1200. Evidence of regional
influence and exchange are evaluated in light of a scaled down version of the peer-polity interaction model to identify possible mechanisms associated with
structural changes in the greater east-central Utah interaction sphere during the Formative Period.
Patterson, David [181] see Himes, Sarah
Patton, Katherine (University of Toronto)
[287]             Learning to “See” like an Archaeologist: Making the Most out of Field Trips in Undergraduate Education in Archaeology
Field trips are an integral component of undergraduate education in the natural sciences and in human geography. In archaeology, field trips are a nexus of
pedagogy, heritage tourism, public archaeology and critical theory. British archaeological theorists and educators have long discussed these elements of
field trips, perhaps because such trips are central to undergraduate studies in the discipline in the U.K. Little has been done, however, to assess the impact
of archaeological field trips on student learning, both in the short and long term. How do we know, for example, that students get more out of visiting an
archaeological site than they do from writing a research paper on the same topic? How do we prevent field trips from being just sightseeing? In this paper, I
present the results of a preliminary study attempting to measure the outcomes of archaeological field trips in university-level education. I consider also how
we, as educators, might help students get the most out of field trips and help them to “see” heritage and archaeological sites “like archaeologists.” This
research is drawn from two recent field trips with University of Toronto undergraduate students to the Ohio Valley and Colorado Plateau.
Pauketat, Timothy (University of Illinois) and Susan Alt (Indiana University)
[18]              Visions of Substance in Eleventh Century Mid-America
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               340
Various archaeological approaches exaggerate relations with objects at the expense of the affectivity of substances, phenomena, materials, and spaces.
New data from the eleventh century foundations of the Cahokian world suggest that the experience of substantial, phenomenal, material, and spatial
qualities were the primary constituents of a form of religious conversion also known as Mississippianization. Circular buildings at the Emerald site
embodied these qualities and point to the creation of novel relationships between water, earth, moon and people. Cahokians carried such practices far to
the north, where another shrine complex highlights the need to consider ontologies alongside colonial or missionizing dynamics.
[132]              Discussant
Pavao-Zuckerman, Barnet (University of Maryland)
[28]               “Just Move On”: Lessons from the Career of Dr. Betsy Reitz
Betsy Reitz is universally admired as a scholar, mentor, and colleague, and known for her prodigious production of high-quality, interdisciplinary, and
rigorous scholarship. She taught her many students that research should be question-driven, anthropologically significant but not disciplinary confined, and
multiscalar, with an emphasis on the long view. Betsy has long crossed the traditional divide between pre- and postcolumbian archaeology, exploring long-
term trends in fisheries exploitation in the southeast, change and continuity in Native American subsistence strategies, and global climate change. She also
trained a generation of environmental archaeologists interested in anthropogenic and non-anthropogenic ecological change, pushing us toward
interdisciplinarity. She taught us to be judicious in our use of technology; archaeological science is question-, not machine-, driven. I strive to live up to
Betsy’s superb model of scholarship and mentoring. In my research on the colonial experiences of Native peoples, I attempt to answer “big” questions, like
the colonial origins of the modern global economy. My students and I also seek to better understand the impacts, and mitigation, of introduced Eurasian
livestock on Sonoran Desert environments. The shadow of Betsy’s career is long, as her own students train another generation of zooarchaeologists to
produce rigorous, contextualized, and interdisciplinary research.
[28]               Chair
Pavao-Zuckerman, Barnet [134] see Mathwich, Nicole
Pavlovic, Daniel (Universidad de Chile), Rodrigo Sánchez (Universidad de Chile), Daniel Pascual (Universidad de Chile) and Andrea Martínez
[259]              Dynamics of Interaction and Integration between the Tawantinsuyu and the Local Populations of the Kollasuyu: Contributions from the
                   Mediterranean Valleys of Central Chile
This paper aims to contribute to a critical analysis of the dynamics of interaction and integration between the Incas and the local populations in the
Kollasuyu based on the results of research projects carried out during the last decades in the valleys of Aconcagua, Maipo, and Mapocho in the
Mediterranean area of the western slope of the Andes. The collected records point to complex processes of acceptance, rejection and differential
integration of local populations with respect to the Tawantinsuyu. These results are considered in the framework of the principles of inclusion/exclusion and
cultural interdigitation, among others, suggesting interaction dynamics that would have sustained in ritual activities in different types of contexts.
Pawlowicz, Matthew (Virginia Commonwealth University)
[269]              Cosmopolitan to Different Degrees: Daily Engagement with Maritime Culture at Swahili Towns at the Turn of the 16th Century
One of the most important developments from the past couple of decades towards understanding the history of the East African coast has been an
appreciation of diversity among Swahili communities. Those communities each experienced the broad trends and developments that have been used to
characterize Swahili history, but their experience of those trends was not uniform. This paper explores such diversity towards the end of the Swahili
florescence at the turn of the sixteenth century, drawing on recent work on archaeological materials from four sites: Mikindani, Gede, Songo Mnara, and
Pujini. The material from these sites is used to explore the degree to which the inhabitants of these towns engaged with Indian Ocean economic networks
and cosmopolitan, Islamic ideals in their daily lives. The archaeological evidence provides clear evidence for differences in their engagement, owing to
local conditions and the particular histories of each community. Understanding those differences allows us to better appreciate the causes and implications
of Swahili diversity, particularly at this moment of increasing disruption in the western Indian Ocean.
Pawn, Ian (Florida State University)
[164]              Burial and Kinship during the St. Johns: A Bioarchaeological Study of the Ross Hammock Site
Many aspects of St. Johns lifeways have been studied, but kinship, the most fundamental unit of human organization, has rarely been addressed beyond
identifying vaguely defined “lineages” or “kin groups.” Some have argued that burial mounds represent kin groups, and this paper investigates St. Johns
period kinship systems using the biological affinity of individuals from Ross Hammock Mound, a burial mound at Canaveral National Seashore in Florida.
Biological distances between individuals are measured using metric and non-metric dental traits. These data are compared to burial provenience to identify
biological/spatial patterns within the mound. Population structures identified through these methods not only help nuance understanding of the construction
and use of the burial mound, but clusters of burials help identify interred kin groups. These biological patterns are then compared to household and
settlement data, mortuary treatment, and historic records to model kinship during the St. Johns period at Ross Hammock. The evidence suggests the
utilization of the mound by a genetically related group, and burial treatment emphasized community kin identity over status differences. Given available
data on settlement organization and resource gathering strategies employed during the St. Johns, a bilateral/bilocal (or ambilocal/ambilineal) kinship
system is suggested by the current research.
Payne, Jennifer (Los Alamos National Laboratory), Anthony De La Rosa (Los Alamos National Laboratory) and Kelly Michel (Los Alamos
National Laboratory)
[64]               Virtual Preservation and Outreach for Nake'muu Pueblo: Using Technology to Make Inaccessible Sites Accessible
Nake’muu Pueblo is situated at the tip of a mesa above the confluence of Water Canyon and Cañon de Valle at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) in
Los Alamos, New Mexico. This area of LANL is not accessible to the public. Nake'muu is an ancestral site to the Pueblo de San Ildefonso. The site is
important as a Coalition period (A.D. 1200–1325) site and because it was reoccupied during the Pueblo Revolt (A.D. 1680–1682). Nake’muu is also the
only pueblo at LANL that retains standing walls. For 15 years, the site has been studied, monitored, mapped, and photographed. Given the unique nature
of the site, the public and members of the Pueblo de San Ildefonso frequently request tours, but site location and security requirements make access
difficult. For this reason, cultural resources staff worked with members of LANL’s Virtualization Team to create an interactive three-dimensional model of
the site using an iPad. The application is part of an exhibit at the Bradbury Science Museum in Los Alamos. The methodology and technology used to
create the application is presented in this poster along with information about how it is used for outreach and for documenting changes at the site over
time.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                341
Payntar, Nicole [198] see Weinberg, Camille
Pearsall, Deborah [220] see Siegel, Peter
Peart, Daniel (The Ohio State University), Sara Watson (University of Texas at Arlington), Hannah Keller and Naomi Cleghorn (University of
Texas at Arlington)
[181]            Variation in Site Use through Time: Find distribution at Knysna Eastern Heads Cave 1, (Western Cape, South Africa), from Marine Isotope
                 Stage 3 through the Last Glacial Maximum
Fluctuating sea levels during Marine Isotope Stage 3 (MIS3) resulted in radically shifting environmental zones and shoreline position along the southern
African coast. Investigation of the intensity of site use and find types relative to modeled coastline proximity provides insight into early human responses to
such environmental perturbations. Knysna Eastern Heads Cave 1 (KEH1), a coastal cave site in Western Cape Province, is the only documented locality
along the modern coast that preserves a significant archaeological deposit spanning the latter part of MIS3 and MIS 2 through the Last Glacial Maximum
(LGM). During the 2014 and 2015 KEH1 field seasons, over 10,000 finds were plotted throughout a stratigraphic sequence dating between 46,436 and
18,890 Cal B.P. Plotted finds include bone, shell, ostrich eggshell, charcoal, ochre, lithic shatter, and lithic tools consistent with Early Later Stone Age
assemblages. Our statistical analyses show that variation in the distribution and density of find types is indicative of changing landscape and environmental
conditions. Data at KEH1 are indicative of an intense period of site occupation prior to the LGM. The KEH1 sequence provides a rare opportunity to
investigate human behavioral flexibility in response to landscape and ecological change in the Late Pleistocene.
Pecci, Alessandra [125] see Lancelotti, Carla
Pecci, Alessandra (University of Barcelona)
[125]            Combining Residue Analysis of Floors and Ceramics to Identify Activity Areas and the Use of Space
Residue analyses have been applied for more than 40 years to the study of ceramics and floors (Barba, Bello 1978; Condamin et al. 1976). This has
allowed to better understand ceramic contents, on the one side, and the traces left by human activities on floors, on the other. Both these disciplines
provide important information on human activity markers, focusing on the use of ceramics in the first case and the use of space and the function of
structures in the second. However, a deeper understanding domestic and production activities and the use of space can be achieved when these two
approaches are combined together. Here, we show examples of the combination of the two studies carried out in Italian archaeological sites from Etruscan
to Medieval times.
[125]            Chair
Peche-Quilichini, Kewin [257] see Tafani, Aurelien
Pecoraro, Luke (Boston University)
[51]             The Old World a Bridge to the New: Daniel Gookin Jr.’s Intercolonial and Transatlantic Connections in the Seventeenth Century
Daniel Gookin Jr. is perhaps one of the better-known figures in colonial Massachusetts history, as an important civil servant and military leader. The third
son of an English planter from Kent who settled in County Cork during the second phase of the Munster Plantation in 1611, Gookin Jr. was born in Ireland,
and became involved in his father's plantation projects in Virginia, migrating to North America in 1625. This paper will outline the archaeological biography
of Daniel Gookin Jr. and the influences from Ireland he brought with him to Massachusetts. Though the period of time that Gookin spent in Ireland was brief
compared to the other places he lived, it was his first experience in a colonial project, and he carried the knowledge he gained from this venture into North
America. The results of colonial entanglements made Gookin Jr. a cosmopolitan figure in the British Atlantic world in which his social networks of friends in
England and family in Ireland, trade partnerships in New England and the Chesapeake, and his role as a military commander and mediator between
Indians in Virginia and Massachusetts, are revealed in the dynamic archaeological record.
Pedersen-Guzman, Jeannine
[110]            The Incised Stones of CA-ORA-662, Pelican Hill in Orange County, CA
A large scale data recovery investigation took place in the early 1990s at CA-ORA-662, Pelican Hill in Orange County, CA. The excavation revealed an
array of Late Prehistoric artifact types including 124 incised stones, grooved stones and tablets. Among these are 41 stones incised with distinctive
patterns, the majority of which have a simple cross hatch or diamond pattern. Three of the stones have more complex designs suggesting a non-utilitarian
use. The collection of artifacts recovered from CA-ORA-662 including the incised stones is housed at the Dr. John D. Cooper Archaeological and
Paleontological Center in Santa Ana, CA. The stones have been in storage for over twenty years. This paper will provide descriptions of the incised
stones and provide a preliminary analysis of the recurring design elements.
Peebles , Giovanna [71] see Malloy, Maureen
Peeples, Matt [17] see Giomi, Evan
Peeples, Matt (Arizona State University), Barbara Mills (University of Arizona), Jeffery Clark (Archaeology Southwest), Benjamin Bellorado
(University of Arizona) and Thomas Windes (National Park Service)
[17]             Social Networks and the Scale of the Chaco World
Chaco Canyon in northwestern New Mexico has long been recognized as an important regional center characterized by impressive architecture and wide-
spread influence across the Ancestral Puebloan region (ca. A.D. 800–1150+). Although few researchers dispute the strong similarities in construction
styles and techniques most often used to track Chacoan influence, there is little agreement on what such similarities mean in terms of social, political, or
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              342
economic relationships. In this paper, we explore the nature and development of the Chaco World from a network perspective. Using information on the
relative frequencies of ceramic styles and types, the geographic origins of lithic raw materials, and architectural features we evaluate material evidence for
connections: 1) between Chaco Canyon great houses/great kivas and outlying communities and 2) among outlying Chacoan structures across the
Southwest. By tracking the complex webs of overlapping connections across multiple lines of evidence through time, we seek to develop a relational
perspective on the scale of the Chaco World as well as the centrality of Chaco Canyon itself in this broader sphere.
Pelier, Serenela (University of Florida), Tosha Dupras (University of Central Florida) and Rimantas Jankauskas (University of Vilnius )
[147]             Stable Isotope Evidence for the Geographic Origins and Military Movement of Napoleonic Soldiers during the March from Moscow in 1812
In 2001, 3269 unidentified individuals were recovered from a mass grave in Vilnius, Lithuania. Archaeological context indicates that these individuals were
likely soldiers that were a part of Napoleon’s Grand Army. Geographical origins of 9 individuals from the mass grave were assessed utilizing stable oxygen
isotope (δ18O) values that were extracted from femoral bone apatite. The carbonate oxygen isotope (δ18OVSMOW) compositions (24.5‰ to 26.4‰)
suggest that all assayed individuals were non-local to the place they were interred, and most likely originated from central or western Europe. The
δ18OVSMOW values also suggest that the local Lithuanians were not burying their citizens in this grave and therefore support the identification of these
individuals as Napoleonic soldiers. Complimentary analysis on this sample using stable carbon isotopes (δ13C) suggests that the percentage of C4 foods
in the diet ranged from 17.8 percent to 31.7 percent, which overlaps with eastern European consumption patterns, the slight shift towards a higher C4
percentage is more representative of a central and/or western European diet. The results are significant because they provide further evidence that these
individuals participated in Napoleon’s Russian campaign of 1812, and that oxygen isotopes can be used to identify non-local individuals in this context.
Pellegrini, Evan [69] see Hockett, Bryan
Pelto, Brendan
[250]             Moderator
Pelton, Spencer [115] see Grund, Brigid
Peña, Luis Alberto [63] see Levy, Jessica
Peña, Jose and Emily-Anne Davis (University of Central Florida)
[204]             Study of Archeobotanical Remains from El Campanario Site: A Preliminary Analysis of a Middle Horizon site in the North Coast of Peru,
                  Huarmey Valley
During the Middle Horizon, the Andean area experienced significant cultural transformations in settlement patterns, architecture, ceramic style, and
subsistence strategies, which are commonly associated with the Wari Empire. The region surrounding the Wari capital in Ayacucho was transformed to
increase agricultural productivity in order to support the growing population. The increase of agricultural productivity can be also observed in the provinces
in which the transformation of the land was oriented towards the production of certain products along with the construction of canals and reservoirs.
Preliminary excavation work at El Campanario was conducted in residential areas within the site in order to understand the social interaction of non-elite
groups, the ceramic style recovered from this site suggested that the area was occupied during the Middle Horizon. In addition, macrobotanical remains of
different species, both edibles and non-edible, revealed significant variation in plant products, which indicate that the inhabitants who resided at the site
had access to a wide array of resources that could be related to the Wari influence in the Huarmey Valley. The macrobotanical remains found at El
Campanario are comparative with those found at other archaeological sites within the coastal Andean region.
Peniche May, Nancy (UCSD)
[288]             Paths towards Complexity in the Maya Lowlands: Implications of Architectural Change at Cahal Pech
The elucidation of how permanent settlements and social complexity evolved in the Maya lowlands has been a long-standing question among Mayanists.
Recently, it has been proposed that the first permanent architecture in the Pasion River region (i.e., Ceibal) emerged as ritual complexes around 1000 B.C.
rather than villages with permanent households (i.e., Inomata and colleagues 2013). Nevertheless, Middle Preclassic evidence from the Belize Valley (i.e.,
Cahal Pech) has depicted a different scenario. At Cahal Pech, the first permanent architecture consisted of households, which were changing through time
in both form and function until becoming public buildings at the end of the Middle Preclassic. This evidence suggests that there were different paths
towards permanent settlement and the emergence of social complexity in the Maya lowlands. Despite of these different paths, communities were not
isolated as throughout the Middle Preclassic there was an increasing interaction among the regions of the Maya lowlands witnessed by similar architectural
forms and other material culture.
[288]             Chair
Peniche May, Nancy [288] see Ebert, Claire
Pentney, Sandra (Atkins)
[191]             Future Proofing Communities and Preserving Cultural Resources
Climate change is already having observable effects on cultural resources within both the natural and built environments. As communities and
governments strive to protect their assets from climate change impacts there is opportunity for advanced preservation practices. On the flip side of this, a
lack of preservation planning within the construct of future proofing assets may have irreversible and detrimental effects to cultural resources of all types.
This paper delves into opportunities for preservation while planning for climate change effect mitigation.
Pepe, James (Janus Research)
[253]             North Woodlawn Cemetery: Remotely Sensing Jim Crow
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              343
North Woodlawn Cemetery served Fort Lauderdale’s African American community during the period of legislated racial segregation. In the 1960s, a portion
of the cemetery was purchased by the State of Florida and incorporated into the new Right-of-Way (ROW) for Interstate 95. In 2012, Janus Research
began working with the Florida Department of Transportation on possible improvements in the vicinity of North Woodlawn. A major part of this research
involved ascertaining if unmarked graves are present within the I-95 ROW. An unspoken assumption of project archaeologists and planners was that local
citizens would welcome the excavation of remains from the ROW for reburial within current cemetery boundaries. Field methodology was limited to remote
sensing techniques, including use of a cadaver dog, ground-penetrating radar (GPR), and radar tomography. Additional research involved the solicitation of
information from local informants. This presentation provides the results, limitations and benefits of each technique used in the project. It also adds to the
pioneering remote sensing studies conducted by Dr. William Jerald Kennedy in the 1980s on reported local burial sites. In a larger sense, this study also
illustrates the perils of a project designed by the enfranchised for the ostensible benefit of the historically disenfranchised.
Perales, Manuel
[233]            Dining and Feasting with the Lords and Gods: A Reevaluation of the Nature of the Activities at the Inca Site of Hatun Xauxa in the Mantaro
                 Valley, Peru
Recent studies have shown the importance of commensal politics in the consolidation of Inca power and ideology, highlighting the leading role played by
the pots as political tools. Following this perspective, this paper proposes a reassessment of the nature of the activities carried out at the Inca site of Hatun
Xauxa in the central highlands of Peru, based on functional and distributional analysis of the state and local pottery recovered during excavations made in
2014 by the Proyecto Qhapaq Ñan—Sede Nacional. Thus, we seek to contribute to a better understanding of the role played by this settlement in the Inca
administration of the Mantaro region, tracking the ways in which the links between the state elite and the conquered groups were set up.
Peraza Lope, Carlos [26] see Masson, Marilyn
Perdikaris, Sophia [100] see Bain, Allison
Perdikaris, Sophia (Human Ecodynamics Research Center CUNY), Allison Bain (Universite Laval, Quebec, Canada), Sandrine Grouard
(Archéozoologie, archéobotanique : Sociétés (UMR 72), Naomi Sykes (Department of Archaeology, Univ. of Nottingham) and Stephan Noel
(Universite Laval, Quebec, Canada)
[100]            One Island, Two Stories: Tradition, Ritual and Identity in Barbuda, West Indies
Barbuda, the small sister island to Antigua, provides a unique geographically bound island context for the study of human-environmental interactions over
the last 6,000 years. Today, Barbuda’s national animal is the fallow deer, Dama dama dama, a species that is native to a small area of Anatolia but that
has been transported around the world by people. According to historical accounts, fallow deer were imported to Barbuda, from England, by the Codrington
family, the island’s primary leaseholders during the Colonial Period, who sought to establish both a British colony and lifestyle upon the island. In addition
to fallow deer a number of other species were imported such as chickens, turkeys, horses, cats, donkeys, etc. While colonial powers were replicating the
idea of home in the British perspective, archaeological evidence and current island practices suggest enslaved peoples used both local and introduced
species. The subsistence, tradition and identity of both peoples shaped the Barbuda and Barbudans of today and will be investigated through the analysis
of faunal remains from relevant sites.
Perea, Ema (Pontifical Catholic University of Peru) and Luis Muro (Stanford University)
[206]            Study of the Construction Sequence of a Moche Ceremonial Mound in Northern Peru: Huaca La Capilla–San José de Moro
For two decades, archaeological research in the Moche site of San José de Moro, located in the valley of Jequetepeque northern coast of Peru, have
focused on exploring the ceremonial nature of the site from the study of funerary and feasts contexts. However, there are still many unresolved questions
about the ritual practices, where they were made and what its frequency was. That is why, since 2012, new explorations started at a monumental
construction, in order to understand the role and function of these structures in relation to the widely documented funerary and ritual features of SJM. This
poster will present the preliminary results of research conducted at the mound called Huaca La Capilla. We will provide an approach to the construction
sequence from data obtained on three consecutive excavation units located on the eastern slope of the mound. The analysis was conducted from
architectural surveys, and the material recovered during excavations have allowed us, temporarily, to place the structure in relation to the long and
continuous occupation of SJM, outlining a preliminary constructive sequence characterized by intense occupation, and among others, contribute to
determine the relationship of this with the most representative burials from the site.
Pereira, Carla (Texas A&M University)
[145]            Tektaş Burnu: The Process of Rendering a Period-Accurate Model of a Classical Greek Shipwreck
During the summer of 1996, the Institute of Nautical Archaeology (INA) discovered a shipwreck off the coast at Tektaş Burnu, Turkey. This shipwreck, now
known as Tektaş Burnu, is a classical Greek ship from the 5th century BCE and was excavated between 1999–2001. The ship was found to carry a cargo
of wine in approximately 200 amphorae which may have been made at nearby Erythrae, pine tar, pottery, and other amphorae. The ship remains include a
pair of marble opthalmoi and lead-filled anchor stocks. The ship is currently dated around 440–425 B.C.E., and is one of the only Classical shipwrecks to
be fully excavated in Aegean waters and thus lays claim to a certain importance.
This project seeks to take the findings from the excavation, along with what is known or suggested about shipping in this era, and use it to digitally render a
model of what the Tektaş Burnu ship looked like before she sank using RHINO digital modeling software. Furthermore, with the aid of the original notes
and maps of where the cargo was scattered, to render an accurate reconstruction of how and where it was stored on board.
Pereira, Gregory [179] see Medina-González, Isabel
Peres, Tanya [9] see Walker, Renee
Peres, Tanya (Florida State University) and Theresa Schober (University of Florida)
[133]            Making Mounds Out of Midden: A Behavioural Analysis
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               344
The contents of shell-bearing sites are routinely used to make inferences regarding resource availability, subsistence practices, technology, and as proxies
for past environments. Variability in the genesis of shell matrix within an archaeological site and the cultural context of its use and reuse can introduce bias
into these interpretations. The authors previously developed a model of shell matrices inferred as midden, mound, and feasting deposits based on visual
characteristics, artifact profiles, and radiocarbon dating. The present study refines and broadens this model through additional analyses and tests its
efficacy against shell deposition sequences at a temporally and geographically unrelated archaeological site. It is further demonstrated that identification of
matrix type is categorically possible and a fundamental first step before interpretations of shell matrix as proxy for environmental or cultural conditions can
be made.
Peresolak, Katherine (Indiana University of Pennsylvania) and Joe Baker (Pennsylvania Department of Transportation)
[208]            The PHAST Way: The PennDOT Highway Archaeological Survey Team
Since 2010, Indiana University of Pennsylvania (IUP) and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) have cooperated in the
implementation of the PHAST program. PHAST is both a small, in-house transportation archaeology program and a professional development-
apprenticeship program. The team is supervised by a PennDOT staff archaeologist and is composed of a graduate student Field Director and student
intern field technicians. PHAST is deployed on small to mid-sized highway archaeology projects state-wide during the summer months. The program
involves extensive and intensive professional training, and affords the participants professional experience they would be hard pressed to get anywhere
else. It has also saved the Commonwealth’s taxpayers literally hundreds of thousands of dollars, placed almost all of its alumni in private and public sector
jobs, and successfully completed dozens of projects from initial project scoping to the production of final reports. PHAST is a model for agency and
university partnership, for professional development in CRM archaeology, and for the effective and efficient management of heritage resources.
Pereyra Domingorena, Lucas [57] see Lazzari, Marisa
Perez, Daniel and Jon Carroll
[199]            Reconstructing the History of Archaeological Research at Tel Lachish
Reconstructing the history of archaeological research at Tel Lachish, an archaeological site in southern Israel, has proven to be a challenging task. The
need to synthesize large volumes of data produced over decades of research has resulted in the creation of a spatial database using Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) technology. This paper touches on the data collection of the previous three expeditions to Tel Lachish, but primarily discusses
current data collection methods, as well as successes and challenges in establishing and maintaining historical excavation data for the current expedition
to the site, The Fourth Expedition to Lachish.
Perez, Ventura (University of Massachusetts Amherst)
[215]            Discussant
Pérez, Luz [122] see Bernal, Marcela
Pérez Chávez, Thania (UNAM)
[136]            Las representaciones cerámicas de cánidos en la costa del Golfo: consideraciones metodológicas para su estudio.
De acuerdo con las investigaciones arqueozoológicas, se tiene registro de tres especies de cánidos que convivieron con el hombre prehispánico en
Mesoamérica: el lobo (Canis lupus baileyi), el coyote (Canis latrans) y el perro (Canis lupus familiaris); la importancia de su convivencia se ve reflejada en
diversas representaciones arqueológicas de cánidos. En la región de la costa del Golfo, particularmente en el actual estado de Veracruz, se ha registrado
la presencia de representaciones de cánidos con particularidades estilísticas propias de la región; sin embargo, no se han realizado investigaciones
formales que permitan entender el papel y la importancia de los cánidos en estas sociedades.
En esta presentación se discutirán los principales problemas metodológicos relacionados con el estudio de las representaciones cerámicas de cánidos: el
registro arqueológico, su análisis y las propuestas interpretativas, tomando como ejemplo el caso de las figurillas procedentes de la costa del Golfo que se
albergan en el Museo de Antropología de Xalapa, Veracruz.
Pérez Iglesias, Lourdes (MSc., Investigadora Auxiliar)
[222]            Archaeozoology Contributions to the Studies of the Anthropology of Food through the Study of Two Archaeological Contexts of Early
                 Hispanic—Indigenous Interaction in the Northeast of Cuban
The study of bone modifications in archaeology becomes an important source of information for understanding aspects of food anthropology and extinct
human groups, as well as it improves the knowledge of these aspects in poorly documented historical stages. This applies to the first moments of Spanish
colonization in the north of Holguin. This paper includes elements of the exploitation of faunal resources in two marked Indo-Hispanic archaeological
contexts in northeastern Cuba: Chorro de Maita and Alcala. Special emphasis is made in the study of bone modifications in Euro-Asian fauna because of
anthropic actions, offering an anthropological approach to the archaeozoological studies
Perez Rodriguez, Veronica [169] see Minc, Leah
Perez Rodriguez, Veronica (University at Albany, SUNY)
[169]            Cerro Jazmín and its Urbanism in Context
In this presentation I provide context for the papers that follow in this session devoted to the Cerro Jazmín Archaeological Project (CJAP). In the last eight
years, CJAP members have investigated the urban societies that developed at this Formative and Postclassic hilltop city in the Mixteca Alta region of
Oaxaca, México. Investigations have so far focused on the layout and regional function of the city, the timing of its abandonment and later reoccupation,
the details of domestic life in the city, mortuary practices, monumental construction, terraces, and the immediate environmental impact of the city’s growth,
abandonment, reoccupation, and ultimate demise. Emerging evidence suggests that the centuries that followed the first establishment of urban society
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               345
were marked by the use of diverse sociopolitical strategies aimed at solidifying the status of the city and its rulership, while also building cohesion within its
population. Our understanding of Cerro Jazmín is discussed in relation to its immediate regional peers and the possible interactions that took place with
other polities beyond the Mixteca. Finally, recently obtained chronological data are presented to clarify the city’s complex history of occupation.
[169]            Chair
Pérez Rodríguez, Verónica [169] see Medellín Martínez, Christian
Pérez-Crespo, Víctor Adrián [16] see Arroyo-Cabrales, Joaquin
Pérez-Roldán, Gilberto (Universidad Autónoma de San Luis Potosí) and M. Fabiola Torres-Estévez (Escuela Nacional de Antropología e Historia)
[169]             El aprovechamiento del recurso faunístico en el Cerro Jazmín, Oaxaca.
Para muchas comunidades prehispánicas, la fauna formó parte de la alimentación y en ocasiones en la elaboración de objetos. En esta investigación se
abordarán las especies tanto de invertebrados como vertebrados, destacando los siguientes grupos: Pleuroploca sp., Pintada mazatlanica, Chama sp.,
entre otras especies. En el caso de los vertebrados: Ranas sp., Meleagris gallopavo, Sylvilagus sp., Lepus sp., Canis familiaris, Odocoileus virginianus,
entre otros. En este asentamiento también hallaron objetos trabajados en piezas duras de animales como pendientes, incrustaciones, punzones, agujas,
entre otros. Además, se tienen evidencias del trabajo de la manufactura de estas piezas, por lo que se puede destacar algunas áreas de trabajo
denominado como talleres para concha y hueso
Perkins, Tyler [112] see Thomas, Jonathan
Perlingieri, Cinzia [261] see Ashley, Michael
Peroni, Nivaldo [135] see Machado, Juliana
Perrault, Stephanie [265] see Greenlee, Diana
Perreault, Charles [69] see Brantingham, P. Jeffrey
Perri, Angela (Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology)
[176]            Chair
Perry, Megan and Anna Osterholtz (UNLV)
[116]            Mingled Bones, Mingled Bodies: Primary and Commingled Burials at Nabataean Petra, Jordan
Although bioarchaeologists have recently developed best practices for the analysis of commingled samples, few scholars have theorized the significance of
communal, commingled burial. In many cases, the practice of commingling skeletal remains is but one possible variant in the mortuary process. Numerous
societies, including the Nabataeans at Petra, utilize collective burial in addition to primary inhumation within the overall mortuary program. The actual
practice of commingling, such as when and why it is considered an option in mortuary practice, who are the actors and participants creating the
assemblage, and how the physical body is perceived after death involves broader concepts of personhood, identity, embodiment, and commemoration in
ancient societies. In this case, exploring this intimate act of postmortem body manipulation, along with other elements of the mortuary realm, can build
upon the scant knowledge regarding Nabataean identity. These perspectives move beyond perceiving the body as a deceased individual and biological
object to a socially-produced artifact. In addition, it considers commingled remains not as a bioarchaeological “problem” but as a context worthy of rigorous
methodology within a theoretical construct.
Perry, Megan [189] see Sussman, Emily
Perry Sampson, Christina [6] see Austin, Robert
Pestle, William (University of Miami)
[50]             The Burials of Tibes, Reconsidered
The 1970s Tibes excavations of the Sociedad Guaynía unearthed the remains of well over one hundred individuals from various portions of what is
currently understood to be the earliest ceremonial center in the Caribbean. Despite attempts to avoid burials, more recent (and ongoing) excavations by the
Proyecto Arqueológico del Centro Ceremonial Indígena de Tibes have increased this number to a modest degree. Taken together, the resulting corpus of
bioarchaeological material represents one of the largest samples of skeletal material from any prehistoric Caribbean context. Over the past two decades,
the skeletal remains from Tibes have been the subject of a variety of analyses (osteological and archaeometric), the results of which are reconsidered here
in light of new contextual data and more recently developed understandings of the site’s geological and cultural history. Particular attention will be paid to
the results of stable and radiogenic isotope studies of these materials as constrained by data resulting from a rigorous program of radiometric dating.
Pestle, William [50] see Curet, L.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                346
Peteet, Dorothy [85] see Gill, Lucy
Peters, Ann [63] see Thompson, Katlynn
Peters, Ann (University of Pennsylvania Museum)
[172]             Color Patterns and Aspects of Significance in the Paracas Necropolis
Anne Paul (1998) observed that the Paracas Necropolis embroiderers seem to explore all possible color repeat patterns in their mantle design. At the
same time, a few dominant color combinations recur throughout the assemblage.
Like speech, color is a system of difference, hues perceived relationally through contrast with those adjacent. Dyed color is produced by chemical
processes on natural fiber with pre-existing tones, and changes over time in diverse environmental conditions. These factors complicate color typology for
archaeological textiles. A relational approach aids in defining dominant color fields and combinations. The range and diversity of hues linked to techniques
and habitual practices are analyzed as aspects of style, which may co-vary with other technical and design features. Motivated uses of certain colors
appear to reference features of natural entities and systems of conventional meaning.
The range and intensity of dyed hues on cotton or camelid fiber have been attributed to improving dye technologies, a modernist theory thrown into doubt
by expanded artifact samples with better provenience data. Distribution of color spectra and visually dominant combinations among mortuary assemblages
suggests association with the social identity of the deceased, or ancestral personage, as well as the contributors and producers of different textiles.
Peterson, Kristi (Florida State University)
[20]              Presentation and Representation: Ixiptla and the Material Agency of the Sculptural Image
Devotional sculptures and their attendant ritual interactions allow for pointed critical engagement with the very nature of images, both formally and in the
intersection of art and sacra. To that end, this paper will explore the manner by which ixiptla (lit. representation), a type of central Mexican cult effigy,
functioned to shape conceptions of space, place, and cultural identity in the Postclassic Period. By investigating their position within the visual milieu, I
posit that, through their material agency, ixiptla were crucial in the formation of the aforementioned social systems in pre-Columbian central Mexico. This
paper further argues that sacred images are, as a class of representation, indices of collective memory and nostalgia through the mythic narratives
inscribed upon the objects themselves and their usage. They in turn form the visual rhetoric that is illustrative, and formative, of the construction of space,
place, and identity. This paper will specifically address the manner in which these images defined the idea of place, primarily through their position,
movement within, and integration with both the physical and cultural landscape. In the manner of a community presenting itself to itself, they both display
the overarching cultural matrix as well as participate in its formation.
[20]              Chair
Peterson, Staffan (Indiana University - Bloomington), Dru McGill (Indiana University) and Elizabeth Watts Malouchos (Indiana University)
[137]             Spatial, Architectural, and Economic Dimensions of Neighborhoods: A Comparison of Three Large Mississippian Sites in Indiana
The vast majority of Mississippian research in southwestern Indiana has focused on Angel Mounds, specifically the extensive excavations of the Eastern
Village and analysis of decorated ceramics. Recently, a site wide magnetometry survey and large scale analysis of Mississippian Plain Pottery from the
Angel site were completed by the first and second author of this paper. Additionally, recent magnetometry and excavations at the Stephan-Steinkamp site,
the second largest Angel phase site in the region, were undertaken by the third author. Comparisons between Angel, Stephan-Steinkamp, and the nearby
Southwind sites suggest certain architectural styles, structural alignments, and monumental constructions created social landscapes that served to
integrate local, regional, and supraregional Mississippian communities. Results from these research projects also suggest the common existence of
intrasite social organizations (termed neighborhoods), manifested in both spatial propinquity and everyday material practices. In this paper, we will discuss
neighborhoods through analyses of architecture, ceramic traditions, communities of practice, and individual styles, and argue for the importance of
neighborhood-level research as a potential comparative scale of data relevant to studies of intra-site diversity, domestic economy, power, and other
theories of Mississippian society previously focused on the whole site or regional levels.
Peterson, Christian (University of Hawai'i at Manoa) and Robert Drennan (University of Pittsburgh)
[171]             Letting the Gini Out of the Bottle: Hazards of Measuring Inequality Archaeologically
Since the 1980s, archaeologists have measured economic inequality by borrowing the Gini index from economics, and applying it to the archaeological
record in various ways. Burial assemblages were the earliest targets, and more recent efforts have expanded to house sizes, areas of agricultural fields,
and household possessions. Each of these sources provides potentially enlightening information about the distribution of wealth within an ancient
community. Each source has its advantages and disadvantages, and none represents the totality of household wealth in anything like the way family net
worth or annual income can be measured with modern or historical data. The Gini index's reliance on a distribution of proportions can lead to especially
misleading results when very different cultural contexts are compared. In some cases, wealth inequality may not even be the most persuasive
interpretation of the patterns observed. The most productive archaeological strategy would aim to refine the ways in which available sources can be used,
and then to use as many as possible, playing them off against each other for maximum insight. This paper discusses some of the issues to be more
thoroughly thought through and experimented with to make Gini indices calculated from archaeological data more convincing.
Peterson, Staffan [208] see MacDonald, Douglas
Peterson, Elizabeth (Simon Fraser University)
[269]             An Ethnoarchaeological Approach to Exploring the Development of Hideworking Traditions in Ethiopia
Presented are the results of an ethnoarchaeological study of hide working traditions among the Wolayta peoples of southern Ethiopia. This research is part
of a larger study that aims at tracing the development of social complexity/inequality occurring during the pre-Aksumite period (>800–450 B.C.E.) in eastern
Tigrai through studying the emergence of craft specialization of hideworking traditions. The processing and trading of hides has a long history in Ethiopia.
The export and local trading of cattle hide has continued as an important aspect of the Ethiopian economy with possible roots within the early development
of the Aksumite state. The ethnoarchaeological study focuses on documenting aspects of sociocultural and economic behavior related to hide processing
activities that are likely to leave identifiable residues in the archaeological record. Drawing analogies gained from living communities with possible links to
the pre-Aksumite/Aksumite populations provides an excellent opportunity to create new understandings of the behavioral adaptions reflected within the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               347
material record.
Petraglia, Michael
[170]             Climate Change and Out of Africa Dispersals
International, interdisciplinary fieldwork is at the core of Lawrence Straus' long-term archaeological research. Inspired by such an approach since my
involvement with Straus' excavations at the Abri Dufaure in southwest France, I have been conducting field work in the Arabian peninsula, which aims to
understand the relationship between climate change and human demography across the Pleistocene. Satellite images and GIS studies have effectively
demonstrated that there were wet phases in this arid zone, with clear signs of rivers and lakes. Interdisciplinary fieldwork has established the presence of
freshwater lakes, and the recovery of a range of fossils, including elephant and hippo, signals deep and permanent water bodies in areas that are now
hyper-arid. Systematic surveys and excavations have identified a range of new archaeological sites, including Lower, Middle and Late Palaeolithic
localities, together with Epi-Palaeolithic and Neolithic occurrences. The abundance of terrestrial archaeological sites of every period demonstrates that
human expansions outside Africa were not confined to coastal zones, as is usually assumed. Our studies reveal an intimate link between wet and dry
climatic phases and human expansions and contractions, which is of some importance in assessing Out of Africa dispersals, including the movement of
Homo sapiens into Eurasia.
[22]              Discussant
Petraglia, Michael [295] see Roberts, Patrick
Pettigrew, Devin and Justin Garnett (University of Missouri--Kansas City)
[40]              Ancient Projectile Weapons for Teaching and Public Outreach
Children and adults often glaze over during abstruse discussions of the past, yet most are instantly engaged and excited on witnessing a flexible dart
launched with an atlatl, or a hunting boomerang whirling towards a target. Most will try their hands at these weapons with enthusiasm. Today these are
curious, antiquated devices, however, they were once the battle and hunting rifles of their day, and using them provides us with some sense of what it was
like to be an ancient hunter or warrior, however removed from the direct experience of those people our own may be. When employed safely, and with skill
by a professional demonstrator, these weapons can ground students and public in a direct, physical experience that creates strong memories,
demonstrates the creativity and skill of ancient peoples, and opens students to more abstruse discussions of the past. Several years making, practicing
with, and demonstrating ancient projectile weapons to the public provides a number of worthwhile insights.
Pevny, Charlotte [218] see Jennings, Thomas
Pezzotti, Nicole [6] see Green, Jennifer
Phelps, Danielle (University of Arizona) and Ugo Fusco (La Sapienza, Rome )
[103]             The Analysis of Late Antiquity (c. 4th to 6th century A.D.) Human Remains from Veii-Campetti, Italy
Veii was a prominent ancient Etruscan city, which eventually fell to Roman rule in 396 BC. After its fall, Veii was abandoned and then turned into a
municipality during the rule of Augustus. Within the site of Veii, is the Campetti complex south-west, which houses several different structures. In the earlier
periods of occupation (circa the late seventh to fourth century BC), the archaeological area functioned as an urban sanctuary, in which water played a
major role. When Augustus turned it into a municipality, the site functioned more as a public space where baths and cisterns were built. On the many
water-related structures it is interpreted as a thermal, therapeutic and religious complex. By Late Antiquity (circa fourth to sixth century A.D.), the site had
lost its importance as a bathing complex and water cults and transitioned into a more rural occupied area. In this later period (circa fourth to sixth century
A.D.) of occupation a cistern was excavated which held many layers; one of which contained the remains of sixteen individuals. This paper will report the
bioarchaeological analysis of the human remains recovered from the cistern and provide a possible explanation for the deposition of human remains.
Phelps, Danielle [236] see Burham, Melissa
Philippe, Nondédéo [96] see Cyril, Castanet
Phillips, Lori [148] see Hawthorne, Paige
Phillips, Lori (Washington State University), Erin Thornton (Washington State University) and Carlos Peraza Lope (Centro Regional de Yucatan,
INAH)
[235]             Maya Turkey Management and Domestication at Mayapan
It has been largely assumed within Maya archaeological research that the native ocellated turkey (Meleagris ocellata) was consumed but not managed,
and the domesticated Mexican turkey (Meleagris gallopavo) wasn’t introduced to the Maya region until 1000–1500 A.D. Recent investigations have begun
to question these assumptions and our research aims to further illuminate this complex topic. Through morphometric and stable isotope analyses of
zooarchaeological remains of both species, we investigated the possible management of ocellated turkeys and the timeframe of Mexican turkey
introduction at the Postclassic site of Mayapan. Throughout the study, particular attention was paid to differences in turkey remains associated with elite
and non-elite, and domestic and ritual structures, to explore how wild and managed turkey populations were used and potentially managed in ancient Maya
society.
Phillips, Paige
[237]             A Comparison of Three Chemical Methods for Phosphorus Activity Area Analysis
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  348
This research examines three different analytical methods used in the archaeological studies of soil chemistry for the purpose of uncovering human
activities at archaeological sites. The samples used come from a prehispanic urban center at the Formative period site of Tlalancaleca (800 B.C.–A.D.
100), located in Puebla, México. Soil samples from Tlalancaleca were analyzed using inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-
OES), Mehlich 3 soil phosphorus colorimetry, and portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) spectrometry. The comparison examines the concentrations of
phosphorus in soils, a highly indicative element of human activities. In this comparison of methods, ICP-OES was found to be the most comprehensive,
precise, and accurate method to use, while pXRF and Mehlich colorimetry were found to show differing information with regards to available and natural
concentrations of phosphorus.
Phillips, Erin (Coastal Environments Inc.)
[240]             Evidence of Heirlooming at Moundville
This paper examines evidence of heirlooming at Moundville, a major Mississippian center located in west central Alabama. This evidence was discovered
while analyzing pottery engraved in Moundville's Hemphill style. The Hemphill Style (ca. A.D. 1325–1450) is Moundville's local representational art style
including such motifs as winged serpents, raptors, crested birds, paired tails, hand and eye designs, scalps, skulls, and forearm bones.
[240]             Chair
Phipps, Elena
[172]             Nuance, Brilliance and Sheen: Textile color qualities in the Andean World
Andean textile artists transformed fibers and dyes from nature to create complex color palettes attuned to the aesthetic of their time and place. Creating
unique qualities not only of value and hue, qualities of color—in nuance shades, degree of sheen and brilliance—Andean dyers, spinners and weavers built
a vocabulary of color that contributed to the meaning and value of textiles in their social, political and creative context. From Chavin religious and
supernatural figures created through working pigment into the cotton yarns to form the designs, the widely polychromed Paracas embroideries that use
color range as well as sequencing to convey meaning, to Inca blood-red garments and Aymara 18th century Tornesol mantles with high sheen and silk-like
qualities with their related lloque effects, all represent aspects of a long and creative tradition. This tradition, viewed as a history of materiality of color and
its associated properties will be the subject of this presentation.
Picin, Andrea (Friedrich Schiller University of Jena)
[211]             Technological adaptation and the emergence of Levallois in Central Europe: new insight from Markkleeberg and Zwockau open-air sites
The introduction of Levallois method in Europe is considered the technological innovation that marked the beginning of the Middle Paleolithic. In north-
central Europe, the early evidences of this new concept of flake production are dated to the late MIS 9/ early MIS 8, a period in which were testified a
deterioration of the climatic condition, a change from forested to tundra -cold steppe vegetation and the dispersal of the “Mammuthus–Coelodonta” faunal
complex from the artic territories. This paper aims to contribute with new data to the current debate, by exploring the lithic assemblages of Markkleeberg
and Zwockau open-air sites (Germany). The technological analysis reveals the introduction of Levallois technologies in the modalities recurrent
unidirectional and preferential. This modification in the hunter-gatherers technical behavior is interpreted as a technological adaptation in response to the
new faunal complex, composed of seasonal migratory animals.
Picin, Andrea [278] see Rosell, Jordi
Pierce, Daniel (University of Missouri-Columbia)
[179]             Finding Class from the Glass: Obsidian source as a costly signal
Obsidian is abundant at nearly every Post-Classic Mesoamerican site. The obsidian typically is derived from multiple sources, including distant, “costly”
sources. Given that the obsidians’ utility is similar regardless of source, one possible explanation for such “wasteful” consumption uses costly signaling
theory. In this model, behavioral displays indicate a hidden quality. Here, use of distant obsidians reflects status by demonstrating access to trade networks
and the ability to absorb the extra costs of distant trade. However, for a signal to be received, the cost must be readily visible, which may not be the case
with obsidian given its uniform color and texture. In this experimental project, I test if observers can visually differentiate obsidian sources. Using 30
previously sourced obsidian blade and flake fragments from the Post-classic site of San Felipe Aztatán, participants with no previous training sorted the
artifacts into distinct source groups. If participants successfully identify source groups, then people in the past could do the same. I found the average
success rate was 92.4 percent for all participants. These results confirm that obsidian source can be used as a costly signal. Ultimately, this may help to
explain why sources were used differentially by people in the past.
Pietarila, Jennifer [29] see Casserino, Christopher
Pigott, Michelle (University of West Florida)
[213]             The Apalachee in a Cultural Borderlands: A Discussion of Hybridized Ceramic Practice in the 18th century
By the 18th century the Central Gulf Coast of North America was a complex of cultural borderlands, a result of constant Native American migrations and
violent European power struggles. The Apalachee, a group of Floridian Indians, was one of many groups caught up in the rapid changes of culture contact.
After the Spanish mission system inhabited by the Apalachee disintegrated, they dispersed across the southeast, settling in small groups among other
splintered Indian nations. As the Apalachee inhabited the borderlands of the central Gulf Coast, their ceramic practice changed, influenced by cultural
history, new geographic locations and changing social networks. This paper explores the nature of cultural evolution the Apalachee experienced through
an examination of the ceramics they left behind in two 18th century communities along the Gulf Coast, as well as the ancestral Apalachee homeland of
San Luis and the Creek trade town of Fusihatchee.
Pike, Matthew [111] see Flood, John
Pike, Matthew (Department of Anthropology, Purdue University), Jeremy J. Wilson (Department of Anthropology, Indiana University - P), G.
William Monaghan (Indiana Geological Survey, Indiana University - Bl) and Edward W. Herrmann (Department of Geological Sciences, Indiana
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   349
Univers)
[285]             Lawrenz Rising: Preliminary Assessment of a Site Development Chronology for a Mississippian Village in West-Central Illinois
Recent investigations at Lawrenz Gun Club (11Cs4), a palisaded Mississippian village and earthwork complex in the central Illinois River valley, highlight
the importance of integrating landscape-scaled geophysical survey with site formation processes to develop chronologies derived from diverse
archaeological and geoarchaeological investigations. A comprehensive geophysical survey of the fortified village complex and surrounding landscape
revealed extensive habitation beyond the site palisade. The “habitation” magnetic anomalies outside the village walls had multiple spectral and spatial
forms—excavations confirmed them as structures. Radiocarbon ages from structures inside and outside the community’s wall, combined with those from
palisade excavations and GeoProbe cores of the landform and mounds, form the basis of a comprehensive chronology of site development.
The extended habitation zones at Lawrenz can be explained using multiple models of site development and coalescence. By targeting spectrally and
spatially diverse magnetic anomalies for excavation, we assess the relative likelihood of certain site formation models over others, including what role
warfare played in construction of and population aggregation within the site’s palisades. As the largest site in the valley, the development processes at
Lawrenz have implications for the regional organization of labor in response to changing social dynamics and increasing warfare after A.D. 1200.
Pilaar Birch, Suzanne (University of Georgia)
[296]             “From the Aegean to the Adriatic: Exploring the Neolithization of Islands”
Frameworks for understanding Neolithization have increasingly recognized the complex and multifaceted nature of the spread of domesticates from
Southwest Asia into Europe. But how do these factors interplay in unique island settings as compared to the continental scale? This paper takes a
comparative approach using sites located on islands from the Aegean and the Adriatic to address changing subsistence and herd management between
10,000–7,000 B.P. Based on zooarchaeological and biogeochemical evidence, I explore differences between island and mainland diet and mobility, and
consider a number of markers for constraints such as lack of water, land, and available biomass. After defining the early Holocene archaeological context
and its implications for initial Neolithization, I discuss evidence for patterns of specialization and intensification of livestock exploitation as well as the
utilization of wild resources throughout the Neolithic in response to rising populations throughout the period. Located along a “crossroads” and presenting
distinct environmental challenges, the islands of both the Aegean and the Adriatic are ideally situated for investigating human ecodynamics at this pivotal
transition.
Piliciauskas, Gytis [134] see Dupras, Tosha
Piliciauskiene, Giedre [134] see Dupras, Tosha
Pilles, Peter
[165]             Honanki and the Save America's Treasures Project: Partnerships in Preservation, Research, and Interpretation
Honanki is a 13th century, ca. 60 room cliff dwelling in the scenic Red Rock country near Sedona, Arizona. It has been a popular attraction to scientists and
tourists ever since it was first reported by Jesse Walter Fewkes in 1895. Over the years, time and people had caused considerable disturbance to the site
and damage was accelerating as Sedona became an ever-more popular recreational destination. To deal with these problems, the Coconino National
Forest applied for a grant from the newly created Save America’s Treasures Grant Program in 1998. It was one of the first projects approved by the
program, with the objectives to document the sites’ architecture and abundant pictographs, stabilize walls that were in danger of collapsing, construct trails
and other infrastructure, and to provide interpretation for visitors. This presentation will discuss how the Forest was able to leverage the $93,400 dollars of
the grant into a $220,758 project through the use of volunteers and donations. Today, over 22,000 people a year visit the site, thanks to the power of
partnerships.
Pilles, Jr, Peter J. [258] see Hays-Gilpin, Kelley
Pilloud, Marin, Scott D. Haddow (Stanford Archaeology Center, Stanford University), Chistopher J. Knüsel (De la Préhistoire à l'Actuel: Culture,
Environneme) and Clark Spencer Larsen (Department of Anthropology, The Ohio State Univers)
[215]             Memory and Mortuary Practice in Neolithic Anatolia
Social memory has been argued to be a key component in the formation of the large Neolithic village site of Çatalhöyük, Turkey. This assertion has
focused on daily practice centered within the house (Hodder and Cessford 2004), and may have extended to more architecturally elaborate houses as a
central repository for memory and symbolism (Hodder and Pels 2010). Surrounding this discussion of social memory, there has been less focus on human
burials; particularly on the treatment of human remains for interment.
Recent research within Çatalhöyük has begun to focus more intensively on mortuary practice, particularly the processing of human remains before, during,
and after interment. The peoples of Çatalhöyük had an intimate association with the deceased and employed practices which included skull retrieval, skull
and limb removal, postmortem defleshing, and the creation of plastered skulls. Such practices would have played an important role in social memory;
providing a corporeal means of connecting with the dead and incorporating these practices and remains physically within the home. We argue that the
postmortem processing of remains in conjunction with other daily practices centered on the house all served to reinforce social structure and practice, and
ultimately influenced the realization of Çatalhöyük.
Pinares, Jorge [76] see Retamal, Rodrigo
Pinilla, José [207] see Hurtubise, Jenna
Pink, Christine (Metropolitan State University of Denver), Danielle Kurin (University of California, Santa Barbara) and Matthew Boulanger
(University of Missouri Columbia)
[91]              Elemental Analysis of Chanka Pottery from Wari-era and Post-collapse Settlements using Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis
The Chanka were an ethnically distinct population that occupied territory in modern-day Apurimac, Peru. During the Middle Horizon (MH) (600–1000 A.D.)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                    350
Chanka sites considered in this study were situated along roads connecting three major administrative centers of the Wari Empire: Huari, Pikillacta, and
Jincamocco. After the imperial collapse during the Late Intermediate Period (LIP) (1000–1476 A.D.), evidence of increased violence suggests a shift in
regional social organization. This study utilized Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis to explore elemental composition of 100 pottery samples from five
Chanka sites to assess if disruptions also occurred in resource extraction, pottery production, and distribution. Results indicated two clusters in the data
that are chronologically structured and likely reflect local production. Evidence of copper smelting was also revealed. Given early smelting took place in
kilns, chemical signals would be expected in pottery. Relatively high levels of As, Fe, Mn, and Si associated with ore from the Andahuaylas-Yauri belt, and
found in copper slag were observed in samples primarily from the Sonhuayo and Turpo sites spanning the MH through LIP. The Wari may have introduced
copper smelting to the Chanka, and future research aims to elucidate the location of copper processing and the regional distribution network.
Pink, Jeremias [169] see Minc, Leah
Pink, Jeremias (Oregon State University), Ronald K. Faulseit (Field Museum) and Erica Ausel (Indiana University)
[236]             Xipe Totec and Elite Domestic Ritual in Late Classic Oaxaca, Mexico
Imagery related to the deity Xipe Totec is well-recognized in Late Classic Zapotec iconography, most notably on a few large ceramic figures known as
“Xipe Statues.” Unfortunately, the majority of these objects lack detailed contextual information, limiting our ability to fully understand their ritual or
ceremonial significance. Our excavation of an elite residential complex has yielded numerous Xipe statue fragments, as well as painted and incised
human bones, including two drilled mandibles perhaps originally worn strung around the neck as often depicted in Zapotec Xipe statues. These objects
were concentrated around an open stone platform that likely served as a ceremonial space for the terrace residents. The presence of a small ceramic kiln,
over 30 figurine molds, abundant figurine fragments, and a miss-fired effigy vessel, indicate that ceremonial goods were also produced in this area. From
this evidence, we conclude that both Xipe-related rituals and the production of ceremonial objects were embedded within this elite family’s individual
religious practice, rather than more public ceremonies held in the civic-ceremonial core of the city. We suggest that this reflects a broader shift away from
collective ritual activities toward an emphasis on the renewal of individual elite lineages during the Late Classic.
Pintar, Elizabeth (Austin Comm. College), Amber Johnson (Truman State University) and Sarah Lamkin (Truman State University)
[94]              Using Binford’s Frames of Reference to Model Hunter-Gatherer Mobility and Group Size in the Andean Puna
Hunter-gatherer lifeways dominated the Salt Puna of South America for at least 5,000 years before domesticated animals and plants appear in the
archaeological record. The ruggedness of the landscape (with a baseline elevation of 3,300 masl), the low ET and the distribution of resources dependent
on a decreasing E-W rainfall gradient surely had an impact on prehistoric landscape use and mobility of ancient hunter-gatherers. In this poster we follow
Binford (2001) in arguing there is a link between environmental variables and hunter-gatherer organization. We use world climatic data to calculate an
environmental and hunter-gatherer frame of reference that allows us to create a set of expectations regarding past hunter-gatherers in this remote high-
elevation desert. We specifically develop expectations for archaeological hunter-gatherer mobility in terms of number of residential camp moves per year
and distance moved annually in residential moves, as well as group size and project these expected properties onto the Salt Puna. Finally, we compare
these projections to a current model for hunter-gatherer mobility in the study area, to determine differences and incompatible properties.
Pinto Lima, Helena [23] see Browne Ribeiro, Anna
Pinto Lima, Helena (Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi - Brazil)
[23]              Koriabo Ceramics of the Lower Xingu Area: A North-South Stylistic Flow?
Cross-regional and persistent ceramic attributes/styles may express networks of past indigenous societies. In this paper we present a characterization and
the general context of a previously unknown ceramic complex at the mouth of the Xingu River area, Gurupá/Pará/Brazil. We discuss similarities and
distinctions of these materials compared to other ceramic complexes. In a regional perspective, these ceramics show unprecedented and important data
for late pre-colonial history in the lower Amazon: they share clear characteristic with the Koriabo ceramics from the Guianas and also present in Amapá
state, Brazil. The chronology for the Koriabo Complex positions it in the late pre-colonial times, and some archaeologists suggest a connection with
Cariban-speaking peoples. Its presence in the Xingu river raises an interesting question, suggesting a stylistic flow in north-south direction (Guianas-
Amapá-Xingu). Still speculating, this southern presence of Koriabo-like ceramics could help to explain the movements of Cariban peoples in the lower
Amazon. It can also help us understand the geographic and chronological frontiers that separate the Santarém and the Marajoara cultures. Although the
archaeology of this region is still nascent, the confluence of Xingu/Amazon river area is very promising.
[23]              Chair
Pio, Kayla (University of Michigan) and John Marston (Boston University)
[149]             Food Offerings and Feasting in Bronze Age Burial Contexts from the Körös Region, Hungary
While the collection and analysis of paleoethnobotanical material is increasingly common in settlement excavations, it still remains rare in burial contexts.
Botanical material from cemeteries can provide important insights into mortuary practices and associative beliefs about the afterlife for investigated
populations. Charred food remains may indicate food offerings or feasting around the burial site, as well as social inequality or aspects of the deceased’s
personal identity. In the case of the Bronze Age cremations at Békés 103, the near-absence of preserved paleoethnobotanical material may indicate that
the placement of food offerings on the pyre was not customary in the local culture, though rites involving uncharred food offerings or funerary feasts away
from the burial site may have occurred. Alternatively, taphonomic processes could have affected the archaeobotanical assemblage. This study examines
intra-site patterning to address this possibility as well as ritual variation within the cemetery. In addition, to aid in the interpretation of the charred seed
remains that have been recovered, this study places Békés 103’s paleoethnobotanical material in comparison with similar assemblages from other
European burial and prehistoric settlement contexts.
Piper, Philip [134] see Eusebio, Michelle
Piperno, Dolores (Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History)
[1]               Discussant
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                351
Pirrie, Duncan [214] see Knappett, Carl
Piscitelli, Matthew (The Field Museum)
[105]             Developing a "Mound Literacy" for the Late Archaic Norte Chico Region
During the Late Archaic Period, dramatic cultural transformations took place along the north central coast of Peru in a region known as the Norte Chico.
These changes included a transition from hunting-gathering-fishing to farming, more intense social interaction, new kinds of power relationships between
leaders and respondent populations, and the construction of monumental ceremonial architecture—all hallmarks of emergent social complexity. This paper
moves beyond questions of why people built monuments and temples to focus on why they built so many. In order to explain the ritual density evident in
this early sacred landscape I compare the Late Archaic Norte Chico region to the Mapuche society of south central Chile, who actively constructed
ceremonial mounds until the 19th century. By creating a built sacred landscape these mound-building groups forged important connections between the
human and natural realms and possibly demarcated territory. Drawing parallels between the Mapuche and the Late Archaic Norte Chico region, I argue
that the construction of ceremonial architecture was tied to social relationships reflected in the placement and size of the mounds, plazas, and temples
distributed across the landscape. Despite a wide chronological gap, the similarities help develop a “mound literacy” for the Late Archaic Norte Chico region.
Piscitelli, Matthew [206] see Menzer, Jeremy
Pitblado, Bonnie (University of Oklahoma)
[62]              The Role of the Rocky Mountains in the Peopling of North America
Discussion of the prehistoric peopling of the New World is as old as North American archaeology, and peopling-related debate has only intensified through
the decades. Starting with the Great Plains in the 1920s, the major physiographic regions of North America have each experienced “moments in the sun,”
as archaeologists have researched Clovis and sometimes pre-Clovis sites in their midst. For reasons that make little sense in retrospect, the Rocky
Mountains are the last major North American region to have joined the peopling conversation. Yet this paper argues that if we critically examine the most
likely points of Old World, Ice-Age origin for would-be North American colonists, it is difficult to accept that the Rockies did not play a vital role in the
colonization process. By virtual definition, the First Americans were “mountain people;” they lived among the mountains that blanket the northeast Asian
landscape most believe spawned New World immigration. An equally mountainous (and thus, familiar) region beckoned to prospective North Americans
from eastern Beringia. From there, it was an easy and logical step to populate the Rockies—and First Americans did just that.
[62]              Chair
Pitezel, Todd [289] see Searcy, Michael
Pittman, Lydia (New Mexico State University)
[289]             Miniature Pottery Vessels in the Mimbres Region
This paper presents a study of Miniature Pottery vessels from the Mimbres region of the American southwest. I define these vessels as no larger than
10cm in length in any dimension. My data set includes over 150 vessels from sites in southwestern New Mexico. I will look at attributes such as painting,
slip, temper, and completeness as well as depositional context to make inferences about the possible uses of these vessels in the time period that is
covered. My vessels span almost 1,000 years from the start of the Georgetown Phase (A.D. 550–650) through the end of the Cliff Phase (A.D. 1300–
1450). I look at variations in their attributes and contexts through time to help explain their uses. A range of explanations have recurred over the years
about the Mogollon and other miniature vessels in the ancient southwest. The most prominent interpretations are that they are children's toys, older
children's practice pieces, or as specialized ritual vessels of various kinds (e.g., Datura pots). My paper seeks to refine these explanations by considering
how ethnographic evidence of the animacy and other uses and roles of artifacts such as pottery would contribute to interpretations of these miniature
vessels.
Planella, María Teresa [57] see Falabella, Fernanda
Plekhov, Daniel (Boston University), Christopher H. Roosevelt (Director, Research Center for Anatolian Civilizati) and Christina M. Luke
(Associate Professor, Department of Archaeology and)
[184]             Application of Architectural Energetics Models to the Iron Age Tumuli of Bin Tepe in Lydia, Western Turkey
This poster presents a study that applies an architectural energetics model to around 140 monumental earthen burial mounds located in an area known as
Bin Tepe (the “Thousand Mounds”) in western Turkey, which served as the burial ground for Iron Age Lydian rulers and elites. Using measurements
obtained from ground survey and aerial reconnaissance, volumetric figures for each of the tumuli are calculated to determine the amounts of building
materials necessary to construct each tumulus. These parameters are entered into an architectural energetics model, based on similar models from other
parts of the world, which assigns to each step of the construction process a time and labor cost according to available technologies and resources. The
outputs of this model are given as quantitative minimum and maximum ranges for how much building material, labor power, and time would be required per
mound, per mound cluster, and for all known tumuli in Bin Tepe. Such a study is a useful and necessary step to moving beyond treating tumuli as
indistinguishable points on a map, towards considering them as varied and individual investments of material, labor, and time that reflect social differences
in the society that constructed them.
Pleurdeau, David [22] see LEPLONGEON, Alice
Plog, Stephen [261] see Heitman, Carrie
Pluckhahn, Thomas (University South Florida) and Neill Wallis (University of Florida)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   352
[17]              Reading between the Lines: A Contextual and Processual Approach to Social Interactions in the Woodland Period of the American
                  Southeast through Integrated Analyses of Complicated Stamped Pottery
Archaeologists have turned increasingly to Social Network Analysis (SNA) to visualize and understand the structure of regional social networks, but their
analyses frequently sacrifice context and process for synchronic, macro-scale patterning. We compare SNA with a more contextual and processual
network approach to the case of Swift Creek Complicated Stamped pottery, a ubiquitous class of material culture In the Deep South of the American
Southeast during the Middle and Late Woodland periods (ca. A.D. 100 to 800). The impressions of wooden paddles carved with an array of unique designs
serve like maker’s marks in documenting Swift Creek vessels finished with an individual identifiable tool. By combining design data, patterns of vessel form
and use, determinations of vessel provenance through NAA and petrography, and absolute dating, this research ascertains types of social interaction
(migration, residential mobility, post-marital residence, and exchange) and their predominant directions and levels of intensity over time and across multiple
ecological, social, and cultural contexts.
Pluckhahn, Thomas [55] see Jackson, Kendal
Plumer, Hannah (University of Sheffield)
[130]             Maya Health Though Time in Northwestern Belize
This presentation will examine paleopathology among the ancient Maya through the analysis of the skeletal remains from three different medium Maya
sites in northwestern Belize. Osteological health indicators such as trauma, porotic hyperostosis, cribra orbitalia, osteoarthritis, and various dental health
issues will be assessed both within and between the three sites. The sites to be discussed are Blue Creek, Nojol Nah, and Xnoha all of which are located
along the Bravo Escarpment in northwestern Belize. This area is part of the larger Three Rivers Region, of northern Belize, which was an incredible
location for trade and agriculture throughout the Preclassic and Classic (250–900 A.D.) periods. the health indicators that are present at these sites will not
only be examined temporally, but also through the lens of social stratification and biological sex. Due to both pH levels in the soils in the area along the
escarpment, as well as burial practices, the skeletal populations of these three sites are quite well preserved, which allows for a unique look into a micro-
region of the Maya. This study aims to illuminate Preclassic and Classic Maya health through the analysis of the skeletal populations of the three sites on
the Bravo Escarpment.
Plunkett, Gill [95] see Armit, Ian
Pluskowski, Aleksander (Department of Archaeology, University of Reading)
[161]             Between Radicalism and Tolerance: Characterising the Rule of a Militarised Christian Theocracy in the Medieval Baltic
The Teutonic Order, the last of the major military orders founded in the Holy Land in the twelfth century, developed a strong, centralised hierarchy once it
redirected its efforts to crusading in the Baltic. After the initial period of crusading was over, its fortified monasteries were built with consistent regularity,
and the Order adopted a top-down, corporate approach to controlling the conquered territories, under the leadership of the Grand Master. However,
despite this centralisation, degrees of autonomy within its ranks are evident across its lands, which can be linked to the variable ecological and cultural
contexts encountered by its commanders and lesser officials. The Order was able to overcome ‘discrepancies’ between its own castles though its supra-
national network, which connected the smallest frontier outpost with regional convents and the central headquarters at Marienburg. In this respect as a
colonising corporation it adapted extremely well to the environment of the eastern Baltic. However, its relationships with the indigenous population and
Christian colonists were more adhoc, and resulted in the persistence of pre-Christian religion alongside the introduced Christian infrastructure. This paper
considers the evidence for this tension between regulation and toleration within a society dominated by a militarised Christian theocracy.
[161]             Chair
Pohl, John (UCLA)
[58]              Exhibiting Cultural Context
A continuing issue is the treatment in exhibitions of precolumbian objects as simply works of art. This is as much due to museum department
compartmentalization and the dominance of design divisions who do not consider the integration of meaningful detail a priority and may even see it as
disruptive to the overall design concept. Many of us are interested in developing contextualization without inhibiting the ability of art and artifacts to be
appreciated for their own aesthetic merits so we have to educate ourselves as to how to do this and in so doing get curators back into the creative process
of exhibition development.
[101]             Discussant
[117]             Chair
Pohl, Mary [230] see von Nagy, Christopher
Pohl, Mary (Florida State University), Christopher von Nagy (University of Nevada Reno), Joseph Gamble (Joseph Gamble Photography),
Gabriel Lima Estudillo (Comité de Preservación del Patrimonio Cultural de ) and Eliseo Padilla Gutiérrez (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de
México)
[230]             What is Oxtotitlán Cave Communicating?
Cave murals, painted in Olmec style with iconographic links to the major Gulf coast center of La Venta, appear to communicate the dynamism of
interregional relationships in an era of rising urbanism. The paintings seem to evoke the evolution of hierarchical positioning among political and religious
actors. They might reveal the tools for local and long-distance power building. Yet the work that has clarified the nature of Oxtotitlán Cave and its
associated site of Quiotepec has extended the enigma of the murals. Dating of both the murals and carbon recovered from archaeological excavations
verifies the Middle Formative chronological timeline. Mural cleaning conducted by Mexican government conservators and our own intensive photographic
documentation have revealed new figural details that strengthen visual associations with La Venta’s sophisticated carved stone monuments. On the other
hand, other aspects of the paintings and especially the material culture coming forth from excavations in both Oxtotitlán Cave and at Quiotepec continue to
be local to Guerrero with significant links to Central Mexico and much more tenuous traces of contact with the Gulf Coast. What is Oxtotitlán’s message
and meaning?
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              353
Poinar, Hendrik [85] see Harris, Alison
Poirier, Marcela [91] see Vaughn, Kevin
Poister, Nicholas (California State University, Los Angeles), Errol Mathias (California State University, Los Angeles), Mario Mena (California
State University, Los Angeles) and James Brady (California State University, Los Angeles)
[93]             Seeking Molecular Evidence of the Ritual Function of Unslipped and Monochrome Slipped Ceramic Types at Naj Tunich, Guatemala
A large portion of the ceramic assemblage recovered from the Maya cave site of Naj Tunich, Guatemala consists of unslipped and monochrome slipped
ceramic types generally considered to be “utilitarian” or “domestic” wares. This identification is based upon type-variety analysis rather than any evidence
of the actual use to which they were put. That these ceramics were deposited in conjunction with domestic activities is at odds with the widely accepted
interpretation that the Maya employed caves almost exclusively for ritual purposes. There is reason to believe that these ceramics were, in fact, used as
incense burners. If GC-MS analysis of absorbed residues reveals the presence of the chemical signature of copal incense, the finding will put to rest any
lingering doubt as to the ritual function of the Naj Tunich ceramics.
Polanyi, Tamas (Northwestern University)
[257]            The Second Voyage of Odysseus: Tale of the Traveling Warrior of Bronze Age Europe
Elites and the deconstruction of elite-centered perspectives of past societies have long been at the focus of archaeological approaches. In European
Bronze Age research there is a revitalized interest in reconnecting diverse regions and understanding them as parts of an abstract pan-European
ideological system - the warrior ethos. The primary theoretical vehicle employed in this endeavor, institutional analysis of synchronic societies, draws our
attention to social and political structures created, modified and transformed from the top, chiefly by a narrow group of warrior elites. Warriors became the
new “super actors” who single-handedly shape their communities and connect them into inter-regional flows of prestige goods, new and advanced
technologies, and knowledge. In archaeological interpretations warrior institutions are defined, constructed and reproduced by not merely a set of signifying
objects, a ‘symbolic package,’ uncovered mostly in burials; but by a shared life style and a common set of practices. In this paper, I attempt to complicate
this rather one-dimensional understanding of local communities by employing a gender-sensitive contextual analysis of multiple cemeteries and an inter-
contextual approach to (re)evaluate assumed regalia of warriors.
Politis, Gustavo [16] see Gutierrez, Maria
Polk, Michael (Commonwealth Cultural Resources Group, Inc)
[89]             Moderator
Polkinghorne, Martin [74] see Stark, Miriam
Pollard, Joshua (University of Southampton, UK)
[132]            Discussant
Pollard, Edward [269] see Fenn, Thomas
Polyukhovych, Yuriy [272] see Munson, Jessica
Poncelet, Eric (Kearns & West)
[60]             Reflections on Anthropology and Environment: Implications of Crumley’s Holistic Approach
One of the benefits of anthropology’s four-field approach is that it invites reflecting on and applying insights, perspectives, and learnings from one field to
another. Such was my experience with Carole Crumley. Although Carole was an archeologist and I was a cultural anthropologist, I asked her to serve as
my faculty advisor at UNC-Chapel Hill primarily because she deeply believed in the importance of my research interest. I wanted to study multistakeholder
environmental collaboration in industrialized societies. Carole’s holistic approach to the complex relationship between humans and the environment is well
represented by her 2001 edited volume, New Directions in Anthropology and Environment, of which I was a contributor. The book explored the physical
and mental dimensions of the human-environment relationship, across time and cultures, and across disciplines and professions. This paper describes
how my research on the cultural dimensions of collaborative environmental problem solving (as expressed through the study of partnerships among
governmental, business, and environmental community stakeholders in the European Union and U.S.) and my subsequent 17 year-career as an
environmental conflict resolution practitioner have been inspired by Carole’s inquisitive and inclusive approach to the study of human-environment
relationships.
Pool, Michael (Austin Community College)
[64]             “No Attempt Was Made to Cultivate Crops until Very Recent Times”
 Ethnographic and ethnohistoric information are significant sources of data for archaeologists in developing various models. It is a widely held belief among
archaeologists that the Chiricahua Apache subsistence was based only on food foraging and raiding. This interpretation originates with Opler, the primary
ethnographer for the Chiricahua Apache, who stated that “no attempt was made to cultivate crops until very recent times” and “By the time the Eastern
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               354
Chiricahua became seriously interested in cultivation they were already so often threatened, assaulted, and uprooted that it was almost futile for them to
attempt to farm.” Thus, the adoption of agriculture by them is seen as a reservation development (1850s and later). A number of archaeologists have
accepted this interpretation.
    Given the long-term relationship between archaeology and ethnographic and ethnohistorical data, it is important that such errors be corrected. This
poster provides ethnohistoric documentation that suggests the Eastern Chiricahua Apache were as, or as near as, agricultural as the Western Apache are
considered.
Pool, Christopher (University of Kentucky), Michael Loughlin (University of Kentucky), Manuel Melgarejo Pérez (Independent Researcher),
Gabriela Montero Mejía (Universidad Veracruzana) and Kyle Mullen (University of Kentucky)
[264]             Architectural Variation in the Tres Zapotes Region
A combined program of aerial LiDAR mapping and pedestrian survey is documenting significant intra-regional variation in prehispanic architectural plans in
the Eastern Lower Papaloapan Basin of southern Veracruz, Mexico, reflecting the interplay of ecological adaptation, political integration, factionalism, and
extra-regional influences. Consistent association of domestic mounds with small bajos in low-lying areas suggests intentional (as opposed to accretional)
mounding and landscape modification to exploit aquatic resources. Preliminary assessments of temporal affiliation for civic-ceremonial complexes support
a diachronic model in which Late Formative political affiliation expressed architecturally in the Tres Zapotes Plaza Group layout was succeeded by a
proliferation of distinctive Protoclassic and Classic layouts, including Central Veracruz-inspired Standard Plans and Monumental Platforms, in the context
of a fragmented political landscape. The Postclassic, in turn, witnessed the appearance of novel formal arrangements concentrated along a major east-
west transportation route.
Poot, Paulina, Javier Rivas Romero (Universidad Autónoma de Campeche) and William J. Folan (Universidad Autónoma de Campeche)
[179]             The Peten Campechano: A Functional and Socioeconomic Analysis of Its Settlement Patterns
The 1980s construction of the road to the archaeological site of Calakmul, Campeche made it necessary to record 86 sites on and alongside its trajectory
and in the area around the Chumpich Lagoon down to Uxul on the Guatemalan border. The systematic location and mapping of each site and their
associated cultural elements as well as flora, geology and paleoclimatology have permitted us to identify a variation in their architecture as well as
settlement patterns and access to resources. In this paper, based on the classification of the sites, we were able to define their different functions within
the Calakmul Regional State from the Preclassic to the Terminal Classic.
Pope, Matt [146] see Milks, Annemieke
Pope, Melody, Lynn Alex (University of Iowa, Office of the State Archaeolog) and Shirley Schermer (University of Iowa, Office of the State
Archaeolog)
[266]             Stewarding Past Places into the Future—Cultural Landscapes, Byways, and Heritage Studies in Archaeological Practice
Between 2010 and 2013 archaeologists at the University of Iowa, Office of the State Archaeologist collaborated with local communities, traditionally
associated peoples, and other stakeholders in planning processes involving archaeological sites, cultural resource districts, and archaeological preserves
in Iowa and Illinois. Each project built on and extended partnerships with and between Native American communities and fostered new multidisciplinary
relationships between archaeologists, architects and museum specialists, all of whom contributed greatly to each projects success, exposing
commonalities, tensions and complexities involved in managing cultural and heritage places and landscapes. Multidisciplinary partnerships are critical
aspects of these projects, but are not without challenges and tensions. In this poster we present outcomes, challenges, successes, tensions and lessons
learned along the way that will hopefully benefit others working in these diverse arenas of archaeological practice.
Pope, Matthew (UCL)
[278]             The Middle Pleistocene at La Cotte de St. Brelade, Jersey
The important archaeological sequence of La Cotte de St. Brelade, known for both abundant lithic and faunal material recording human activity and
environmental conditions over the last 200,000 years, is an exception in this key region making the site unique. La Cotte is also famous for the discovery of
late Middle Pleistocene concentrations of mammoth and rhinoceros bone remains, known as ’bone-heaps’ (Scott 1986). Different hypotheses have been
proposed to explain the formation of these bone accumulations (Scott 1986; Smith 2015). Here we will present the first results of a full re-examination of
the bone material from the Saalian deposits of La Cotte, which takes into account a taphonomic and zooarchaeological investigation, and when applicable,
in relation to the spatial repartition of the remains. The results of this multi-proxy analysis allow for a deeper understanding of the process of formation and
modification of the different faunal assemblages from the site; carnivore presence is extremely limited and even absent in some layers. Our analysis points
toward an anthropogenic origin of the faunal assemblages from the different Saalian layers of La Cotte, including the famous heaps, and opens new ways
to investigate the different possible behaviours resulting in these peculiar accumulations.
[278]             Chair
Popelish, Linda [267] see Brown, Erin
Popelka-Filcoff, Rachel [13] see Darling, J Andrew
Popescu, Gabriel (SHESC, Arizona State University)
[146]             Living through the Last Glacial Maximum. A View from the Eastern European
The region between the Eastern Carpathians in Romania and the Prut River in both Romania and Republic of Moldavia, knew both temperate and
continental/cold climates throughout the Late Pleistocene, and still witnessed significant and rapid environmental shifts caused by global climate regimes,
especially during the Last Glacial Maximum. I will examine in this poster the important interplay between technological, social, and land-use dynamics as
culturally mediated responses to climate change within the periglacial zone. I will therefore combine information from excavated sites across the area
between the Eastern Carpathians and the Prut River, in order to examine Upper paleolithic behavioral adaptations to the environmental shifts of the Late
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              355
Pleistocene (late MIS-3 through MIS-2). To achieve this, I will define several indexes that serve as proxies for land-use strategies and technological
specialization. The expectation is that the variation in these indexes across space and through time will provide a basis for a model of Upper Paleolithic
eco-dynamics. The results will allow the opportunity to evaluate if land-use patterns across this area was sufficiently flexible and resilient to environmental
change to persist throughout the Late Pleistocene.
Popp, Casana [129] see Hirth, Kenneth
Porter, Benjamin (University of California, Berkeley), Stephanie Brown (University of California, Berkeley), Katie Simon (Center for Advanced
Spatial Technologies, Universi), Andrew Wilson (Bangor University) and Christine Markussen (University of Vienna)
[199]            Documenting an Iron Age Townscape at Busayra (Jordan) using Geophysical Survey Techniques
Located in southwest Jordan, Busayra has long been suspected of being the capital of the Iron Age polity of Edom. British excavations in the 1970s
revealed monumental buildings, fortifications, and domestic residences on Busayra’s acropolis that confirms the settlement’s stature as an administrative
center. Despite this impressive evidence, little else is known about the town’s design. In order to further investigate Busayra’s sub-surface features, the
authors conducted a geophysical survey project in 2014 in collaboration with the University of Arkansas’ SPARC (Spatial Archaeometry Research
Collaborations) program. Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) and Magnetic Gradiometry instruments were used to survey the site's unexcavated areas and
yielded interesting results including clear architectural anomalies. Notable discoveries include the identification of sub-surface monumental buildings
associated with Building A, a multi-room structure believed to be associated with ritual activity. Structures that are likely domestic residences were
identified east of Area C, where several houses were excavated in the 1970s. Although gradiometry is rarely employed in the region, it proved to be
particularly successful at identifying new features in this survey. In addition to a discussion of upcoming sampling strategies of these identified structures,
this paper will discuss the feasibility of using geophysical technologies in southwest Jordan.
[199]            Chair
Potter, Ben (University of Alaska Fairbanks), Joshua Reuther (University of Alaska Fairbanks), Vance Holliday (University of Arizona) and
Charles Holmes (University of Alaska Fairbanks)
[21]               Colonization of Northern North America: a view from Eastern Beringia
Recent investigations at multiple well-stratified multi-component sites in interior Eastern Beringia have provided important data on late Pleistocene
technology, subsistence economy, and habitat use. Our review incorporates recent multidisciplinary work at Upward Sun River, Mead, and Swan Point. We
summarize these data within human ecological perspectives and derive implications for the lifeways of early Beringians. We review the biogeography and
early archaeological record for the Ice Free Corridor and Northwest Coast potential migration routes and evaluate their relative viability.
Potter, Amy [100] see Bain, Allison
Poulos, Anastasia [153] see Edwards, Erin
Power, Torin (Western State Colorado University) and David M. Hyde (Western State Colorado University )
[273]            Evidence for Quarrying at Medicinal Trail, A Maya Hinterland Community in Northwestern Belize
Excavations associated with Structure A-7, a 9 x 4 m isolated mound near Group A of the Medicinal Trail Community in northwestern Belize, have revealed
evidence for the extraction of stone blocks from the limestone bedrock. The evidence for quarrying consists of rectangular scars outlining stone blocks that
appear to have been in the process of being harvested. Additionally, there was an artificially created bowl-shaped depression, 2 m in diameter and
approximately 1 m deep. A problematic deposit, possibly a midden, was placed inside the depression. Structure A-7 extends over the block scars and the
depression. Ceramic examination suggests that there was a lot of intermixing of the deposits in the midden. Late Preclassic, Protoclassic, Early Classic,
and some Late Classic ceramic types were identified in the deposit, and there does not appear to be any stratigraphic differences in the midden matrix and
to determine if the deposit was a true midden, or secondary refuse dump. This paper describes the excavations and evidence of quarrying, discusses the
possible meaning of the problematic deposit found in the depression.
Powis, Terry (Kennesaw State University)
[235]            Monumentality in the Middle Preclassic: The Beginnings of Public Ceremonialism at Pacbitun, Belize
In the Middle Preclassic (900-300 BC), physical evidence of the increasing complexity of Maya society can be found in the form of monumental public
architecture. However, the origins of temple building are poorly understood during this time period, especially in the Belize Valley. At the site of Pacbitun
we have been exploring the initial purpose of public architecture as constructions to bring likeminded communities together for ritual, ceremonial, and/or
social functions. Archaeological investigations by the Pacbitun Regional Archaeological Project (PRAP) have recently unearthed a large, radial pyramid
(dubbed El Quemado) buried beneath Plaza A in the site center. El Quemado is very reminiscent of Str. E-VII-Sub at Uaxactun and our excavation of this
sub-plaza temple may shed new light on the beginnings of public ceremonialism as well as on the foundation, nature, and development of the site’s early
social and political structure. This poster will summarize our research to date, including a look at other architectural complexes in the Belize Valley that
were involved in early public activities similar to what we have identified at Pacbitun.
[109]            Discussant
Powis, Terry [120] see Cartagena, Nicaela
Pozeilov, Yosi [121] see ONeil, Megan
Pozorski, Shelia [31] see Pozorski, Thomas
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             356
Pozorski, Shelia, Thomas Pozorski (University of Texas-Pan American), Bobbie Lovett (University of Texas-Pan American) and Rosa Marin
[31]              The Initial Period from the Perspective of the Casma Valley on the Northern Peruvian Coast
During the Initial Period (2100–1000 B.C.), the largest platform mound in the New World was constructed at Sechin Alto site in the Casma Valley.
Measuring 300 m x 250 m x 35 m tall, this mound served as the administrative center for the Sechin Alto Polity which included over a dozen sites, most
with monumental architecture. Our current understanding of the Sechin Alto Polity and how it functioned comes from decades of fieldwork by other
researchers and by us, and this research is ongoing. This paper takes an historic look at how our knowledge of the Initial Period unfolded within the Casma
Valley by examining key turning points in the research there. These include the realization that over a dozen Casma Valley sites are Initial Period in date;
the recognition that mounds could have varied functions, including secular ones; the identification of the square-room-unit architectural form as a symbol of
polity authority; and the correlation of the square-room-unit module with what appears to be a power symbol within local Initial Period iconography.
Pozorski, Thomas (University of Texas-Pan American) and Shelia Pozorski (University of Texas-Pan American)
[31]              The Importance of the Initial Period in the Development of Early Peruvian Civilization
Research over the past 50 years has demonstrated the importance of the Initial Period (2100–1000 B.C.) societies that thrived along the Peruvian coast
over 3000 years ago. The Initial Period, once viewed as a mere continuation of the subsistence-oriented Late Preceramic Period (3500–2100 B.C.) with the
addition of pottery, is now widely considered to be a time of dynamic cultural change, witnessing the development and maturation of many of the social,
political, and economic institutions that became the bases for later Peruvian civilization. Investigations in the 1970s and 1980s along the north and central
coast and at Chavin de Huantar clearly showed that the coastal mound/plaza complexes significantly predated Chavin de Huantar and served as some of
the sources of inspiration for the art and architectural accomplishments of that highland site. Investigations over the past 20 years have largely confirmed
the dynamic nature of Initial Period coastal societies and have demonstrated that the roots of those societies go back well into the Late Preceramic Period.
Pratt, Jordan (Texas A&M University)
[114]             A Geospatial Analysis of Northern Side-notched points in the Northern Great Basin: A Case Study from the Burns District Bureau of Land
                  Management
In the northern Great Basin region of eastern Oregon, little is understood about human settlement during the hot, dry middle Holocene. The only diagnostic
piece of material culture which reliably dates to this period is the Northern Side-notched (NSN) projectile point, which was last studied extensively by John
Fagan in 1974. The purpose of this study is to reconsider Fagan’s interpretations of Altithermal occupations in the northern Great Basin—specifically
whether such sites are limited to high elevations and associated with perennial springs. NSN points and associated site reports from the Burns District of
the Bureau of Land Management were reviewed, and ArcGIS was utilized to analyze the geographic distribution of NSN, including in reference to obsidian
sources. Ultimately, NSN were produced on both local and non-local obsidians, occur extensively across the landscape, at high and low elevations, and
appear to have been associated with both perennial and ephemeral water sources. These results indicate that Altithermal occupations were more
extensive than previous research indicated, and that prehistoric humans were exploiting multiple resource zones despite climatic fluctuations.
Pratt, William (Texas State University), David Brown (University of Texas at Austin) and Ryan Hechler (Tulane University)
[196]             Cochasquí under the Inka: Reassessing the Inka presence in northern Ecuador
The archaeological site of Cochasquí exhibits some of Ecuador’s largest and most ornate earthen pyramids or Tolas. With long dirt ramps and truncated
steps of cangahua blocks, the Cochasquí pyramids are some of the most recognizable in the country. It was at this site that the Inka first encountered and
conquered one of the great polities of the Caranqui Confederation. Sometime after its conquest by the Inka, the Spanish arrive and, by all historic
accounts, the location was abandoned by 1580 leaving only a hacienda and a tambo in its place. The three other major Caranqui Confederation polities
today have large cities associated with them, yet Cochasquí is still relatively uninhabited leaving behind a somewhat pristine archaeological site. What
happened at this site between the arrival of the Inka and its eventual abandonment is poorly understood. While many archaeologists believe that the area
was initially abandoned after the arrival of the Inka, historic and archaeological evidence suggests not only that the site was occupied until the arrival of the
Spanish, but that the Inka played a large role in its final configuration.
Pratt, William [279] see Hechler, Ryan
Premo, Luke [272] see Miller-Atkins, Galen
Prendergast, Mary (St. Louis University Madrid)
[223]             Biological Exchange in the Swahili World: Archaeofaunal and Biomolecular Evidence
The Swahili coast, stretching from Somalia to Mozambique, has a long history of engagement in western Indian Ocean trade, from at least the first century
CE according to documentary evidence. One result is the widespread use of animals of Asian origin—particularly zebu cattle (Bos indicus) and chicken
(Gallus gallus)—in African subsistence systems today. However, tracing these animals’ arrival and spread is complicated by their osteological similarities to
indigenous taxa and by poor chronological resolution, and aDNA research on these taxa is still in its infancy. One taxon that preserves well in coastal urban
settlements, and can serve as a proxy for increasing maritime biological exchange, is the black rat (Rattus rattus). Black rats have been reported from
numerous Swahili coast and inland sites, but examination of some of these remains using collagen fingerprinting (ZooMS) demonstrates that many were
misidentified. Combining ZooMS, aDNA and direct radiocarbon dating, we trace the arrival of the black rat to the coast, significantly later than predicted
based on other sources of information. We outline potential areas for research on the impacts of this taxon on indigenous flora and fauna and on the
spread of disease.
[223]             Chair
Prentiss, Anna (University of Montana), Thomas Foor (The University of Montana), Kristen Barnett (The University of Montana) and Matthew
Walsh (The University of Montana)
[171]             Cooperation, Labor, Sharing, and Inequality in a Long-Lived Household, Bridge River Site, British Columbia
Archaeological research at the Bridge River site, British Columbia, demonstrates that during the Bridge River 3 period (ca. 1300–1000 cal. B.P.) material
wealth-based inequality developed on an inter-household basis during what appears to have been a Malthusian ceiling where populations were briefly very
high and resource access weakened. While there is significant knowledge of village-wide socio-economic, demographic and political change at the site little
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              357
work has been done to gain an understanding of these processes from the standpoint of intra-household relationships. Excavations conducted in 2013 and
2014 at the deeply stratified Housepit 54 provide an opportunity to examine social change across a series of anthropogenic floors occupied in
approximately 20 year intervals ca. 1200–1400 cal. B.P. We develop a multivariate statistical approach to testing models associating degree of household
cooperation in labor to variability in sharing of goods and the emergence of social inequality. We expect to offer reflections on the nature of social inequality
in the Mid-Fraser region along with thoughts on alternative quantitative approaches to household archaeology.
Prentiss, Anna Marie [185] see Tifental, Emilia
Prentiss , Anna [124] see Barnett, Kristen
Price, Max (Harvard University)
[75]               Introduction to Smallholders and Complex Society, with a Note on Pigs and Mesopotamia
In this introduction, I discuss the literature on smallholders in complex societies and directions for current and future archaeological research. I attempt to
answer several questions: What is a smallholder? How can we detect them in the archaeological record? How does a focus on smallholders contribute to
studies of other social groups, such as classes, gender, and ethnicity? I conclude my presentation with a discussion of the role of smallholders in pig
husbandry in Chalcolithic and Bronze Age Mesopotamia and how this may have brought them into conflict with the emerging state.
[75]               Chair
Price, Gypsy (University of Florida)
[134]              Discriminating Tastes: Intra-Species Variation in Exploited Fauna at Mycenae, Greece
This paper demonstrates how integrating isotopic analyses and more traditional zooarchaeological methods can help to bridge the gap between theory and
practice. Isotopic ratios from species known to have been purposefully managed establish inter- and intra-taxonomic variation from which management
practices may be inferred. These management practices reflect decision making processes enacted by producers and consumers responsible for procuring
fauna for occasions of consumption. This paper presents results from faunal material recovered from the Late Bronze Age settlement of Mycenae, Greece,
with an eye to elucidating faunal economies operating in disparate socio-economic sectors of the palatial settlement. Of particular interest is the lack of
intra-site variation in management practices regarding consumed caprine resources, while other managed species show distinct variation between
consumption contexts. These species-specific differences, while intuitive, can be hard to nail down in archaeological record. These data augment current
models of faunal exchange within LBA Mycenaean palatial settlements, teasing out nuances which were previously unobservable.
Price, Max [176] see Otárola-Castillo, Erik
Price, Michael (Penn State Anthroopology), Christopher Jazwa (Penn State Anthropology), Douglas Bird (Penn State Anthropology) and
Rebecca Bliege Bird (Penn State Anthropology)
[180]              A Field Processing Model that Accounts for the Cost of Home Labor
Hunter-gatherer and subsistence farmer populations frequently make decisions regarding field processing when collecting resources away from a central
base. These decisions can have a profound influence on the relative abundance of items in archaeological assemblages if systematic biases exist in the
propensity for particular goods to be field processed. An influential and productive framework for understanding field processing decisions is the model
formulated by Metcalfe and Barlow. In this poster, we (1) describe an extension to their model that accounts for the opportunity cost of home labor, (2)
discuss a graphical approach for testing the model, and (3) illustrate the approach using ethnographic observations of field processing decisions from the
island of Seram in eastern Indonesia. We show that the extended model can account for otherwise unexplained deviations from the predictions of standard
field processing models, and conclude that the ethnographic observations are consistent with the cost of home labor time making a significant contribution
to field processing decisions. We discuss the archaeological implications of the updated model using ethnoarchaeological and archaeological case studies
of shellfish field processing on the island of Mer in the Torres Straight between Australia and New Guinea and on California’s northern Channel Islands.
Price, Neil (University of Uppsala)
[192]              Slavery and the Vikings: Archaeological Perspectives
The cultures of the Viking Age in Scandinavia (A.D. c. 750–1100) were economically dependent on widespread, complex and deeply rooted systems of
slavery. However, this aspect of the period was long neglected by scholars, partly due to the diluting influence of contemporary terminology. A Viking slave
was a träl, producing the rather weaker English word 'thrall', and the nationalistic approaches to the period that dominated Viking studies far into the
twentieth century often tended to subsume an unpalatable truth in their preference for a supposedly heroic past. This picture has changed considerably in
recent years, and this paper introduces the steadily increasing range of archaeological evidence that we have for Viking slavery. From material culture
such as shackles—themselves potentially ambiguous items—to the identification of possible slave quarters in settlements, attempts have been made to
trace slave labour in the archaeological record of Viking economies, especially in key areas of production such as the manufacture of sail cloth. Possible
slave burials are discussed, and as a rare coda we can even identify the voices of the (former) slaves themselves in runic inscriptions made by freedmen.
Prieto, Gabriel O. [31] see Druc, Isabelle
Prieto, Gabriel
[31]               Early “Guañape” Ceramics from the North Coast of Peru: New Data from Gramalote (Moche Valley) and Huaca Prieta (Chicama Valley)
The problem of the introduction or adoption of the ceramic technology in the Central Andes is still an open debate. Earlier efforts have identified that
ceramic vessels in the Moche and Chicama valleys were already in use around 1600–1500 B.C. Current research support the fact that the Second
millennium is tentatively the period when domestic wares became popular in this region. New data from the Gramalote and Huaca Prieta sites support this
view, suggesting that there seems to be formal differences between the ceramic vessels in the range of 1600/1500 to 1200/1000 B.C. and the so called
“Cupisnique” cultural complex (1000/800 to 400/200 B.C.). In this paper the authors proposed that there is an early ceramic tradition in the North Coast of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               358
Peru, specifically in the Chao/Viru–Chicama region between 1600–1200 B.C. which is well represented in littoral sites associated with fishing and
gardening/farming activities. Are these formal differences only part of fishing settlements or did they share similarities with other contemporary
settlements? This paper is a first attempt to systematically characterize an early ceramic tradition of the Peruvian North Coast.
[31]             Chair
Prignano, Luce [72] see Lozano, Sergi
Prim, Lynda [66] see Swarts, Kelly
Primeau, Kristy (NYS DEC) and David Witt (NYS DEC)
[197]            Soundscapes in the Past: Towards a Phenomenology of Sound at the Landscape Level
During the past few decades, researchers have developed methodologies for understanding how past people have experienced their wider world. The
majority of these reconstructions focused upon viewsheds and movement, illustrating how individuals visually observed their environment and navigated
through it. However, these reconstructions have tended to ignore another sense which played a major role in how people experienced the wider, physical
world: that of sound. While the topic of sound has been discussed within phenomenology at the theoretical level, and has been approached at the site level
through the growing study of “acoustic archaeology,” it has not seen much practical application at the landscape level. This multimedia presentation
illustrates how GIS technology can be utilized to develop soundscapes, exploring how people heard their wider surroundings, as well as saw them.
Primeau, Kristy [208] see Witt, David
Príncipe, Andrés [160] see Martinez-Cruzado, Juan
Pritchard-parker, Mari
[73]             Discussant
Prociuk, Nadya (University of Texas at Austin)
[188]            Awash in Meaning: Exploring the Symbolic and Ritual Functions of the Iron Age Bathing Structures of the Iberian Northwest
Unique to the northwestern corner of the Iberian Peninsula, the ceremonial baths of the Iron Age Castro Culture present an entry point for our
understanding of the social and symbolic mechanisms at work in Castro society. Not found anywhere else in Iberia, the precise use and meaning of the
structures remains controversial. Were they an indigenous development, or a technology borrowed from the Roman world? Was their use related to
personal grooming or ritual cleansing? Located within settlements, but with a distinct architectural style and limited accessibility, these structures clearly
played a role in the lives of the community, but what role was that? The most striking feature of these structures are their decorated pedras formosas, or
beautiful stones, which mark the entrance of enclosed chambers. With decorations ranging from single engravings to a proliferation of motifs, the pedras
formosas mark boundaries and entry points into the symbolic world of the Castro people. Through an examination of the pedras formosas I will explore the
potential uses and meanings of these distinctive structures from the perspective of understanding symbolic motifs as communicators of identity at different
scales, from personal to communal.
Proctor, Lucas (University of Connecticut) and Hannah Lau (University of California, Los Angeles)
[87]             Reconstructing Land-Use and Agropastoral Production during the Middle Bronze Age of the Southern Caucasus: Preliminary Results from
                 Qızqala, Autonomous Republic of Naxçıvan, Azerbaijan
Inhabitants of the Middle Bronze Age in the Southern Caucasus (c. 2400–1500 BC..) are thought to be highly mobile communities, heavily reliant on
pastoral resources. Few settlements have been recovered archaeologically, and fewer still excavated. New work from the Middle Bronze Age settlements
and kurgans at Qızqala on the Şerur Plain in the Autonomous Republic of Naxçıvan, Azerbaijan therefore fills an important lacuna in our understanding of
the lifeways of Middle Bronze Age peoples. We report on the initial results of an integrated analysis of archaeobotanical and zooarchaeological evidence
for agropastoral production in the Middle Bronze Age from the 2014 and 2015 excavations. These data speak not only to the intentional management
choices Middle Bronze Age inhabitants made regarding their floral and faunal resources, but also to their land use practices and potential environmental
impacts. Here we test the prevailing hypothesis that inhabitants’ lifeways in this period were largely predicated on sheep and goat husbandry. By
examining the types and timing of subsistence activities visible in the Qizqala record, this study sheds light on MBA foodways, and the implications it has
on the relative periods of mobility and sedentism built into inhabitants’ seasonal rounds.
Proctor, Terren (Vanderbilt University) and Tiffiny Tung (Vanderbilt University)
[204]            That’s a Wrap: Understanding Processes of Cranial Modification among post-Wari populations from Huari-Vegachayoq Moqo
This study examines cranial vault modification (CVM) frequency and styles among 35 crania from the Vegachayoq Moqo sector at the site of Huari, the
former capital of the Wari Empire. The crania date to the post-Wari era (A.D. 1250–1400). In order to document the process by which they were modified,
the crania were analyzed by noting the number of pad impressions and locations, as well as the center of applied pressure; the design of the modification
devices was extrapolated from the observed impressions. Results show that among the 30 adult crania, 53 percent exhibit modification and two of the five
children’s crania (40 percent) are modified. Based on the analyses of the modified crania, there appear to be two types of CVM in this sample, in addition
to the unmodified ones. Given that other studies have suggested that CVM was used as a marker of ethnic affiliation, there may be three distinct social or
ethnic groups within this population. Stable isotope data (carbon and oxygen) from dental enamel will also be compared between the two modified groups
and the unmodified crania to examine differences in childhood diet and water source, if any.
Proue, Molly (Northern Land Use Research Alaska LLC)
[148]            Dam It! Manipulating Water in the Tolovana Mining District, Alaska
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              359
Obtaining adequate water for mining operations has always been a problem in Livengood, Alaska. To make mining feasible on small creeks in the area,
ditches were excavated from the earliest days of the strike in 1915. As the character of mining evolved throughout the first half of the twentieth century,
corporate interests formed to create even larger water conveyance systems, most notably the Hess Creek Dam, a sizable earthen dam built on permafrost.
This poster presents an overview of the water control infrastructure spread across the historic mining landscape of Livengood as revealed through archival
research and recent archaeological surveys.
Prout, Michael (Anthropology Master of Arts)
[93]              Subadult Human Sacrifices in Midnight Terror Cave
Children throughout Mesoamerica were preferred sacrificial victims, especially to water deities. Because caves were associated with rain, ethnohistoric
sources mention the sacrifice of children in caves. The importance of children in sacrifice was documented early on by Edward Thompson’s dredging of the
Cenote of Sacrifice at Chichen Itza. More recently archaeological investigations of caves have recovered and identified the skeletal remains of children that
have been interpreted as sacrificial victims. This poster reports on the impressive juvenile skeletal assemblage from Midnight Terror Cave with an eye
toward refining our understanding of subadult human sacrifice using this large sample.
Prouty, Michael (Alpine Archaeological Consultants, Inc.)
[110]             Representing Cultural Networks: A GIS Analysis of Spanish Colonial Settlement in San Diego
The colonial efforts by the Spanish and subsequent generations resulted in the formation of cultural networks that were based on the reliance and access
to key ecological resources. Ultimately these networks influenced the development of social stratification of the San Diego River watershed and the
surrounding region. Incorporating the analysis of archaeological, anthropological, and historical data, and utilizing geographic information systems, a
series of maps depicting site densities, a suitability model, and cultural interaction diagrams were built. Coupled together, these maps highlight the cultural
networks that had formed prior, during, and after Spanish contact. The analysis of these networks and the resulting social stratification resulted in
identifying settlement patterns that influenced the development of the San Diego region.
Prowse, Tracy (McMaster University)
[25]              Patterns of Mobility during the Iron Age and Roman Periods in Apulia, Italy.
Archaeological and historical evidence indicates that the end of the Iron Age in southern Italy was characterized by political and social upheaval associated
with a series of battles between the Roman Republic, indigenous Italian groups, Greece, and Carthage. The outcome for many local populations in
southern Italy after the Samnite, Pyrrhic, and Punic wars was the subjugation of local populations, a decline in settlement size and density, and the
confiscation of land by the expanding Roman Empire.
This paper explores patterns of migration between the Iron Age and Roman periods, particularly childhood migration, through the isotopic analysis of teeth
from the Iron Age (seventh–fifth c. B.C.E.) sites of Botromagno and Parco San Stefano (n=30) , and the Roman Imperial (second–third c. C.E.) site of
Vagnari (n=54). Archaeological evidence from Vagnari indicates that this was an Imperial Estate owned by the emperor and run by local administrators.
This raises the question of who lived on this estate—were they descendants of subjugated local Iron Age populations, or were they outsiders brought in by
the conquering Romans to work on this estate?
Prufer, Keith M. [236] see Thompson, Amy
Pryor, Liza [58] see Fleming, Edward
Psoma, Aikaterini (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[166]             Ksagounaki, Diros: an Open Air Site of the Final Neolithic from the Viewpoint of Chipped Stone Tools
The Final Neolithic Period (FN) in the Aegean and the Greek mainland is characterized by the proliferation of settlements and the occupation of defensible
sites. The Ksagounaki site, located at the northern entrance of the Alepotrypa cave at the Mani peninsula, appears to be a representative example of such
a transition. In the present study we try and locate changes occurring in the entire spectrum of prehistoric life of the denizens of the site during the FN,
drawing information from the lithic assemblage that was recovered during the excavations on the site from 2012–2014. We discuss the technological and
typological analysis of the artifacts, and the origin of raw materials. We then compare the assemblage with the chipped stone tools that have been
recovered from the neighboring cave of Alepotrypa. By setting the lithic assemblage in an archaeological context we attempt to understand and identify the
types of activities that took place in Ksagounaki, map the social structure of the local community, and assess the dynamics of the prehistoric settlement.
Ptacek, Crystal, Beatrix Arendt (The Thomas Jefferson Foundation), John Jones (Archaeological Consulting Services, Ltd.), Derek Wheeler (The
Thomas Jefferson Foundation) and Fraser Neiman (The Thomas Jefferson Foundation)
[36]              Discovering Landscape Modification through Pollen Data Analysis at Thomas Jefferson’s Monticello
Pollen analysis can advance our understanding of change and spatial variation in the landscape of Thomas Jefferson's Monticello plantation from its initial
settlement in the eighteenth century to the present. In this poster, we present and evaluate data from an intensive, multi-year campaign of stratigraphic
sampling conducted in the largely ornamental mountaintop landscape immediately surrounding Jefferson's mansion. Comparing these data to stratigraphic
samples not from Monticello Mountain allows us to measure the distinctiveness of trajectories of change in ornamental and agricultural contexts. We
suggest that Jefferson's landscaping activities created a distinctive, ever-changing niche on the mountaintop which both humans and plants exploited.
Puckett, Heather (Alabama National Guard)
[73]              Discussant
Pugh, Timothy [100] see Freiwald, Carolyn
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              360
Pugh, Timothy (Queens College and The Graduate Center)
[291]             New Data on the Urban Grid at Nixtun-Ch’ich’, Petén, Guatemala
Gridded settlements are rare in the Americas and previously unknown in the Maya world until the Spanish conquest. Recent work has documented a
modular orthogonal grid at Nixtun-Ch’ich’, Petén, Guatemala. The grid appears to have been imposed upon much of the site around 400–200 B.C.E. In
other parts of the world, planned orthogonal grids are frequently associated with powerful central authority. If this were the case at Nixtun-Ch’ich’ then then
this act of power is correlated with the emergence of states in the area. Hence instead of elite claims to power carved on monuments, we likely have
evidence of elite power carved into a city. Early rulers at the site likely used the grid to organize and control the newly urbanized population. Our recent
work on the grid corridors has revealed that some of their surfaces were uniquely constructed.
Pugliese, Francisco [49] see Hilbert, Lautaro Maximilian
Pugliese, Francisco Antonio (MAE/USP BRAZIL)
[167]             The Search for Places in Southwestern Archaeology: Ancient Landscape Building in the Madeira and Purus Basins and Long-Term
                  Indigenous History
Mounds, ditches, roads and other kinds of earthworks are found in ever larger quantities in southwestern amazon archaeology. An increase in the quantity
and quality of research carried out in this area and the more detailed data that was recently made available have changed our understanding of the kind
and degree of human interaction with the environment. Today, archaeological landscape building in this region can be explored in a more regionally
detailed framework, since the knowledge produced about the western part of the Purus and Madeira river basins is now able to interface with studies
carried out in the Brazilian Amazon Basin over the last two decades.
Almost all of the earliest human occupations found in the Amazon Basin have some relationship with places physically constructed in the past. The horizon
of the mid-Holocene moundbuilders appears to be spread over an area larger than Japan, and its relations with later modifications of the landscape are
beginning to be investigated. This symposium intends to offer an opportunity of exchange for researchers that have been acting in the southwestern
amazon and beyond, with the purpose of improving the construction of the regional archaeological scenario.
Pullen, Daniel (Florida State University)
[166]             Measuring Ceramic Change and Variability at Final Neolithic Diros
The southern Greek Final Neolithic period extends for over 1,500 years, ca. 4700–3200 cal B.C., but has resisted satisfactory subdivision in largely due to
the lack of stratified excavations. Nevertheless most scholars follow Phelps’ 1975 division into an earlier and a later phase, each with distinct ceramic
features, but this division combines data from many different regions, and finds from surface surveys or from poorly dated contexts.
A series of stratified radiocarbon dates from Ksagounaki, in both mortuary and domestic contexts, now allows us to construct a ceramic sequence for the
middle four centuries of the FN period, ca. 4200–3800 cal B.C., in which we can measure temporal variability of ceramic features. What is clear is that
ceramic features formerly used to subdivide the FN in fact extend throughout the period.
As the occupation of Ksagounaki corresponds to one of the most intense periods of use of Alepotrypa Cave, our next step will be to correlate the two
sequences to see whether we can detect variability in ceramic change based on the different contexts of open air and cave.
Pullen, Daniel [166] see Parkinson, William
Punzo, Jose Luis (Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia)
[101]             Landscapes of Power: The Uacusecha Presence in the Southern Portion of the Tarascan Señorio
In 2012, INAH-Michoacan started an archaeological project in the south central portion of the state based on ample surveys in the region looking for the
presence of sites associated to the Tarascan period, especially in relation to mining, transport, manufacture and consumption of metallic items. In that
sense, with this new survey we been able to identify the existence of important archeological sites with presence of rectangular stone structures with
circular extensions (yácatas) similar to those that exist at Tzintzuntzan or Ihuatzio, the capitals of the Tarascan Señorio. These sites were placed in
strategic locations at the routes that connect the highlands, the core of the Tarascan Señorio, and the lower Tierra Caliente, places with relevant strategic
resources for the Cazonci, especially copper mines. On the other hand, the historical sources of the XVI century give us important information about the
caciques, the towns and the richness of the area. In this paper I will present the recently conducted research, discussing how the location of those sites
and the routes for travelling in that landscape, speaks to the power executed by the uacusecha lords, expressed in the architecture and the prestige goods
encountered at those sites.
Punzo Díaz, Jose Luis [74] see Somerville, Andrew
Purdue, Louise (CNRS-CEPAM UMR 7264), Cyril Castanet (University Paris VIII, LGP-UMR 8591), Lydie Dussol (University Paris 1, ArchAm-UMR
8096), Eva Lemonnier (University Paris 1) and Aline Garnier (University Paris 12)
[96]              Where and How did the Maya Practice Agriculture in the Classic Period City of Naachtun, Guatemala?
Maya communities occupied and cultivated the tropical lowlands of Naachtun (Peten, Guatemala) for nearly a millennia (A.D. 150–950). Major goals of the
Peten-Norte Naachtun project include understanding why the city was founded, the reasons for its development and why it was abandoned. Due to
constraining environmental conditions (non-permanent water supply, shallow soils), the availability and management of water and soil resources in the city
and around the bajo are closely tied to settlement pattern dynamics. To discuss this issue, a systematic field geoarchaeological, agronomical, chronological
and cartographic study was conducted in the city. Combined with laboratory studies (paleoecology, micromorphology), this study has allowed us to identify
areas where agriculture and water management was practiced, define the technical systems in use (type of culture, agricultural practices, soil properties)
and characterize their evolution through time. Four major hydro-agrosystems will be presented here: artificial areas supplied by small reservoirs (terraces,
anthrosols), agriculture on natural soils, topographical depressions cultivated or exploited for water, drainage structures evacuating runoff water rich in
sediments towards the bajo/reservoirs. They can be related to changing climatic conditions and phases of land anthropisation, and allow for an illustration
of systemic answers to ecological and social issues.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             361
Purdue, Louise [96] see Nondédéo, Philippe
Purnell, Mark [214] see Crellin, Rachel
Putt, Shelby [181] see Daniel, Chloe
Pyburn, Anne (Indiana University)
[10]              Community Involvement in Kyrgyzstan The Value of Heritages
A decade of collaboration with Kyrgyz citizens from many walks of life has resulted in several new heritage initiatives including local museums, teaching
materials for school children, a college textbook, a national avocational organization, and a new government ministry. Kyrgyz people have always placed
great value on their heritage, but as these programs have developed people have become more interested in protecting the material signifiers of heritage.
Counter to expectations, public and professional interest in Kyrgyz archaeology has emphasized a complex multiethnic past, and may have a softening
effect on the ethnic tensions that have threatened to divide the country in the past.
Decisions about site preservation and public presentation are where archaeologists can bring collaboration with local and descendant communities to bear
on policy decisions about heritage management and tourist development. The fact that these are decisions with direct political and sometimes economic
import does not absolve archaeologists from engagement. In fact, it is in exactly this arena that engagement of archaeologists with the local communities
and a suite of heritage stakeholders is most important for making decisions about preservation, but also for the human rights associated with heritage
identity.
[54]              Discussant
Pyburn, Anne [30] see Thomas, Jayne-Leigh
Pyburn, Anne
[128]      Responsibility for the Past, Responsibility to the Present
Decisions about site preservation and public presentation are where archaeologists can bring collaboration with local and descendant communities to bear
on policy decisions about heritage management and tourist development. The fact that these are decisions with direct political and sometimes economic
import does not absolve archaeologists from engagement. In fact, it is in exactly this arena that engagement of archaeologists with the local communities
and a suite of heritage stakeholders is most important for making decisions about preservation, but also for the human rights associated with heritage
identity.
Pye, Jeremy (Cultural Resource Analysts, Inc.)
[38]              Parasites and Their Impact on Human Behavior and Society
Parasites have had a significant impact on the course of human history. Parasites have caused the deaths of countless individuals, have resulted in the
abandonment of settlements, and have even affected the outcome of wars. Parasitologists, biologists, and even medical anthropologists have conducted
extensive research on how parasites affect the human body, including how they lead to malabsorption of nutrients, bowel obstruction, internal bleeding,
blindness, physical disability and deformation, as well as many other symptoms of disease. What should be of keen interest to anthropologists and
archaeologists is that certain species of parasites can actually effect behavioral changes in their hosts, which can sometimes have society-wide implication.
This poster explores the life stories of a variety of parasites that can influence human behavior in the hopes that this discussion will bring a greater
awareness of the importance of looking at past populations through an archeoparasitological lens.
Qian, Wei [180] see Nan, Puheng
Qin, Ling (Peking University) and Dorian Q Fuller (University College London)
[106]             Globalization and World Systems as Alternative Modes of Cultural Transmission in the Eastern China, 5000–2500 B.C.
An eastern crescent zone of the Middle to Lower Yangtze and upwards to Shandong can be defined as a zone of Globalization processes in the Neolithic
that was eventually broken down into a number of cores in a world system. The globalization model operates through Neolithic networks, that had no clear
political centre but nevertheless promoted shared practices and cultural values over large distances. This is illustrated by the spread of food cultures:
crops, cooking methods and ceramic repertoires. By 3000 B.C. regional centers emerged which fragmented this spread into cores of political and symbolic
power from which privileged crafts and their understanding were dispersed by a more centralizing World System process. The latter can be illustrated by
jades and eggshell ware, the forms, decorations and use of which all reinforced centrality in power, production and exchange.
Qin, Zhen [120] see Storozum, Michael
Quackenbush, William (Ho-Chunk Nation)
[203]             Discussant
Quackenbush, William [266] see Reetz, Elizabeth
Quartarone, Melissa [291] see Austin, Tucker
Quave, Kylie (Beloit College)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              362
[63]              Revealing Precolumbian Bundles: Collaborative Student-Faculty Research at the Logan Museum of Anthropology, Beloit College
Recent research at the Logan Museum of Anthropology combines student and faculty expertise with archaeometric methods to reveal new information
about coastal precolumbian Andean collections brought to the museum in the early- to mid-twentieth century. With student collaborators we scanned a
possible “bird mummy” with computed tomography to reveal that there was no avian body but rather a complex suite of offerings within its cloth wrapping.
They included maize cobs, shell, and other materials. These results are helping us to assign cultural and temporal affiliations to an object without
archaeological context. Dozens of artifacts that came to the museum as a single mummy assemblage from the Rimac Valley, Peru were analyzed visually,
microscopically, and through portable x-ray fluorescence and scanning electron microscopy to reconstruct the identity of the individual(s) with whom the
textiles and wooden, ceramic, and metal objects were interred. By combining various methods in collaboration with students, we are working to reconstruct
the life of a possible local administrator. This work is vital to bring to light previously unresearched and unpublished archaeological collections, while
providing independent and collaborative research opportunities for undergraduate students and promoting interdisciplinary inquiry.
[198]             Chair
Quave, Kylie [198] see Covey, R. Alan
Quave , Dr. Kylie [204] see Olesch, Dana
Quilter, Jeffrey [31] see Prieto, Gabriel
Quinn, Colin (University of Michigan)
[116]             Urns, Mounds, Pyres, and Pits: The Many Pathways of Middle Bronze Age Bodies in Transylvania
Communities of the Wietenberg Culture in Middle Bronze Age Transylvania (2000–1500 B.C.) participated in diverse and dynamic social, economic,
political, and ideological institutions. Traditional approaches to the mortuary practices of this period, however, have obscured diversity in the archaeological
record in favor of a more homogeneous characterization of burial practices as cremation and burial in urn cemeteries. This paper traces the many different
pathways that Middle Bronze Age Transylvanian bodies traveled from death to burial. In particular, the co-occurrence of multiple techniques of processing
cremated bodies, inhumation in pits in settlements, reuse of Early Bronze Age tombs, and bodies missing from the archaeological record are explored. Co-
occurrence is approached as both an archaeological issue, incorporating spatial and temporal dimensions, and as a social phenomenon, where alternate
pathways of the body represent different choices made by the living. Examining the co-occurrence of multiple body treatments is critical for understanding
complex mortuary politics, identity, social segmentation, and the development of institutionalized inequality in the Transylvanian Bronze Age.
Quiroz, Luciana [207] see Belmar, Carolina
Quispe, Erika [63] see Levy, Jessica
Quitmyer, Irvy (Florida Museum of Natural History), Nicole Cannarrozzi (Florida Museum of Natural History), Margo Schwadron (National Park
Service) and Douglas Jones (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[28]              Zooarchaeology of Three PreHispanic Sites in the Southern Georgia Bight: Evidence for Cultural and Ecological Continuity, Flexibility and
                  Resilience
Zooarchaeological research in the central Georgia Bight has arrived at a point where human subsistence behavior over space and time can be modeled.
Elizabeth J. Reitz and colleagues have offered a testable hypothesis that subsistence rested on three cultural and ecological pillars: continuity, flexibility
and resilience. For nearly 5,000 years, and possibly longer, resilient estuarine finfish taxa that easily recover from intensive harvest were most frequently
exploited, while terrestrial and littoral zone taxa were less commonly consumed. Stochastic processes common to the marine environment and extreme
semi-diurnal tides that cycle between two and three meters must have selected for flexibility within everyday subsistence planning. The question arises, do
preHispanic subsistence practices represented in the estuaries of the southernmost extent of the Georgia Bight, and points just south, rest on these three
pillars? Well recovered zooarchaeological assemblages from Castle Windy (A.D.1190–1420), Turtle Mound (A.D. 1280–1640) and Site 8SL1146 (A.D.
1090–-1388) validate this approach to resource use. The assemblages contain core finfish species such as mullet, spot, Atlantic croaker, and hardhead
catfish whereas among shellfish, Eastern oysters and coquina clams fill a similar role. The zooarchaeological record documents a rich and stable fishery
that was primarily associated with the estuarine system.
Rabinowitz, Adam (The University of Texas at Austin)
[261]             “Periods, Organized (PeriodO)”: A Linked Data Period Gazetteer and Approach to the Modeling of Scholarly Assertions
The PeriodO project seeks to solve a problem in the harmonization of heritage data described according to chronological periods rather than computer-
readable calendar dates. It does so using a Linked Open Data approach. Such approaches, in which records in databases are associated with common
points of reference, rather than described according to unified metadata schemata, have been successful for the linking of heritage records related to
places. So far, however, they have not been successful in linking periodized data, because data producers differ not only in their terminology but in the
chronological and spatial extents they ascribe to the same period terms. The PeriodO solution is the creation of a gazetteer not of agreed-upon period
concepts, but of period definitions offered by authoritative sources, with transparent modeling of both the assertions themselves and their scholarly
provenance. These definitions consist of spatial and temporal coordinates in the form that they are provided by a particular source, resolved into a
machine-readable chronological and spatial extent, and identified by a permanent URI (an ARK ID). The project has created a core dataset of more than
2700 definitions and a client interface that will allow a user community to continue to add new information.
[33]              Discussant
Raczek, Teresa (Kennesaw State University)
[221]             “I don’t Know all of these Stories”: Method and Intention in Community-Oriented Research and Heritage Projects
Scholars who conduct engaged and collaborative research and heritage projects often warn against treating participants as homogeneous communities
who speak with a unified voice. Gender provides a useful lens to combat this tendency and to create a reflexive, action-oriented archaeology. This paper
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                363
will discuss the role of gender, intersectionality, and intersubjectivity in method and intention in archaeological practices. Current projects in Georgia,
U.S.A. and Rajasthan, India, will be used to highlight the ways that gender, along with other representations of the self, plays a role in researcher-
stakeholder interpersonal field dynamics as well as the construction of narratives about the past.
[221]             Chair
Rademaker, Kurt (Northern Illinois University)
[139]             The Missing Middle: New Efforts to Understand Early Inter-Zonal Connections in the Peruvian Central Andes
In southern Peru our group is investigating a Paleoindian settlement system with linked sites situated in diverse ecological zones and exhibiting vastly
different subsistence adaptations. This system encompasses one of the earliest coastal fishing settlements in the Americas and high-elevation hunting
sites on the Andean plateau. Determining the nature of this and other early inter-zonal connections in adjacent areas is important for identifying routes
used to settle Andean South America, with implications for colonization patterns at the continental scale. Traditionally, inter-zonal links have been detected
by identifying exotic materials and determining their probable provenance, but this approach alone cannot distinguish single-group mobility from exchange
between multiple groups. This problem of understanding the origin of early contemporary, specialized adaptations and inter-zonal linkages in the Central
Andes has been complicated further by the near-total absence of early sites in the region’s geomorphically dynamic intermediate-elevation zones. We will
present new results from interdisciplinary study of lithic distribution patterns, site seasonality, and stable isotope analysis of high-elevation human remains.
We also will discuss alternative models for the initial exploration of the high Andean plateau that our group is evaluating via systematic survey efforts at
intermediate elevations.
[62]              Chair
Rademaker, Kurt [62] see Moore, Katherine
Radimilahy, Chantal [223] see Crowther, Alison
Rae, Brianna
[61]              Sandy Hill: A Preliminary Reanalysis
The Sandy Hill Site (72-97) was dug on the Mashantucket Pequot Reservation over the course of several years as part of large-scale, multi-phase cultural
resource management (CRM) excavations. The site, which dates to the Early Archaic, produced a dense assemblage of quartz lithic artifacts, as well as
thousands of charred botanicals and calcined bone fragments. Very few bifacial tools were recovered, which has led to the argument that this site may
represent a southern manifestation of the Gulf of Maine tradition. Sandy Hill also contained a series of large, overlapping features that have been
interpreted as successive house floors, making this the first and only Early Archaic site in Connecticut to have extensive evidence of possible domestic
occupation. In this paper I will conduct a preliminary re-analysis of Sandy Hill, with special attention to the aspects of the site that have yet to be addressed
in the archaeological literature.
Raff, Jennifer [160] see Martinez-Cruzado, Juan
Rafferty, Sean [189] see Chovanec, Zuzana
Raffield, Ben (Simon Fraser University)
[192]             Cross-Cultural Comparative Approaches to Viking Slavery
Slavery was an integral part of Viking culture, as attested by a variety of contemporary sources such as the observations of the tenth-century Arab envoy
Ahmad Ibn Fadlān, which describe the capture, trafficking, sexual exploitation, and employment of slaves amongst Scandinavian societies, including their
role in ritual and their treatment after death. Slavery nonetheless remains largely underrepresented in the archaeological record, although a small corpus of
finds support historical and literary accounts. Given that Viking Age Scandinavian societies were clearly hierarchical, slaves likely formed a substantial
portion of the population. Despite this, we have little knowledge of how such people were acquired and transported, where and how they were sheltered,
provisioned for, or what conditions they had to endure. We also have little idea of what infrastructure was in place to support the transportation of slaves
across great distances. Focusing on comparative aspects of the transatlantic slave trade, this paper will detail the potential benefits of large-scale, cross-
cultural points of comparison in helping us to better understand Viking slavery. This includes the consideration of slave markets and emporia, theorisation
of the Viking ‘slave ship’ (a neglected and important topic), and the contemporaneous moralities that underpinned and legitimised slaving.
[192]             Chair
Rafidi, Brianna (Arizona State University), Christopher Carr (School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizo) and Mary Kupsch (Folklore
Program, University of Oregon)
[286]             The Archaeology of Souls: A Foundation through Systematic Survey of Historic Woodland and Plains Native American Soul Concepts
The potential for accurately reconstructing prehistoric Woodland and Plains Indian societies’ notions of human soul-like essences using symbolically rich
mortuary remains and art can be improved when analogous, comparative ethnohistorical information is collected systematically and with sensitivity to tribal
and regional variations. Literature on 49 historic Woodland-Plains tribes produced 643 cases informing on nine selected subjects: number and locations of
souls in an individual, number of souls that leave the body in life and death, where and when they exit, and their functions and qualities in life and death.
Ideas varied considerably but patterned in their frequencies and geographic distributions.
Railey, Jim (SWCA - Albuquerque)
[168]             Radiocarbon Dates and Local Variation in Long-term Trends in Far Southeastern New Mexico
There are now well over 1,000 radiocarbon dates from the BLM’s Carlsbad Field Office region, and local variation in long-term patterns is becoming
increasingly evident. In the Mescalero Plain, and most local areas within it, radiocarbon dates exhibit a prominent frequency spike in the seventh and
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               364
eighth centuries A.D., followed by a precipitous plunge in the number of dates. But some local areas within the Mescalero Plain the numbers of dates
remain comparatively high in the Late Formative period (A.D. 1100–1450), and the reasons for this may vary. For example, along the base of the
Mescalero Escarpment, this pattern may reflect a concentration of Late Formative “villagers,” at least some of whom practiced farming. The same appears
to be true for the Maroon Cliffs area, although most Late Formative occupation there dates from the Maljamar phase (A.D. 1100–1300), and the number of
dates drops off in the Ochoa phase (A.D. 1300–1450). Along the southern periphery of the Mescalero Plain, however, the comparatively high frequency of
dates in the Late Formative may signal a continuation of highly mobile, forager lifeways throughout the Late Formative Period, similar to adjacent portions
of west Texas.
Raja, Mussa [170] see Bicho, Nuno
Rajagopalan, Angela (Dept. of Art & Art History, UNC Charlotte)
[15]               Representations of the Devil and the Demonic in Sixteenth-Century Mexico
As the influence of the Spanish Inquisition increased in the decades following the Spanish conquest of Mexico, it became increasingly common for
indigenous artist-scribes, or tlacuiloque, to substitute pictographic images of prehispanic deities with iconography related to the Christian devil. Drawing on
examples from Mesoamerican painted manuscripts and murals produced in the sixteenth-century, this paper explores the nature of those representations.
Distinctions occur between representations of pre-Hispanic deities (often depicted in the form of a classically-inspired Renaissance devil) and
representations of priests or other individuals associated in the Spanish Catholic world with the demonic (often depicted in other forms but using attributes
associated with the devil, such as dark pigment or clawed appendages). While the use of surrogate devil imagery asserted a Christian perspective when
dealing with subject matter related to pre-Hispanic history and religion, it was not always effective in avoiding censorship.
Ralston, Ian (University of Edinburgh, Scotland) and Gary Lock (University of Oxford, England, UK)
[60]               The Hillforts of Britain and Ireland: How Regionally Varied are They?
Since the beginning of insular Iron Age studies, the nature and variability of the settlement record across these islands have been a principal matter of
interest. This approach reached a zenith in the mid-twentieth century, in the schemes of Christopher Hawkes and Stuart Piggott. These set out to delineate
different provinces and regions within Britain in which distinctive cultures could be recognized, in substantial part framed on the distributions of varieties of
settlements, as depicted for example in the seminal map of the Iron Age in southern Britain, produced by the Ordnance Survey. The Atlas of Hillforts in
Britain and Ireland Project is an AHRC-funded collaboration designed to collate standardized information on the c. 5,000 sites of this type now known in
Britain and Ireland, including more-recently discovered sites (e.g., through aerial photography), and also by eliminating earlier inconsistences in
terminology amongst the different archaeological services across the islands. This contribution will allow a preliminary assessment of the impact of the new
data on previous perceptions of regionality within British and Irish Iron Age studies.
Ramireddy, Pranavi (Hampshire College), Jaime Ullinger (Quinnipiac University) and László Paja (University of Szeged)
[149]              Using Cremain Weight from a Bronze Age Cemetery in Eastern Hungary as an Indicator of Sex
In well-preserved osteoarchaeological samples, traditional anthropological methods are employed to determine age at death, biological sex, differences in
diet, activity level, pathologies, and genetics. Determining sex based on classical anthropological methods such as examining morphological and metric
traits is often difficult or impossible with cremains due to fragmentation and post-depositional damage. A previous study conducted by Van Deest et al. in
2013 showed a correlation between cremain weight and sex using a modern sample. At the Békés 103 site, a Bronze Age cemetery and settlement in
Eastern Hungary, 61 burials had been found by the end of the 2014 season, the majority of which are cremations interred in urns. In our study, total
cremain weights were analyzed to see if sex could be determined from urns belonging to adult individuals. Weight-based determination of sex was then
compared to results based on morphological and metric traits. Results show that weight estimations of biological sex did not match the results from
morphological and metric traits when available.
Ramis, Damià (Independent researcher)
[296]              Animal Exploitation in the Early Prehistory of the Balearic Islands
The Balearic Islands were the last large islands in the Mediterranean to be settled, as late as the third millennium cal B.C. Currently, there is a good
zooarchaeological record for the late third and second millennia cal B.C., which allows the reconstruction of animal exploitation and management strategies
in Mallorca, Menorca and Formentera. The results show that the obtainment of animal resources relied mainly on sheep, goat, cattle and pig husbandry.
When this record is compared to the surrounding regions (east Iberia, south France and the central Mediterranean islands of Corsica and Sardinia), the
main patterns that can be observed are (1) an unusual very high proportion of caprines among the livestock species, (2) a high relative frequency of goat
compared to sheep and, (3) a nearly complete absence of exploitation of wild faunal resources. This was due probably to a combination of the relatively
late colonization (not by early Neolithic, but by late Neolithic or early Bronze human groups) and comparative isolation of the Balearic archipelago until the
late 2nd millennium cal BC.
Ramon, Gabriel (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú)
[135]              Itinerancy and Pottery Production in the Andes
Swallows are a type of potter that travels seasonally to places away from their “home base” to practice their craft. For more than a century, and, in several
parts of the world, ethnographers have documented this phenomenon, however, archaeologists have only addressed it tangentially. Yet swallows are
important for archaeologists to consider, since they demonstrate that cultural interaction is not always limited to the distribution of pottery, but can also be
important during the manufacturing stage. Based on fieldwork in more than thirty communities with potters, this paper will characterize the cyclically
migrant potters of the Peruvian Andes emphasizing them as agents of transformation in material culture. Six varieties of Andean swallows will be
presented. These varieties will be explained within a regional map of technical styles (aka manufacturing styles), considering their tools, their sources of
raw materials, and their routes. These features will then be discussed in relation to analogous archaeological evidence to suggest how technical styles and
pottery workshops may be used to trace cultural interaction.
Ramon Celis, Pedro
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               365
[231]             Cuevas Prehistóricas de Yagul y Mitla, procesos de gestión, patrimonio cultural y su construcción como concepto en la población
A cinco años de la declaratoria de patrimonio cultural de la humanidad por la UNESCO, el sitio Cuevas Prehistóricas de Yagul y Mitla, que alberga
elementos naturales y arqueológicos variados (desde los vestigios más tempranos de la agricultura en América, hasta evidencias del México porfiriano),
es un ejemplo del arduo trabajo de gestión que se requiere para poder concretar un proyecto de dimensiones tan grandes. Este proceso de construcción
no hubiese sido posible sin la participación e involucramiento de poblaciones de los tres municipios que conforman el área, que ha permitido no solo la
protección de estos bienes, sino el acercamiento e interés de la sociedad civil para con su patrimonio. El presente trabajo, problematizará precisamente
como es que estos nuevos valores de protección patrimonial han ido desarrollándose en las poblaciones generando nuevas formas de participación
comunitaria.
[231]             Chair
Ramos, Teobalda Inés [63] see Levy, Jessica
Randall, Lindsay (Robert S. Peabody Museum of Archaeology) and Marla Taylor (Robert S. Peabody Museum of Archaeology)
[11]              Uncommon Engagement: Integrating Archaeology into High School Education
Archaeology-centered education is typically relegated to throw-away curricula in elementary school classrooms, often not to be discussed again until post-
secondary education. The Peabody Museum strives to break this pattern by actively engaging high school students and teachers in ways that connect
archaeology to their everyday lives. This is done through a work study program focusing on hands-on interaction with artifacts, as well as teaching
traditional subjects with archaeology. This model fosters a lasting appreciation for cultural heritage and a shared responsibility for preservation without a
significant addition to the curriculum.
Randall, Asa (University of Oklahoma) and Kenneth Sassaman (University of Florida)
[132]             Terraforming a Middle Ground in Ancient Florida
All societies face contradictions between the perception of how the world was in the past or should be in the future, and the material realities of the present.
Changing social and ecological contexts are catalysts for intervention by communities hoping to restore or assert structure during turbulent times.
Terraforming is one mode of intervention in which large-scale modifications to land reference ancient times, events, and persons to create new
opportunities for the future. At the landscape scale, terraforming as historical process reproduces or redirects the relations between communities,
ecologies, and cosmologies. Ancient Floridians, for example, engaged in a wide range of landscape modifications to navigate the diverse relations between
underworlds, upperworlds, and the day-to-day. Over 6,000 years ago on the St. Johns River, communities deposited shell, earth, and objects in ridges over
assemblages of massive pits dug by their predecessors, arguably restructuring the relationships among wetlands, the living, and the dead. Later
communities of the Florida Gulf coast constructed mounds and ridges at a time of rapid sea-level rise to redirect their social capital towards landward
communities of lesser vulnerability. The “middle ground” of terraforming in Florida was the reconciliation of futures past with the uncertainty of futures to
come.
Rando, Carolyn [187] see DuBois, Erin
Rangel De Lázaro, Gizeh (University Rovira i Virgili. University of Havana) and Armando Rangel Rivero (University of Havana; Museo
Antropológico Montané.)
[156]             Cuban Natives Cranial Deformation. The Implications to the Skull Vascular System
The precolumbian deformed skulls, display an oblique tabular fronto occipital artificial cranial warp, which is an Arawak–Taino cultural characteristic
element. Such cranial deformations were induced immediately after birth, in both women and men. According to the descriptions supplied by Columbus
and other chroniclers, deformations were practiced by the Taíno pottery agriculture groups living in Cuba. Although not all Taíno’s skulls were deformed,
this feature is typically used as a cultural identification of these populations. Our main goal is to review the principals’ craneovascular implications of cranial
deformation in Cuban precolumbian culture. Skull morphogenesis comprises open neurocranial sutures till advanced adult stages. Usually, they finally
close long after the brain is completely grown and developed. However the prematurely sutures close may lead to a pathological situation known as
craniosynostosis, linked to diverse neurocranial malformations depending on the suture involved. This practice disappeared in the early years of
colonization. Such changes may be able to influence the morphology of specific vascular endocranial traits.
Rangel Rivero, Armando [156] see Rangel De Lázaro, Gizeh
Rangel Rivero, Armando (University of Havana. Museo Antropológico Montané.)
[156]             American Archaeological Expeditions to Cuba Related with Museo Antropológico Montané
At the beginning of the twentieth century, several American archaeological expeditions were made to Cuba. The Museo Antropológico Montané from the
University of Havana was the mediating institution for academic exchange. They were conducted to explore, excavate and treasuring pieces. The
description of these expeditions is the goal of this work. In 1900, Stewart Culin, from the University of Pennsylvania, sought descendants of Aboriginal
communities in the region of Baracoa and its observations were published at "The Indians of Cuba" two years later. Mark Harrington, from the Heye
Foundation, excavated in various regions of Cuba and edited "Cuba before Columbus" in 1921. The last expedition, in the late nineties, was to learn about
the collections in the museum and organize the exhibition "Taíno Pre-Columbian Art and Culture from the Caribbean," in the city of New York, made in
1997. In these tasks participated archaeologists, formed with the support of foundations and universities, namely the Smithsonian Institution, Yale and
Pittsburgh University and Museo del Barrio in New York, among others. The contributions made by the specialists were, to define periodization and
classification of pre-Hispanic cultures that inhabited the island.
Ranhorn, Kathryn (The George Washington University), David Braun (The George Washington University), Christian Tryon (Harvard University)
and Alison Brooks (The George Washington University)
[177]             Late Pleistocene Lithic Technological Patterns in East Africa
Genetic and fossil evidence suggest East Africa played a significant role in the origin and dispersal of modern humans. While studies of East African
Middle Stone Age (MSA) assemblages exhibit apparent regional patterning, this is often based on industrial designations derived from presence/absence
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                366
or frequency of specific forms. Regional comparisons of these assemblages are inhibited by differences in comparability, especially of raw material,
reduction intensity, and inter-analyst variation. We test the hypothesis that East African MSA assemblages in central-north Tanzania exhibit more
similarities to each other than to assemblages further north in the Rift Valley taking into account these inherent influences on technological variation. We
collected morphological data on assemblages from Nasera Rock Shelter, Mumba Rock Shelter, Kisese II Rock Shelter, Prospect Farm, Koobi Fora, and
Muguruk. Raw data were log-transformed and binned according to raw material and reduction intensity. Several independent analyses test differences
within different domains of the reduction sequence (e.g., core exploitation and modification versus tool manufacture and retouch) (following Tostevin 2012).
Patterns of variation were quantified using methods previously tested with actualistic experiments (Ranhorn et al 2014, 2015). This study has implications
for the hypothesis that Late Pleistocene human populations had extensive cultural networks.
Rankin, Jennifer (Temple University / AECOM) and R. Michael Stewart (Temple University / NJ HPO)
[153]              Paleoindian Archaeology in the Delaware Valley: Insights from the Snyder Site Complex in New Jersey
The Snyder Site Complex consists of multicomponent prehistoric localities situated on landscapes adjacent to the Delaware River in the river basin's mid-
section. Over 30 fluted Paleoindian projectile points or bifaces have been reported from plowed/surface and stratified contexts. This number of diagnostic
artifacts is relatively unusual in the context of what is known about other Paleoindian sites in the Delaware River Basin. The Snyder Complex is among the
approximately 110 Paleoindian sites known for the New Jersey and Pennsylvania portions of the Delaware Valley. The sites of the Snyder Complex stand
out because of the large area that it covers, the potential for stratified deposits, the number of fluted bifaces that can be associated with its Paleoindian
occupations, and the fact that it is revisited throughout the Paleoindian period. In this paper, we briefly outline the history of research by the Society of
Pennsylvania Archaeology–Chapter 14 and present new data that highlights lithic resource use, intra- and inter-site patterning, environmental/climate
change, and the variation in landscape use over time that contributes to our understanding of early Native Americans in the Delaware Valley.
Rappe, Charles and William Ringle (Dept. of Anthropology, Davidson College)
[127]              Computing Material Culture: The Utility of Mobile Photogrammetric Techniques in Capturing Structures
Photogrammetric techniques have been around for many years but have not been widely implemented because of the requirements of known camera
positions and expertise in registering photographs, as well as the difficulty involved with going from data points to actual models. This paper addresses
concerns with accuracy, efficiency and overall utility of using more mobile photogrammetric techniques and related software which we began using in 2013.
In addition, some of the benefits of photogrammetry in capturing architecture and in capturing irregular structures (ex. chultuns) will be discussed. The
techniques were also used in the capturing of pit profiles at a number of active BRAP excavations.
To test these concerns, the authors conducted an intensive experiment in photogrammetric recording during the summer field season of 2015. Over 50,000
images of over 60 structures in the Puuc region of the Yucatan were captured as input for the 3D modeling program Photoscan. This paper discusses
camera selection and methods of photographing larger objects such as buildings. The accuracy of the models will be compared to laser models generated
at the same sites during earlier field seasons.
Rareshide, Elisabeth (California State University, Northridge)
[82]               Tongva Ritual Practice on San Clemente Island: Reanalysis of Religious Dynamics during the Colonial Period
Many archaeologists have studied religious identity in Native American populations. Tongva sites such as Lemon Tank and Big Dog Cave on the plateau of
San Clemente Island provide a rich source of data on Tongva ritual practices. Collections from these sites include ritual avian and canid burials along with
caches of seeds, beads, and ritually “killed” objects. Existing research has focused on connecting the archaeological record to the historical and
ethnographic record to identify the rituals that the Tongva practiced at these sites, such as initiation and public mourning ceremonies. At the same time,
artifacts such as metal, glass beads, and mission cloth indicate that these sites were occupied during the Spanish colonial period. Therefore these
collections, combined with current anthropological theory on religion, provide an opportunity to explore Tongva religious practice in the context of
colonialism. This paper reexamines evidence of Tongva ritual on San Clemente Island to explore religious dynamics during the colonial period.
Rasic, Jeffrey [185] see Speakman, Robert
Rathbone, Stuart [80] see Napora, Katharine
Rawski, Zoe (The University of Texas at San Antonio) and M. Kathryn Brown (The University of Texas at San Antonio)
[27]               Preclassic Monumental Architecture at Xunantunich, Belize: Implications for Ritual Performance
Recent investigations in the Preclassic site core at the site of Xunantunich have revealed new evidence for ritual activity at the site’s earliest monumental
structures. This ceremonial core, recently designated Early Xunantunich, is composed of three plazas, an E-Group, and several large, flat-topped
platforms. The largest of these platforms forms the northern boundary of the site, measuring 100–115 meters wide and over 10 meters tall. Recent
excavations of this platform revealed at least three construction phases, including an inset staircase on its southern face similar to those seen in other
Preclassic platforms in the Belize River valley. All three construction phases at the associated E-Group’s eastern architectural complex also contain inset
staircases, and we believe the presence of stair blocks at both locations to be suggestive of public ritual performances. Within the final phase of the
northern platform’s central staircase, a small lip to lip ceramic vessel cache containing two carved jadeite heads was encountered. This Terminal
Preclassic center-line offering has implications for more formalized ritual activities by this period. In this paper we highlight our recent findings at Early
Xunantunich and present preliminary interpretations related to the function of the northern platform and its relation to the E-Group complex.
Ray, Celeste
[60]               Holy Wells across the Longue Durée
Sacred springs and holy wells in northwest European prehistory evidence multi-period veneration, yet are archaeologically-resistant sites. This paper
assesses evidence for votive deposition at sacred watery sites with a focus on the Iron Age to Christian transition in Ireland. While recent scholarship
deconstructing “the Celts” has also dismissed contemporary holy well practices as invented traditions or as Roman introductions, ongoing veneration at
nearly 1000 Irish well sites is part of an old paradigm. Early medieval literary documentation (in Irish myths, hagiographies, penitentials and annals) of
“rounding rituals” at supermundane wells seems to offer direct precedents for today’s wellside folk liturgies. Visitation of well landscapes also involves
prayer and votive deposition at sacred trees and stone “stations” that have come within the cultural orbit of wells. Possibly revealing older patterns of
regional saint dedications and interconnectivity, some well landscapes must be visited in conjunction. Inspired by Carole Crumley’s emphasis on
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                367
interdisciplinarity, the Annales school, ethnohistory, and multiscalar dynamics, this paper reassesses the potential of holy wells as archaeological
resources.
[60]              Chair
Ray, Erin (University of California, Merced)
[273]             Comparative Geochemical Analyses of Lime-Plaster from a Cave Site in Belize, C.A.
The medium-sized Late Classic Maya polity of Las Cuevas, Belize features a heavily-modified cave just below the main plaza, containing 73 platforms,
seven staircases, and two sets of terraces. Geochemical analyses of the plastered surfaces were conducted in situ using portable XRF (pXRF) and in the
lab using pXRF, XRD, SEM-EDS, and FTIR in order to understand the technology used to create the platforms within the cave. Platforms were sampled by
selecting from different areas of the cave entrance, different light quality, and different sizes. I hypothesize that differences in chemical composition may
represent chronological or functional differences. I will present the results of these different but complementary analyses, discuss the range of variation and
explore possible explanations.
Ray, Erin [294] see Moyes, Holley
Raymond, Tiffany (Mississippi State University)
[98]              Comparing Prehistoric Freshwater Mussel Shell Ring Site Locations in the Mississippi Yazoo Basin with Other Archaeological Site Types
                  Using a Modern Flood Model
The Mississippi Delta is dotted with many types of aboriginal archaeological sites. Among these are freshwater mussel shell rings that seem to occur
mainly along current or historical water sources. Using a modern flood model for the Mississippi Yazoo Basin, this paper will examine whether freshwater
mussel shell ring sites in the Yazoo Basin occur predominately in highly flood-prone areas, as shell rings would create elevated surfaces for habitation.
This paper will also compare mussel shell ring site locations with other aboriginal archaeological site locations in Quitman and Yazoo counties to determine
whether there is a general correlation between flood-prone areas and site locations for all site types, or if there is a difference in distribution between
mussel shell ring sites and other site types.
Raymond, Tiffany [277] see Carlock, Bradley
Razgildeeva, Irina [150] see Buvit, Ian
Rebellato, Lilian (Universidade Federal do Oeste do Pará), Camila Figueiredo (University of Toronto) and William Woods (University of Kansas)
[263]             The Geographical Distribution of the Amazonian Dark Earths in the Lower Amazon
The geographical distribution of the Amazonian Dark Earths (ADE) in the Amazon region presents interpretive gaps. Understanding their distribution
patterns might reveal the dynamics of indigenous settlements during pre-colonial times, as well as landscape management practices, and chronology. In
the Upper Xingu, the distribution of ADE indicates that the smaller satellite villages were interconnected by roads to a larger village center. Santarém and
Belterra regions, in the Lower Amazon, ADE sites have been located in distinct landscape types presenting great variation in their area, shape, position,
depth, and density of archaeological artifacts. The large number of ADE sites across different types of landscapes results from long term of human
occupation, an increase in population density and social complexity in the last millennium. In this paper, we will ponder on the impact of European contact
during the colonial period in the formation and spatial distribution of ADE in the Belterra Plateau.
Reber, Eleanora (UNC Wilmington) and Raghda el-Behaedi (UNC Wilmington)
[277]             In Their Cups?: Background Lipids in Shell as a Basis for Analyzing Shell Cup Residues
Lipids in a variety of large shells were extracted using both destructive and non-destructive techniques and analyzed with GC/MS. In pottery residue
analysis, lipids found in extracted residues can be assumed to derive from human usage because natural geolipids are removed from the clay during firing.
Shell cups do not undergo firing at temperatures high enough to result in lipid removal. As a result, it is important to understand the natural lipids present in
large shells before attempting organic residue analysis of shell cups. This analysis will hopefully permit a better understanding of the possibilities for
residue extraction from shell cups in archaeological context, which would open up a new artifact class to organic residue analysis.
[277]             Chair
Rebolledo, Sandra [76] see Olguin, Laura
Redding, Richard (Kelsey Museum, University of Michigan)
[79]              A Model of Body Part Representation in Archaeozoological Samples
The distribution body parts of animals consumed at a site is an important variable in understanding human subsistence behavior. I present a model of
expected body part distributions for meat versus non-meat bearing elements that assumes whole bodies are transported to and deposited in a site. The
model is based on observed fragmentation at three sites in the Middle East and Egypt: Hallan Chemi (Turkey), Farukhabad (Iran) and Heit el-Ghurab
(Giza, Egypt). The model predicts that 33 percent of all limb elements should be from meat-bearing bones if whole bodies are being butchered on the site.
Variations from this expectation must be understood in terms of human behavior, taphonomy, and/or excavation tactics. Examples of body part variation
within two sites, Abydos (Egypt) and Abu Duwari (Iraq) are presented and explanations offered.
[79]              Chair
Redmond, Brian (Cleveland Museum of Natural History), Nigel Brush (Ashland University), Haskel Greenfield (University of Manitoba), P. Nick
Kardulias (College of Wooster) and Jeffrey Dilyard (Ashland Consortium)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            368
[112]             New Evidence for Human Butchery of an American Mastodon from Central Ohio, USA
A growing body of archaeological data now points to the likely exploitation of American Mastodon (Mammut americanum) by late Pleistocene hunters in
North America. The recent discovery of a partial mastodon skeleton at the Cedar Fork site in Morrow County, Ohio provides additional evidence in the form
of at least one possibly cut marked bone. The skeletal remains are those of a large male and were disturbed post-mortem by animal scavenging and more
recent geological processes including debris flows. Initial visual examination of a fragment of the neural spine of the second or third thoracic vertebra
revealed eight wide grooves that appear to have been made by human agents. Detailed light optical and SEM examinations of the grooves indicate that at
least five exhibit the characteristics of slice marks made by one or more flaked stone tools. The absence of crushed bone in the grooves suggests that
none were the result of incising or chopping on dry bone but were made while the bone was relatively fresh. The recovery of two possible flaked stone tools
in apparent association with the mastodon remains provides additional support for a conclusion of human butchery.
Reed, Ann [37] see Leach, Melinda
Reed, Paul (Archaeology Southwest)
[194]             Protecting Greater Chaco: Recent Efforts to Save a Fragile Cultural Landscape
The Greater Chaco Landscape of northwest New Mexico is threatened by increasing drilling activity associated with development of the Mancos Shale via
fracking. Many groups and individuals have spoken up and banded together to fight this threat. Archaeology southwest has been actively engaged in this
process for a couple years. In this presentation, I summarize our work and detail the steps taken to help ensure greater protection for the irreplaceable
landscape associated with Chacoan Society.
[43]              Chair
Reed, William (USDA - Forest Service)
[165]             Partners, Passports, Parsimony, and Preservation
The Intermountain Region of the Forest Service manages 34 million acres of public land in Utah, Nevada, Idaho, Wyoming, California, and Colorado. As
yet, more than 30,000 sites have been recorded in the Region. From inventory to excavation, to curation and interpretation, and stabilization, the
Intermountain Region has fielded a well rounded Heritage program. This presentation will review a multitude of management challenges and successes
accomplished with minimal funding and plenty of help from diverse preservation partners.
Reeder-Myers, Leslie [296] see Rick, Torben
Reents-Budet, Dorie (Smithsonian Institution) and Ronald Bishop (Smithsonian Institution)
[59]              The Contents, Roles and Meanings of "Tribute" among the Classic Maya
Ethnohistorical accounts of tribute among the Yukatek Maya provide an impressive list of commodities in circulation at the time of Spanish contact while
also affording a glimpse of the interwoven layers of socio-economic relationships underlying these acts of tribute and tax payments. This paper compares
the Yukatekan configurations, both recorded and implied, with those intimated from the patterns of production and distribution of Classic Period decorated
ceramics. The study employs a multi-disciplinary approach to include art historical, epigraphic, ceramic paste chemical, and archaeological data.
Reese, Kelsey (Southwest Archaeological Consultants, Inc.)
[67]              From the Empirical to the Conjectural: Using Spatial Analysis to Determine Population Settlement Patterns on the Uncharted Mesa Verde
                  Landform
A consistent issue that arises in archaeological studies is the absence of a complete set of data on which to perform analyses. Data may be unavailable for
a variety of reasons, but its absence often inhibits complete understanding of a population in a defined area. In southwestern Colorado, survey coverage
on the Mesa Verde landform is limited to the extent of Mesa Verde National Park, and therefore settlement studies are limited to less than one third of the
prominent landform. To fully understand the size and expanse of habitations that were present in this area, this case study extrapolates settlement
information from the recorded to help understand the settlements that could possibly lie in what is unrecorded. Utilizing geospatial analyses, multiple
dimensions of settlement choices, and overarching settlement patterns, this poster will present potential demographic and settlement characteristics from
A.D. 600–1280; and further include potential placement of habitation sites and various types of public architecture that may exist beyond the boundaries of
Mesa Verde National Park.
Reetz, Elizabeth (University of Iowa Office of the State Archaeologist) and William Quackenbush (Tribal Historic Preservation Officer for the Ho-
Ch)
[266]             Creating Collaborative Learning Opportunities for Indigenous Youth with Archaeology-based Environmental Education
Midwest archaeologists and Native American communities have recently initiated successful community-based and collaborative research endeavors.
Through such collaborations, tribal leaders have expressed an interest in providing ways for youth in their communities to engage in contemporary cultural
and natural resources work to inspire future stewardship and introduce potential professional pathways. Many archaeologists are in a unique position to
promote heritage and preservation through environmental education, the fundamentals of which have overlapping and parallel themes to archaeology
education and outreach. With the guidance of archaeologists and tribal community educators, youth can participate in authentic, hands-on and place-based
archaeological activities that place them into the roles of scientists and researchers and allow them to interpret their own archaeological heritage. Also,
such learning opportunities for American Indian students can enhance core academic subject matter by incorporating culturally relevant topics of interest.
Archaeologists are introduced to the core principals of environmental education and Native American Learning Styles to minimize barriers among such
community projects. Tribal historic preservation leaders and educators also offer guidance for conscientious communication between archaeologists and
tribal classrooms, and outcomes from a recent partnership between archaeologists and Ho-Chunk youth in Wisconsin are explored.
Reeves, Jonathan (The George Washington University), Jonathan Scott Reeves (George Washington University), Melissa Miller (University of
Tulsa) and David R. Braun (George Washington University)
[181]             Modeling the Formation of Lithic Surface Assemblages through the Application of Aerial Photography and Photogrammetry
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                369
Previous research has demonstrated that surface artifacts provide insight into land-use patterns when the taphonomic processes influencing their
distribution are understood. This understanding is derived from detailed field mapping of landscape topography and geomorphology. Aerial imagery, when
combined with photogrammetry and geospatial analysis, produces datasets that can be used to characterize the erosional processes that actively influence
the occurrence of surface material. Using unmanned aerial systems and photogrammetric software (Agisoft Photoscan), we created high resolution
orthomosaic imagery and, digital elevation models (DEM) of the archaeological landscapes of Koobi Fora. Terrain analyses of the DEMs investigate
hydrology, slope, aspect and terrain ruggedness of the modern landscape. Here these methods are employed in combination with artifact location data, to
explore how active erosional processes and topography influence the formation of surface assemblages. These data have implications for understanding
when high densities of surface material reflect patterns of behavior as opposed to concentrations that are the result of variation in erosional patterns. We
demonstrate the degree to which modern terrain influences the occurrence, density, composition and overall preservation of surface artifacts.
Reeves, Jonathan Scott [181] see Reeves, Jonathan
Reeves Flores, Jodi (Center for Digital Antiquity, Arizona State University) and Leigh Anne Ellison (Center for Digital Antiquity, Arizona State
Univer)
[11]              Heritage Stewardship in the Digital Age
Digital access to all levels of archaeological data, from the raw data to synthesized reports and summaries, can support public interest in cultural heritage.
High quality internet resources easily provide access to more information on local sites that they are already interested in, and can also make them aware
of heritage issues that they never considered. The Center for Digital Antiquity makes a variety of archaeological and historical information available to
researchers and the general public and also interacts with people to answer their questions and promote interest in archaeology. The catalyst for this
dialogue is tDAR (the Digital Archaeological Record), an online repository for archaeological data that makes images, documents and other types of
information freely accessible. This paper looks at tDAR’s impact on raising public awareness of archaeological data, explores collections in tDAR that seek
to address ethical issues regarding cultural heritage while making accurate information more accessible, and examines ways in which using an existing
platform such as tDAR can make it easier for people in the heritage sector to promote interest in and the preservation of cultural heritage.
Regnier, Amanda [240] see Hammerstedt, Scott
Reichardt, Stephen [265] see Simon, Arleyn
Reid, David [139] see Rademaker, Kurt
Reid, David (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[219]             Road Networks of Southern Peru: Connecting Landscapes of Colonialism
Increasingly relevant to studies of geopolitical state expansion is the role of infrastructure: the networks of communication, travel, and commerce that
embed local human landscapes within broader processes of imperialism. In pre-industrial communities, formal roads and highways were often the only
localized presence of an overarching state, promising greater interconnectivity and shaping the colonial experience. I utilize geographic information
systems (GIS) and remote sensing applications to model diachronic changes in road/path networks between the Ocoña and Majes Valleys in southern
Peru. Ground truthing of roads and waystations suggest a deep prehistory of camelid caravan activity later coopted by the intrusive Wari and Inca highland
states. While human settlement on the arid coast is considered to be relegated to the lush river valleys that descend from the highlands, this research
suggests major lateral travel occurred across the desert pampa and was supported by associated waystations.
Reid, Basil (Senior Lecturer in Archaeology)
[220]             Caribbean's First Farmers: The Story of St. John in Southwestern Trinidad
Recent starch grain analysis of three grindstones from St. John has confirmed that the Ortoiroid people of St. John (southwestern Trinidad) were in fact the
first farmers of the insular Caribbean. This discovery is significant for the region as it provides proof that as far back as 7,700 years ago, early native
communities in the Caribbean were actively engaged in the sowing, harvesting and processing of a range of cultivars. This paper will explore early farming
at St. John in relation to farming epistemology of the pre-colonial neotropics.
Reifschneider, Meredith (Stanford University)
[128]             The Social Politics of Health and Healing: Archaeological Approaches to Social Meanings and Practices of Illness and Well-Being
Colonial regimes of knowledge and practice and the attendant maintenance of biological, raced, class-based, and gendered difference have remained
central concerns for social historians, anthropologists, and archaeologists. Within this milieu of colonial studies, social histories of Western medicine have
increasingly interrogated the connections between biological science and racial and gendered difference. Social constructionist approaches to biomedicine
provide a useful groundwork for archaeologists to move beyond strictly Foucauldian conceptions of subjectivity to understand contrasting social meanings
and practices of illness and healing. In turn, targeted studies of material culture elucidate how conditions of oppression and trauma, and subsequent
patterns of resistance and healing, are shaped by various circumstances. My own research at a plantation hospital on St. Croix, USVI aims to understand
the social politics of health within this framework. The colonial past for many communities is not a historical legacy; rather the effects of colonialism and
enslavement are evidenced today by the physiological and psychological outcomes of exclusionary and racist health policies. Archaeological studies of
healing and medical practice can work to break down conceptual and methodological boundaries that perpetuate fundamental differences between
“traditional” healing practices and scientific medicine, while stressing the importance of non-oppressive medical models.
Reinhart, Katharine [61] see Kasper, Kimberly
Reitsema, Laurie [8] see Smith, April
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 370
Reitz, Elizabeth (University of Georgia)
[133]             Charleston, South Carolina (USA): A Case Study in Using Fish as Evidence of Social Status
Charleston (South Carolina, U.S.A.) was founded in A.D. 1670 on the southeastern Atlantic coast of North America. The city’s archaeological record can be
divided into four periods: 1710–1750, 1750–1820, 1820–1850, and 1850–1900. Fishes were used by all social strata in Charleston. The minimum number
of fish individuals fluctuates between 22 percent and 30 percent of the non-commensal individuals and the number of taxa ranges from 44 percent to 49
percent. A core group of estuarine fishes was used throughout the city’s history by all social groups. These were animals that could be captured from
shallow, brackish waters using relatively simple gear. Social distinctions are subtle, but after the 1710–1750 period, assemblages from elite townhouses
are richer and more diverse than are assemblages from sites occupied by people of lower status. This higher diversity was achieved by using fishes
infrequently used by other social groups, ones that were, perhaps, more costly to acquire. Most fish individuals were taken from trophic levels 3.4 and 3.5
regardless of time period, status, or site function. Thus, we find in Charleston’s archaeological record evidence that fishes were important in the local
economy and cuisine and that social distinctions are reflected in fish remains.
[1]               Discussant
Reitze, William (University of Arizona)
[268]             Three Seasons of Survey in the Painted Desert: An Update of the Petrified Forest Boundary Expansion Survey
In 2004 Congress authorized Petrified Forest National Park to more than double in size, in part to protect unique cultural resources. This poster introduces
the preliminary results of the third and final season of pedestrian survey in these new lands. So far this research has recorded archaeological sites dating
from the Archaic through the Late Pueblo periods. Sites range from lithic landscapes covering hundreds of acres to multi-room masonry or adobe
structures. Survey methodology has focused on sampling a cross-section of different environments to better understand land use across new park lands.
Mapping and recording has documented differential land use through time, with a focus on large semi-stabilized dunes. Detailed ceramic analysis has
documented phenomenal diversity of ceramic types and sources. This additional survey and documentation work will change our understanding of
prehistoric use of this region and how it compares to the broader southwest. In addition to cultural resource management goals this project also functions
as a teaching laboratory with the Petrified Forest National Park internship program. To date, this program has incorporate fifteen college student interns for
in-depth field training and independent research.
[268]             Chair
Remise, François (EPHE)
[119]             The Celtic community of the Heuneburg: An Energetics Approach to Their Building Activity between 600 B.C. and 540 B.C.
During the first Iron Age, between 600 B.C. and 540 B.C., the ruling elite of the Celtic community at Heuneburg in Southern Germany erected monumental
buildings, mainly mud-brick fortifications and funeral mounds. The costs and efforts involved in the construction of these buildings have been estimated
using the science of energetics. This study analyses the energy effort involved in the construction, preferentially on the basis of energy values which would
have applied in the historical and social context, and using standard values only when no information allowing a more appropriate choice is available.
Drawing upon previous experimental works in the field this study analyses the construction workflows in order to identify the most relevant time values for
each part of the projects. Finally, this study offers a model of the labor and sociopolitical organization of this society during this period.
Rendu, William (CNRS - NYU), Lionel Gourichon (CNRS) and Stephan Naji (CNRS - NYU)
[146]             Optimizing Cementochronology for Archaeological Applications: The CemeNTAA Project
Various methodological approaches have been developed in zooarchaeology to discuss how past population coped with seasonal constraints. Among
them, the analysis of tooth cementum incremental structures (cementochronology) is often used for discussing seasonality in archaeological contexts.
However, several issues have been raised about the method, such as the absence of a standardized protocol, the lack of data for specific species,
variability between geographical populations and destruction of archaeological materials. Here we present the CemeNTAA consortium which proposes a
three-step program to address these issues and improve cementum analyses. First a common protocol validated through interobserver blind tests is now
available. Second, a renewed biological documentation has been created from new comparative collections of modern specimens of the main Pleistocene-
Holocene European preys. This reference documentation will systematically document cementum intra-population variability. Finally, multi-scale
spectrometry analyses (optical, synchrotron microtomography and X-ray fluorescence, laser ablation isotopic mapping) are conducted to increase our
knowledge of cementogenesis. This approach will help create a cementum 3D map which purpose is to minimize sample destruction through non-intrusive
analyses. Preliminary application in an Early Aurignacian context of Southwestern France suggest a highly seasonal hunting organization in answer to the
seasonal fluctuation of the reindeer population.
Renson, Virginie [180] see Nan, Puheng
Renson, Virginie (University of Missouri), Hector Neff (California State University Long Beach), David Cheetham (Arizona State University),
James Guthrie (University of Missouri) and Michael D. Glascock (University of Missouri)
[236]             Lead and Strontium Isotopes to Source Ceramics in Ancient Mexico
Recent study showed that lead isotope analysis constitutes an efficient tool to discriminate between ceramics from different origins and can be used to
trace pottery provenance in the Eastern Mediterranean (Renson et al. 2011 [Archaeometry 53] 37-57, Renson et al. [Archaeometry] in press). We are now
applying this approach to Olmec-style pottery from Mexico. In this study, we analyzed lead and strontium isotopes of fragments from various Olmec-style
ceramic wares excavated at San Lorenzo, Mazatan and Tlapacoya (including Limon carved-incised, Calzadas-carved and La Mina White). Contradictory
hypotheses regarding the origins and exchange of these ceramics have been raised and the various interpretations are still being hotly debated (e.g.,
Blomster et al. 2005 [Science 307] 1068-1072, Stoltman et al. 2005 [Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102] 11213-11218, Neff et al. 2006
[Latin American Antiquity 17] 54-76, Stoltman 2011 [Archaeometry 53] 510-527). This study investigates how to use the isotopic approach to confirm or
refute previous interpretations based, among other, on neutron activation results and how it could contribute to trace interactions in the Mesoamerican
region.
Retamal, Rodrigo (Dept. Antrop., Universidad de Chile. Dept. Biol. Anthrop., Cambridge University.), Aryel Pacheco (Department of Archaeology,
Durham University, UK.), Francisca Santana-Sagredo (Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the Histor), Samantha Cox (Department of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                371
Archaeology and Anthropology, Univer) and Jorge Pinares (Facultad de Odontología, Universidad de Chile.)
[76]              Punishment or Surgical Procedure?: Intentional Amputation in a Late Intermediate Period (1000–1450 A.D.) Individual from Pica 8
                  cemetery (Northern Chile)
Presented here is a case of intentional amputation found in a 30–40 year old male (inventoryNº B0796) from the Pica 8 cemetery in Northern Chile who
exhibits an antemortem loss of all his left toes. Whilst Munizaga (1974) suggested that this mutilation was caused by frostbite, our CT scan analysis
suggests intentional amputation.
While this intentional amputation could be the consequence of a surgical procedure, amputation as a form of punishment presents an interesting possibility
to explore in consideration with the individual and cultural context. This individual also possesses an arrowhead embedded in his right first rib and violent
traumas to his forehead and nasal bones. He is the only skeleton from Pica 8 (n=96 individuals) in which an arrow point is embedded and one of only six
exhibiting cranial traumas (Pacheco and Retamal 2015).
These findings prompt a discussion focused on violence during the Late Intermediate Period in the South Central Andes. Considerations are made for the
rise of violent conflict in this period, the use and conceptualization of body and self, and the juxtaposition of the possible interpretations of his role as either
a warrior/hero, a slave/criminal.
Reuther, Joshua [21] see Potter, Ben
Reuther, Joshua, Ben Potter (Department of Anthropology, University of Alaska F), Charles Holmes (Department of Anthropology, University of
Alaska F), Julie Esdale (Colorado State University- CEMML) and Jennifer Kielhofer (Department of Geosciences, University of Arizona)
[242]             Late Quaternary Landscape Change and Large Mammal Habitat Fragmentation in Interior Alaska
It has been known for sometime that interior Alaskan terrestrial mammalian species diversity and biogeography changed during the Late Glacial and
Holocene (16,000 years ago to present). Here we present a synthetic view of how these changes may have been manifested. Herbivores such as bison,
camel, caribou, elk, mammoth, moose, horse, and saiga antelope once had widespread biogeographic distribution across Alaska. Several interrelated
drivers behind the widespread mammalian shifts in diversity and ranges and extinction during the Late Glacial and into the Holocene in interior Alaska have
been hypothesized. These comprise, but are not limited to, climate change, changes in vegetation regimes, shifts in available moisture, decreases in plant
growing seasons, increases in snow accumulation, and predator pressure (including human hunting).
The models we present are based on well-dated paleontological and archaeofaunal data-sets, well-defined records of changes in soil and sedimentation
regimes, and vegetation reconstructions (pollen and macrofossils) from lake cores. As expected, environmental changes during the last 16,000 years
across the diverse landscapes of the region, did not affect each species equally. Many species’ ranges diminished and several species became extinct, yet
others survived and flourished into the later periods of the Holocene.
Reyes, Omar [139] see Méndez, César
Reyes, Omar (CEHA, Instituto de la Patagonia, UMAG), Susan Kuzminsky (University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, ), Cesar Mendez (4.
Departamento de Antropología, Universidad de Ch) and Manuel San Roman (1. Instituto de la Patagonia, CEHA, Universidad de)
[207]             Examining Biological Variation among the Marine Hunter-Gatherers of the Chonos Archipelago, Western Patagonian Channels, Chile
Our understanding of the evolutionary processes and the prehistory of South America have been enhanced by recent archaeological and biological studies
on this continent. Of particular interest has been the focus on marine environments along the Pacific Coast and their importance to biocultural
developments among human groups. In this study, we focus on the Chonos Archipelago (43°50’-46°50’S) in the Western Patagonian channels of Chile,
                                                                                                                                                     2
which is comprised of a series of more than 150 islands forming a dense network of channels and fjords and covering an area of ˜54,000 km . Recent
archaeological excavations in this area have yielded a new chronology of human occupation starting at 6260 cal years B.P. We examine human skeletal
remains recovered from excavations and surface collections in this area that date from ~2430 cal yr B.P. to the historic period. The Chonos assemblage is
unique as it is the only systematically dated collection from this region. Using 3D geometric morphometric assessments of crania, we examine biological
variation among the Chonos skeletons and coastal populations from other regions of Chile. Our results provide new data for elucidating the population
history of prehistoric Pacific coastal inhabitants and the peopling of southern South America.
Rice, Prudence (Southern Illinois University)
[26]              Central Peten Jato Black-on-Gray: A Look at Gray Wares and Black Wares, Monkeys and Mortuaries
Jato Black-on-Gray is an extremely rare Terminal Classic pottery type in central Petén, typically recovered as mortuary furniture. It is a hybrid, combining
typical Petén forms with aspects of color, decoration, and use borrowed from wares and groups such as Chablekal Fine Gray and Achote Black, more
common in western and southwestern Petén. In particular, an incised monkey image on a Jato vase from Tayasal ties it to common motifs on Chablekal
bowls, which are also from burial contexts but were not imported into the lakes area. This suggests that Terminal Classic residents in the lakes area had
broader familiarity with pottery and iconography in the west, and/or that potters from these areas moved into the lakes district, and that, regardless,
innovation was alive and well in the pottery “business” in the lakes district.
[291]             Discussant
Rice, Shaelyn [163] see McCafferty, Geoffrey
Rich, Michelle [256] see Navarro-Farr, Olivia
Richards, Katie (Washington State University)
[104]             What Does Fremont Mean Anyway? Finding a Useful and Constructive Way to Conceptualize a Regional System
The meaning of the term Fremont has been heavily debated for almost as long as it has existed. For over half of a century many archaeologists have
argued that the term is only useful in that it encapsulates the highly variable practices of a region. Others have argued that defining Fremont is impossible
and even unproductive. We disagree with these assertions. We believe that there are sufficient similarities in material culture and social organization
across the Fremont region to suggest that a definition of Fremont is both possible and productive. In this paper, we argue that recent trends which have
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              372
incorporated social theory provide a new avenue to explore and suggest ways to account for variability between sites.
[104]            Chair
Richards, Katie [104] see Johansson, Lindsay
Richards, John (University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee) and Richard Kubicek (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee)
[112]            Pits, Posts, and Not Much Else: Sub-Mound Archaeology at Two Late Woodland Effigy Mound Sites
Effigy Mound is an archaeological taxon that references Late Woodland societies present in the western Great Lakes of North America from about A.D.
800 to A.D. 1050. Effigy Mound builders are known primarily by an estimated 15,000–20,000 mounds built in the shape of animals, supernatural beings
and conical and linear forms. The end of the Effigy Mound period coincides with the adoption of maize horticulture by many Late Woodland groups as well
as the appearance of new pottery traditions marked by the use of collared and castellated rims. Most Effigy Mound excavations were conducted in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century and focused on the mounds and their associated burial programs. Little attention was given to areas outside the
footprint of the mounds. Consequently, we know little concerning activities that may have taken place in the immediate vicinity of constructed mounds. This
poster illustrates results of large-scale excavations at two reported Effigy Mound sites that harbored intact sub-surface deposits including pits, postmolds,
and hearths. The features may be associated with ritual activity connected to the construction, use, and possible episodic reuse of each site.
Richards, Patricia (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee) and Catherine Jones (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee)
[112]            Excavation at the Second Ward Cemetery, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
The Second Ward Cemetery Association incorporated the Second Ward or Gruenhagen Cemetery, in 1850 after the association purchased the land from
Joachim F. Gruenhagen. This Milwaukee cemetery consisted of between three and five acres and interments took place until 1870 when the Association
defaulted on the property’s mortgage and the land was sold by Sheriff’s auction. By 1874, plans had been made to subdivide the property and an article
appeared in the Milwaukee Sentinel announcing that burials needed to be removed in 30 days. The land formally occupied by the Second Ward Cemetery
is a mix of houses and empty lots. It is also the location of the Guest House of Milwaukee, a homeless shelter for men. In the spring of 2014 several
burials were disturbed when the Guest House installed a rain garden. Subsequently, an archaeological monitor was on site in 2015 when the Guest House
broke ground for an addition to their building. Despite the addition occurring in an area that had been developed and disturbed multiple times since 1874,
archaeological monitoring and subsequent stripping revealed the presence of over 55 intact interments. This paper presents preliminary results of the
excavation of the Second Ward Cemetery.
Richards, Michael [223] see Guiry, Eric
Richards, Julian (University of York Archaeology Data Service)
[261]            Current Developments in Cyber-Infrastructure in European Archaeology
In Europe, as in North America, there has been little attention to the long term issues of digital data curation, with consequent risks of catastrophic data
loss. In recent years, however, there has been mounting pressure on government agencies and universities to ensure that the research they fund, and the
underlying data, are properly managed, and are available ‘Open Access.’ Consequently, several European countries are now establishing digital data
archives for archaeology. This paper will review current initiatives, and the problems they face, based largely on the experience of the UK’s Archaeology
Data Service, now approaching its twentieth anniversary. It will introduce ARIADNE, an EU-funded e-infrastructure which is attempting to facilitate
integrated access to national archives and to European archaeological data.
[261]            Chair
Richards-Rissetto, Heather [121] see Day, Zachary
Richards-Rissetto, Heather (University of Nebraska-Lincoln)
[174]            What does GIS + 3D Equal for Landscape Archaeology?
Until recently, Geographic Information Systems (GIS) have held center stage in the archaeologist’s geospatial toolkit. GIS has moved archaeologists
beyond the map—but into what? In the early years, criticisms voicing GIS as environmentally-deterministic were abundant. In the ensuing years what
methods and tool have archaeologists used to overcome these criticisms? How successful have we been? What shortcomings continue? New geospatial
technologies such as airborne lidar and aerial photogrammetry are allowing us to acquire inordinate amounts of georeferenced 3D data, but do such 3D
technologies help overcome this criticism? 3DGIS links georeferenced 3D models and visualizations to underlying data, allowing archaeologists to test
architectural reconstructions and perform subsequent spatial analyses in 3D. This three-dimensionality adds a ground-based perspective lacking in 2D GIS
maps to provide archaeologists a sense of mass and space more closely attuned with human perception. Ironically, 3D modeling and visualization can be
criticized as “culturally-deterministic”—reconstructing archaeological landscapes where hills, streams, and plants serve as a backdrop rather than active
agents in cultural transformation. This paper explores the strengths of GIS and 3D for landscape archaeology and offers some ideas on using 3DGIS to
intertwine environmental and cultural factors to work towards new geospatial approaches for archaeology.
Richardson, Lorna-Jane [71] see Ellenberger, Katharine
Richens, Lane (Brigham Young University), Richard Talbot (Brigham Young University) and Scott Ure (Brigham Young University)
[104]            On the Road Again: A Consideration of Travel Routes within the Late Fremont Regional System
Prehistoric travel routes were conduits of knowledge, goods, and people. Within regional systems they facilitated social integration and identity
maintenance. This was true for Late Fremont period groups, who primarily occupied the rich river valleys of the northern Colorado Plateau and eastern
Great Basin but who also spread across this vast region in smaller settlements. This paper focuses on identifying possible travel routes within the Late
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                373
Fremont regional system. We consider how these travel routes, largely shaped by environmental and socioeconomic factors, influenced Fremont regional
interaction.
Richie, Jillian [148] see Chisholm, Linda
Richter, Kim (Getty Research Institute)
[264]              Art and Interregional Interchange in the Huasteca
The Huasteca has long been portrayed as an isolated, peripheral culture of precolumbian Mesoamerica. However, recent archaeological and art-historical
research challenge this view. The artistic evidence from the Huasteca points to a prolonged cultural dialogue with neighbors along the Gulf Coast, as well
as to stylistic and iconographic affinities with Central Mexico, Oaxaca, and the Maya region. Archaeological excavations, especially at the site of Tamtoc, in
San Luis Potosi, have revealed a monumental urban center with an occupation spanning the Preclassic to Postclassic periods. Tamtoc’s Classic period
monumental sculptures reveal ties to Classic Veracruz. During the Postclassic period, artistic connections expand into Central America and along the Gulf
Coast extending to the Maya region and the American Southeast. Examples of Huastec artworks wherein these artistic similarities are manifested include
portable artworks, such as codex-style incised shell pectorals, bones, and polychrome vessels, and non-portable works, such as codex-style red-on-cream
murals and monumental anthropomorphic stone sculptures representing elite men and women. This evidence indicates that the Huastecs were active
participants in shaping the artistic vocabulary shared across Mesoamerica, while simultaneously maintaining their own regional identity.
Rick, Potts [13] see Brooks, Alison
Rick, Torben (Smithsonian Institution)
[296]              California’s Channel Islands as a Model System for Understanding the Historical Ecology of Islands
Islands around the world have served as important model systems for understanding a host of cultural and environmental issues. Here, we synthesize our
long-term research program on the historical ecology and archaeology of California’s Channel Islands. Drawing on zooarchaeological, paleoethnobotanical,
genetic, stable isotope, and other datasets we document a 13,000 year sequence of human environmental interactions from coastal foragers to early
historical ranchers and modern conservationists. These data underscore the value of island archaeology for helping better understand contemporary
environmental issues and the conservation, management, and sustainability of island cultures and ecosystems.
[157]              Chair
Rick, John (Stanford University)
[178]              Brothers of Invention: Comparing Trends in Innovation in the New World Formative
Competition between Andean Formative centers seems to have stimulated rapid rates of innovation in technology, architecture, art, and behaviors such as
ritual. This in turn seems to reflect a significant change of the role and nature of religion as a force promoting or resisting change, introducing a motivation
for radical transformation within a background of conservative, heavily tradition-based practices. These processes are particularly evident in recent
investigations in Chavin de Huantar, and may well be evident in the record of other Central Andean formative sites. This raises the question of whether
belief-driven transformations of the New World formative in general reflect a process of competitive stimulation in which 'convincing systems', to be
successful, needed to create unique and differentiated material and experiential repertoire to aid in attracting cult membership. This paper raises the
question of whether Andean and Mesoamerican formative societies show parallels in the role of innovation and competition, further complicated by issues
of emulation and imitation.
Ridge, William (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[166]              Alepotrypa Cave and Regional Networks of Southern Greece
During the Final Neolithic (4500–3200 B.C.E.) there appears to have been a major restructuring in the regional settlement networks of southern Greece.
This included a general shift in activity from the north to the south with a significant increase in the number of of small, short lived sites in southern Greece,
particularly in coastal locations. Trade and exchange also appears to have intensified, with exotic materials moved further and more frequently than in
previous periods. Alepotrypa Cave, and its associated open-air site of Ksagounaki, reflect these processes, being ideally situated in Diros Bay and with the
recovery of notable imported raw material and finished goods.
 In this paper, I examine Alepotrypa in its regional and historic context in order to explain the relationship between the local processes that occurred in
Diros Bay with the larger regional processes that changed the social landscape of southern Greece. I also explore the structure and function of the regional
interaction networks that developed in the Aegean and how they related to changes throughout the macro-region during the 4th millennium.
Riebe, Danielle (University of Illinois at Chicago) and Attila Gyucha (State University of New York at Buffalo)
[166]              A Home Above the Bay: A Neolithic Domestic Structure on the Mani Peninsula
Over the past five years, the Diros Project has conducted multi-disciplinary investigations in Diros Bay near the modern day town of Pyrgos Dirou on the
Mani Peninsula, Southern Greece. Excavations aimed at gaining a better understanding of the chronological and functional relationship between the
Neolithic Alepotrypa Cave and the contemporary external settlement on the nearby promontory. Excavation trenches were selected based on preliminary
data recovered through surface collection and remote sensing techniques. In Block 2, a part of a stone building was revealed. Radiocarbon samples date
the structure to the Final Neolithic making this structure a rarity in the archaeological record of Southern Greece. This paper details the results of the
excavations on the domestic structure and the features found in association. The data will be contextualized within a broader regional perspective and
particular attention will be given to the organization and use of space.
Riede, Felix (Dept. of Culture and Society, Aarhus University) and Erick Robinson (Department of Anthropology, University of Wyoming)
[218]              Developing Intra- and Inter-Continental Research Networks for the Study of Human Adaptations to Lateglacial and Early Holocene
                   Environmental Changes
Over the last decade, our knowledge of human-environment interaction in prehistory has been radically transformed. It has become increasingly apparent
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  374
that prehistoric humans had to cope with a vast range of different environmental changes that had their own particular temporal and spatial dynamics.
These changes ranged from millennial- and continental-scale ecosystem turnover and sea-level rise, to centennial- and hemispheric-scale abrupt climate
change events, to extreme events such as tsunamis and volcanic eruptions. The complexities of the potential impacts of these changes on human
societies cross-cut traditional regional and temporal research specialisms. Continued advancement of our knowledge therefore requires researchers to
come together at intra- and inter-continental scales to share knowledge, data, and build multi-scalar models to investigate the variability of human
adaptations to different kinds of palaeoenvironmental change. The International Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA) Humans and Biosphere
Commission has recently funded a project that takes on this challenge: “Cultural and palaeoenvironmental changes in Late Glacial to Middle Holocene
Europe—gradual or sudden?” We will present results from this project and discuss the development of an INQUA International Focus Group that will focus
on these questions across the Northern Hemisphere.
Riegert, Dorothy Ann [235] see Drake, Stacy
Riehm, Grace (University of Alabama)
[8]              Evaluation of the Pensacola Relative Ceramic Chronology by Percentage Stratigraphy Seriation
In parts of the U.S. southeast, including south Alabama, relative ceramic chronologies for prehistoric archaeological sequences are based on descriptive
type-variety systems of classification that have remained unevaluated by seriation methods. This project assesses the chronological utility of the type-
variety classification for Pensacola archaeological culture ceramics through the application of seriation methods to collections from three extensively
excavated sites on Mobile Bay. Chronological utility is defined here by application of the popularity principle with evidence of introduction, increase, and
decrease in ceramic type-varieties through time as ordered by stratigraphic superposition. Lyman et al. (1998) refer to this combined method of frequency
seriation and stratigraphic sequence as percentage stratigraphy, which establishes a relative chronology based on a testable stylistic progression of
ceramic types through time. Decorated pottery from Shell Bank (1BA81), Andrew’s Place (1MB1), and D’Olive Creek (1BA196 and 1BA251) was sorted by
previously established type-varieties and a seriation performed using the Excel macro created by Tim Hunt and Carl Lipo. Through this methodology, type-
varieties of chronological utility can be identified and those that lack chronological utility can be rejected. The results of the seriation are presented and
used to evaluate the chronological utility of the current Pensacola ceramic phase chronology.
Riel-Salvatore, Julien (Université de Montréal) and Fabio Negrino (Università di Genova)
[211]            Volcanic Winter and Population Replacements? Forager Adaptations in Liguria during OIS 3 across the Middle-Upper Paleolithic Transition
There has been a lot of focus on the disruptive effects of dramatic climatic shifts on Paloelithic population dynamics, but the topic of cultural continuity
across such events has been less intensely investigated. This paper presents data from some of our recent research projects in Liguria, especially from the
site of Riparo Bombrini, to investigate the nature of the apparent resilience of the proto-Aurignacian in the face of events like the Phlegrean Fields eruption
and the reasons why the Mousterian disappeared at the site in spite of this phenomenon not being strictly associated with a pronounced climatic shift.
Rieth, Christina (New York State Museum)
[2]              Settlement Archaeology and the Role of Persistent Places among Forager Societies in Eastern New York
The settlement system used by the prehistoric populations of Eastern New York is one in which forager societies often reoccupied the same landscape
creating persistent places. Evidence of this can be seen in a variety of single and multi-component occupations that span the Late Archaic and Transitional
(4,000–1,500 B.C.) and Early Woodland Periods (1,000 B.C. –A.D. 200). Artifact assemblages found at these sites suggest that the site’s occupants used
a diverse array of tools manufactured from local and non-local lithic and ceramic materials. This paper examines a group of sites located along the
Cobleskill Creek and its tributaries in western Schoharie County. Such sites are patterned in their arrangement and appear in what are arguably strategic
locations along the waterway. Here, I discuss settlement of this landscape, and its potential to contribute to our understanding of foraging behavior in
eastern New York. The locations are compared with similar persistent places in the adjacent river valleys.
Rieth, Timothy (IARII) and J. Stephen Athens (IARII)
[296]            Late Holocene Human Expansion into Near and Remote Oceania: A Bayesian Model-Based Comparison of the Chronologies of the
                 Mariana Islands and Lapita Settlement
Carson and colleagues have argued that the settlement of the Mariana Islands ~3500 cal B.P. marks the first major human expansion in the Western
Pacific during the late Holocene. If this settlement date is correct, it would be the initial population movement beyond the Near Oceania and Island
Southeast Asia region, an area occupied by modern humans for 40,000+ years. The previous consensus gave precedence to the rapid Lapita expansion
throughout Near Oceania at generally the same time, followed a few centuries later by an explosive migration into Remote Oceania. However, the order
and timing of the Mariana and Near Oceania Lapita migrations remains a hypothesis to be tested. Most previous analyses relied on ad hoc interpretations
of a few calibrated radiocarbon dates, often from unidentified charcoal that may contain inbuilt age. Such an approach lends itself to the creation of a
subjective, or at least imprecise and potentially inaccurate, chronology. To evaluate the proposed temporal priority of the Mariana Islands in a statistically
rigorous manner, we created a Bayesian calibration model based on early settlement data from both regions. The model results are discussed and we
suggest ways in which extant data can be improved through future research.
Riethmuller, Douglas
[85]             A Comparison of Sherd Paste and Clay Composition at the Ripley Site (Nysm 2490) Using X-Ray Fluorescence & X-Ray Diffraction
The aim of this study is to attempt to source ceramic sherds recovered by Mercyhurst Archaeological Institute from the Ripley site in Ripley, New York.
Based on data gleaned primarily from XRF analysis, visually as well as statistically, the clay’s elemental composition, while not an exact match with the
ceramic’s composition, shows only minor variation and sufficient similarity to conclude that the clay used to form most of the sampled ceramics was
sourced locally.
 Sourcing was accomplished through the emplacement of 15 auger probes to recover clay from the site. The clay was prepared for analysis and analyzed
by pXRF and XRD. A 24 sherd sample of the ceramic assemblage collected from Ripley in 2013 was subjected to pXRF analysis as well as XRD analysis.
The relative percentages of 17 selected elements were then compared from ceramics and clay, as were the mineralogical data derived from the XRD.
This study will add to the knowledge of the site by identifying a location of the raw material for a selection of sherds found at the site. It also will
demonstrate the efficacy of pXRF and inefficacy of XRD for ceramics sourcing.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            375
Rifkin, Riaan (Centre for Microbial Ecology and Genomics (CMEG))
[13]               Ethnoarchaeology and the Symbolic and Functional Exploitation of Ochre during the South African Middle Stone Age
Given that red ochre is a ubiquitous artefact in Middle Stone Age (MSA) contexts throughout southern Africa, the habitual exploitation of ochre has been
widely interpreted as evidence for symbolism, a proxy for the origin of language and as a key element of ‘symbolic’ and modern human behaviour.
Although evolutionary explanations generally agree that ochre and the products of its processing played a significant role in the adaptive strategies of early
modern humans, they differ substantially in the functions assigned to it. My research aims to address the following questions: Did the various symbolic and
functional applications of red ochre provide adaptive benefits to MSA Homo sapiens societies, and can ethnographic and ethnoarchaeological research
provide insight into the possible prehistoric functions of red ochre?
Rigaud, Jean-Philippe [278] see Franklin, Jay
Riley, Tim (Prehistoric Museum @ USU Eastern)
[63]               Poorly Provenienced Perishables at the USU Eastern Prehistoric Museum: New Directions for Old Utah Collections
The Utah State University Eastern Prehistoric Museum in Price, Utah contains an impressive collection of textiles and other perishable artifacts from
Eastern Utah. Many of these artifacts were donated by private individuals early in the museum’s history and have very limited information on their
discovery and provenience. Despite these limitations, these items can become much more than striking art objects displayed to the public. Recent efforts
have focused on expanding the useful data available for these collections, including radiocarbon dating and botanical identification of the materials used in
manufacture. The long-term goal of this project is to reincorporate these objects, detached from context, into an understanding of past human lifeways in
Eastern Utah by providing a temporal provenience and detailed information on their manufacture. This ongoing effort has already produced some
engaging results. A headdress manufactured from a Bighorn sheep cranium, horn sheaths, olivella shell beads, and milkweed cordage was dated to 900
years before present. This new data corroborates the stylistic age determination of the shell beads and has led to further research into the cultural affinity
and authenticity of this object.
Riley, Jenny (Indiana University)
[156]              Possible Evidence of Sloth Butchery: Results from a Faunal Analysis of Padre Nuestro Cavern, Dominican Republic
Between 2005 and 2010, dive teams from the Indiana University Bloomington Center for Underwater Science performed surface collections of the entrance
chamber to Padre Nuestro Cavern, a submerged freshwater limestone cavern located in the East National Park in the southeastern peninsula of the
Dominican Republic. They extracted Chican ostionoid ceramics indicating use of the cave by the Taino culture (ca. A.D. 1000–1492), Casimiroid lithics
indicative of the Archaic culture (ca. 6000–500 B.C.), and faunal remains including extinct sloth (Parocnus serus, Acratocnus ye), extinct platyrrhine
monkey (Antillothris bernensis), and various other terrestrial and marine taxa. This paper presents the results of the faunal analysis, suggesting which taxa
were deposited in an archaeological context, and discusses the bone surface modifications present on numerous sloth bones that may represent evidence
for butchery by Archaic groups.
[156]              Chair
Rincon Mautner, Carlos
[294]              Seats and Domains of Sociopolitical and Sacred Power: Ritual Cave Use in the Southern Mexican Highlands
Numerous caves in the Southern Mexican Highlands are found in remote locations far from settlements and presumably along boundaries between what
were once Classic and/or Late Post-Classic period polities. These caves were recognized as unique features of the ritual landscape and differed in terms
of location, difficulty of access, and entity venerated. While some caves seem to have had a more local, even domestic use, others were of inter-regional
renown. Influenced by socioeconomic and political factors they seem to have varied widely in terms of their historical and cultural trajectories and in their
impacts on collective identity and behavior. Determining which centers of power would have benefited from the sacred power of these caves, the nature of
the ritual ceremonies performed in their interiors, the manner in which these, as well as long-distance pilgrimages to cave shrines would have informed and
affected local beliefs and ritual life, and how access was controlled, are among the thematic questions addressed in this presentation.
Ringle, William [26] see Gallareta Negron, Tomas
Ringle, William (Davidson College) and Gabriel Tun Ayora (Universidad Autonoma de Yucatan)
[127]              Experiencing Yaxhom: Materiality, Memory, and Monumentality in the Puuc Hills of Yucatan
Research conducted at the ancient Maya site of Yaxhom has identified very early monumental architecture next to one of the most fertile tracts in the Puuc
region of northern Yucatan. A third field season, reported on here, carried out further mapping and testing of the urban center to determine the extent of
accompanying Formative architecture. We wished to test whether the platform served to mark place for a population with minimal investment in residential
architecture or whether it formed part of a larger complex of mounds, suggesting it was the product of a more complex and stratified community. A further
goal was to assess how the early monumental core was appropriated by the Late Classic community that grew up around it, potentially revealing political
strategies of the period and the formation of community memory.
Ringle , William [127] see May, Rossana
Rios, Jorge (Centro INAH Oaxaca)
[231]              Arqueología y manejo patrimonial en San Pablo Villa de Mitla, Oaxaca.
La zona arqueológica de Mitla ha sido en los últimos años una fuente de información arqueológica y paradigma de la conservación y manejo. Su
desarrollo paralelo a las políticas publicas culturales del Estado Mexicano ha derivado no solo en un sitio arqueológico abierto al público sino una serie de
eventos sociales y culturales registrados en libros y artículos, que hablan de una interacción de la comunidad local de manera profunda con su patrimonio.
Este trabajo pretende mostrar el desarrollo de los trabajos arqueológicos de Investigación y Conservación al paralelo de las acciones de manejo
patrimonial que se han desarrollado.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 376
Rios Allier, Jorge [231] see Corbett, Jack
Ripp, Naomi (University of Colorado-Dever)
[236]              Burial Practices of the Teuchitlán Tradition and Changes Through Time: A taphonomic Approach
 Are there changes in burial practices of the Teuchitlán Tradition over time, and can any of these potential changes be identified? The data used in this
analysis of burial practice was gathered from the 45 Teuchitlán Tradition burials housed at the Centro Interpretativo Guachimontones in Teuchitlán, Jalisco,
Mexico. The osteology collection spans from the Late Formative Tequila II phase (350 B.C.–100 A.D.) through the Late Postclassic Atemajac II phase
(1400–1600). The analysis of the burials was done through a taphonomic study of the skeletal remains within the burials. Data on burial practices come
from analyzing the postmortem taphonomic conditions. This analysis can provide information on topics such as whether burials were primary or secondary,
if the remains were buried immediately or left exposed for a time, etc.
Rippee, Kassandra (Coquille Indian Tribe)
[29]               Kilkich Youth Corp: Tribal Youth Taking an Active Role in Historic Preservation
Tribal Historic Preservation Officers are responsible for the preservation and management of their Tribe’s cultural resources. For the Coquille Indian Tribe,
that means engaging the community in the protection, preservation, and maintenance of these traditional resources. The Coquille Tribal Historic
Preservation Office connects with the community in a number of ways, the most important of which is through its Kilkich Youth Corp. The Kilkich Youth
Corp is a tribal employment and enrichment program that provides tribal and community youth with opportunities to learn and experience Coquille tribal
culture through mentorship and stewardship. Youth in this program participate in a variety of cultural activities such as archaeological investigations, regalia
making, plant identification, and gathering and preparation of traditional plants, as well as public outreach and education to name a few. Youth engagement
in cultural activities and preservation efforts early and often ensures the continued survival of the Tribe, its culture and its history through its most valuable
resource - its youth.
Rissolo, Dominique [20] see Vaughan, Andrew
Rissolo, Dominique (University of California, San Diego)
[294]              A Reappraisal of Postclassic Maya Effigy Censers in the Cave Context: Evidence from the Central Coastal Region of Quintana Roo,
                   Mexico
Like the subterranean construction and use of ancient Maya shrines and altars, the presence of incense burners in caves provides unequivocal evidence of
ritual practice. Effigy censers, particularly those of the Chen Mul Modeled ceramic type, were locally produced and widely used across the northern
lowlands and have been reported in contexts within architectural precincts at a number of Postclassic Maya centers. The use of such censers in
ceremonies involving deity veneration was most likely, given the range of Maya gods represented in effigy form. Ongoing research in caves of the central
coastal region of Quintana Roo has revealed the common association of Chen Mul Modeled effigy censers, particularly in the form of Chaak, with
Postclassic shrines and altars in caves. These censers appear to have been part of a ritual assemblage associated with Chaak and were likely integral to
the performance of rain rites in caves throughout the region.
Ritchison, Brandon (University of Georgia)
[137]              Responding to Regional Collapse: A Late Mississippian Community on the Georgia Coast
Communities are social fulcrums, situated within multiple scales of interactivity. Understanding the discursive relationship between regions and households
through the lens of the community can allow for a better understanding of social transformations. In the decades preceding 1400 C.E., chiefdoms in the
Savannah River Valley collapsed and the region became depopulated. Settlement evidence suggests large scale population movements from the valley to
the Georgia Coast, with significant social changes occurring among coastal groups concomitant with this movement. Data from intensive shovel test
surveys on and near Sapelo Island, Georgia demonstrate how households and communities reacted to and
engendered these regional shifts.
Ritter, Johanna [95] see Gronenborn, Detlef
Rivals, Florent [278] see Rosell, Jordi
Rivas, Alexander (Washington University in St. Louis) and Carlos Efrain Tox (Universidad de San Carlos de Guatemala)
[4]                Predictive Modeling and the Ancient Maya Landscape
The use of GIS-based analyses has been increasing in archaeology over several years, including predictive modeling from digital elevation models
(DEMs). Critics of these methods suggest that these computational approaches leave no room for human agency, and can create improper landscape
analyses. However, these methods can be properly used when operating in well-defined theoretical frameworks and correct scale. In this paper, we
present recent ground survey data and ethnoarchaeological methods in a GIS to demonstrate how the Maya were able to conduct perennial inland canoe
travel during the wet and dry seasons in Peten and Alta Verapaz, Guatemala. This approach shows how predictive modeling can challenge conventional
ideas on human interaction with the physical and social landscape among the ancient Maya, specifically in regards to hydrological features, seasonality,
and alternative routes.
Rivas, Scott (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[9]                Developing Demographic Proxies for Archaic Faunal Database Integration
In conjunction with multi-scalar integrative faunal research on the use of aquatic resources by Archaic period hunter-gatherers, the EAFWG has been
required to focus on both environmental and demographic reconstructions for both specific locales and larger regions within the interior of the North
American Eastern Woodlands. Although the importance of social and ethnic factors has increasingly been recognized, both environmental change and
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             377
variability and human population growth and aggregation have been cited as explanations for spatial and temporal variation in the intensity with which
aquatic fauna were utilized by Archaic people. However, reconstruction of human demographic variability has not been consistently considered across the
region nor have methods of estimating demographic change among hunter-gatherers been fully explored. Archaeological site file data, although
incomplete and inadequate, must be the basic source of information on population growth and aggregation. In this poster, I review possible approaches to
these problems and report on our pilot study of demographic proxies. It is our contention that as archaeologists increasingly address macro-scale research
projects, new methodological approaches must be developed.
Rivas, Scott [90] see Napoleon, Taylor
Rivas Romero, Javier [179] see Poot, Paulina
Rivas-Tello, Daiana (McMaster University) and Andrew Roddick (McMaster University)
[41]              Finding a Middle Ground: Paste Analysis by way of a USB Microscope in the Lake Titicaca Basin, Bolivia
Ceramic pastes in the Titicaca Basin reflect shifting pottery production practices across space and time. Yet paste groups are not very standardized,
making it difficult to compare ceramic pastes between sites, explore regional pottery production, social interactions, economy, and broader ecological and
social landscapes of the past. This poster presents results from ongoing research employing a Dino-lite digital USB microscope in paste analysis and its
value compared to petrographic analysis. Due to cost, time, and level of experience, most projects cannot petrographically analyze pastes. A USB
microscope can measure the size, shape and abundance of particular inclusions more accurately than a hand lens. The digital USB microscope is
portable, affordable and time efficient, allowing for analysis to be conducted in the field. This tool is being implemented to compare two common Late
Formative Period (200 B.C.–A.D. 500) pastes from two regions in Bolivia, the Taraco Peninsula and the Upper Desaguadero Valley. This method is
promising for future ceramic analysis, as it encourages standardization and inter-site comparisons. Ultimately, this tool provides quick yet detailed insights
into past social landscapes.
Rivera Infante, Arturo (Instituto de Estudios Peruanos)
[283]             Panquilma’s Architecture: Ideologies Involved in the Construction Process
This paper explores the ideologies involved in the process of building structures utilized by people of elite and non-elite statuses. The 2015 excavations of
compounds at Panquilma revealed a range of domestic and ritual activities. The data recorded suggest that local craft production was embedded in
particular religious meanings and/or status paraphernalia related to specific pre-Columbian Late Intermediate Period societies. The association of
destruction and regeneration of materials, seen in the modification of buildings, and material patterns found under floors, are related to Andean ideology
regarding construction.
Rivera-Collazo, Isabel [14] see Sánchez-Morales, Lara
Rivera-Collazo, Isabel (University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras)
[220]             Environmental Change and the Social Context of Human Adaptation Strategies during the Archaic Period in the Caribbean
The connection between environmental change and social response is complex because change occurs on multiple inter-related factors, human decisions
are filtered by social buffers, and the rate and scale of environmental change differs from scale of human decision-making. In this presentation I consider
the rate of coastal landscape change before the mid-Holocene affecting human settlement patterns in the Caribbean, evaluate traditional settlement
patterns in the context of maritime culture, and investigate human response to a sudden, local higher-precipitation event at the beginning of the Late
Holocene. The analysis of Archaic contexts in Puerto Rico suggests that the picture we have built of early settlement patterns is based on very incomplete
data, and that adaptation strategies to climate change are not monolithic, even within the same period. Multiple responses can enhance resilience, as
social support can continue through alliances and exchanges, strengthening social bonds that can help buffer catastrophes.
[100]             Discussant
Rivers Cofield, Sara [265] see Morehouse, Rebecca
Rizzo, Florencia (Licenciada), Sabrina Leonardt (INAPL/CONICET), Amber Johnson (Truman State University) and Vivian Scheinsohn
(INAPL/CONICET-UBA)
[94]              Appliyng Environmental and Etnographic Frames of Reference Northwestern Patagonia, Argentina
 In this work, we apply the environmental and ethnographic frames of referenceconstructed by Binford (2001) and calculated in EnvCalc2.1 in order to
generate and evaluate archaeological hypothesis for the central-western area of Chubut Province (Patagonia, Argentina), an area in which archaeological
research has recently started. Patagonia is an elongatedterritory located between 39º W and 55º S in Southern South America. By its shape, it receives an
important oceanic influence which determines the lack of subpolar conditions, tundra and permafrost, expected by its latitude. The regional climate is
determined by the westerly winds coupled with precipitation inducedby the western flanks of the Andean Cordillera [by a] 'rainshadow effect'. As a
consequence, a strong east-west gradient is produced, with annual precipitation ranging from of4000 mm on the western slope to 200 in the east. In our
study area this gradient determines two biomes:the steppe, represented by Genoa Valley and the forest represented by the Pico Valley. Both valleys are
connected and situated at similar latitude.The hunter-gatherer frames of reference are used to develop hypotheses regarding expected variation
insubsistence, mobility, and housing across the study region. These expectations will be compared with the archaeological evidence from the region.
Rizzuto, Branden (University of Toronto)
[205]             Naipes, Standardized Middle Sicán (ca. C.E. 1000) Sheetmetal Objects: New Insights from Archaeometric Studies
This poster highlights emerging results of the ongoing study that aims to further characterize the technological strategies, standardization practices, and
social relations associated with the production of naipes during the Middle Sicán (900–1100 C.E.) period on the north coast of Peru. Initially conducted as
part of MSc. research under the supervision of J. Merkel, archaeometric (pXRF, SEM-EDXS) and metallographic (chemical etching, optical microscopy,
microhardness) analyses were carried out on thirty-one naipes—excavated by the Proyecto Arqueológico Sicán under the direction of I. Shimada—from
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               378
the sumptuous East Tomb of the Middle Sicán site of Huaca Loro, Peru. As analytical investigations of naipes have thus far been limited and either based
on the Sicán examples or wider surveys of different contexts, the current study represents the most intensive archaeometric and metallographic study of
naipes to date. Results suggest that naipes within a given bundle were produced from variable ore sources and compiled from multiple production events
based on their arsenic content and morphology, demonstrating that standardization practices were employed by observationally skilled artisans and that
the material properties of naipes conveyed important social meanings embedded in much larger Sicán value systems surrounding metal alloys.
Robb, Matthew (de Young Museum)
[58]             Ancient American Art at the Saint Louis Art Museum
In 2013, the Saint Louis Art Museum presented the first major re-installation of its collection of art of the ancient Americas in nearly thirty years. This paper
will present some observations on the challenges presented by a collection largely defined by a single donor, Morton D. May. May's donations coincided
with the high water mark of collecting so-called "primitive" art in the 1950s and 60s. But there is also a history of collecting and displaying pre-Columbian
art in Saint Louis before May, including a group of Mimbres vessels from the notorious Fain White King and material the Archaeological Institute of
America's sponsored excavations at Quirigua. Additionally, Saint Louis lies in the domain of Cahokia. Despite being closer to home, many public and
private collections of Mississippian material in the region have received relatively little attention. How do art museums balance the issues presented by
archaeological material with complicated collection histories from all these places and times with the need and desire to educate the museum-going public?
Robb, John (Cambridge University)
[248]            Moderator
[72]             Discussant
Robbins, Allison [216] see Follensbee, Billie
Roberts, Theodore (PaleoWest)
[90]             Creating Space in New York City: Historic Landbuilding in Brooklyn
Brooklyn’s Floyd Bennett Field was the first municipal airport in New York City (1928) before its use by the U.S. military until the Vietnam War. Since 1972,
the field has been administered by the National Park Service within the Gateway National Recreation Area- the first of its kind in an urban setting. The
landform supporting Floyd Bennett Field is almost entirely anthropogenic having been created by numerous landfill episodes dating from 1878 to 1941.
These efforts used two general categories of parent material- natural and cultural. Combining natural landfill (sand from Jamaica Bay) and cultural landfill
(historic trash and industrial debris from across NYC), city engineers combined Barren Island with several other small islands to create Floyd Bennet Field.
This poster examines the processes, records, and materials comprising the archaeological record of this part of Brooklyn.
[33]             Discussant
Roberts, Jerod L. [131] see Lindsay, Audrey
Roberts, Jerod (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center), Victoria Muñoz (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center)
and Carolyn Boyd (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center)
[131]            How to Capture a Photograph worth a Thousand words: Photographic Documentation of Rock Art in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands of
                 Texas
Digital photography provides increasingly sophisticated applications that are invaluable to rock art researchers. Shumla Archaeological Research and
Education Center relies heavily on many of these applications to document, preserve, and analyze rock art—such as 3D modeling through Structure from
Motion (SfM) photogrammetry, multi-focal stacking, color management, and digital field microscopy for stratigraphic analyses. Depending on which
applications are used, there are important considerations that should be addressed to ensure the collection and management of accurate visual data. This
presentation will discuss some of these applications and how they are being implemented in the extensive photographic documentation of one of the most
complex and threatened rock art sites in North America—the pictographic mural of Rattlesnake Canyon.
Roberts, Victoria (Shumla Archaeological Research and Education Center), Jerod Roberts (Shumla Archaeological Research and Education
Cente) and Carolyn Boyd (Shumla Archaeological Research and Education Cente)
[131]            Getting Up-Close and Personal with Pecos River Style Rock Art
Pecos River style rock art in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands of southwest Texas and Coahuila, Mexico is arguably one of the most famous and complex
pictograph styles in North America, if not the world. Thirty-two radiocarbon assays obtained from 19 figures range from 4200 ± 90 to 1465 ± 50 RCYBP.
Many characteristics of the style have remained almost unchanged throughout that time. What attributes define the Pecos River style, however, are still
debated, despite a seemingly iconic appearance. Shumla has been collecting attribute data for seven years and entering these data into a searchable rock
art database. We can now begin to identify diagnostic attributes for the Pecos River style assemblage, as well as detect inter- and intra-site patterning of
these attributes. Chemical, microscopic, and attribute analyses converge to clarify what defines a figure as Pecos River style.
Roberts, Patrick (Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the History of Art, University of Oxford)
[295]            Introducing Forests of Plenty: biological, temporal, regional, and methodological diversity in human rainforest adaptations
In the 1980s, anthropologists argued that tropical rainforests were unattractive environments for long-term human navigation, subsistence and occupation.
Yet, far from being pristine ecologies, the rainforests of Africa, Asia, Melanesia, and the Americas are increasingly being shown to have shaped, and been
shaped by our species from at least 45,000 years ago, if not earlier. However, in many instances, archaeologists and anthropologists have concluded that
early humans were occupying and using ‘rainforests’ without attempting to examine and detail the diverse nature of the inhabited ecologies, or human
adaptations to them. Here we introduce the ‘Forests of Plenty’ symposium that, by bringing together specialists in numerous regions and time periods, aims
to compare global human adaptations to tropical forests across prehistoric, historic and ethnographic timescales. By highlighting the applicability of
developing methodologies in the fields of modern risk management, linguistics, history, genetics, biomolecular science, and archaeology to the study of
human rainforest demographies, adaptations, and impacts, we highlight the more refined research questions driving increased understandings of our
species’ rainforest histories. We introduce this approach by drawing on our own multidisciplinary and multi-period work in the rainforests of South Asia and
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 379
Melanesia.
[295]             Discussant
[295]             Chair
Robinson, Tessa [47] see Baquedano, Elizabeth
Robinson, Erick (University of Wyoming), H. Jabran Zahid (Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Harvard-Smi), Bryan N. Shuman (University
of Wyoming) and Robert L. Kelly (University of Wyoming)
[55]              Holocene Climate Change and Human Population Growth Rates
Statistical analysis of large databases of radiocarbon dates enables research on the processes regulating human population growth rates. Recent analysis
of summed probability distributions of dates from the entire states of Colorado and Wyoming has found that both states had similar long-term growth rates
of .04% for most of the Holocene. This growth rate was the same for Australia, Europe, and North America throughout much of the Holocene. Similar
growth rates between different environments and non-agricultural/agricultural societies suggests that long-term population growth was regulated by non-
local processes such as global climate or endogenous biological mechanisms. On the other hand, short-term deviations from this long-term growth rate
were regionally variable. This suggests that long-term and short-term population growth rates were regulated by different factors at different spatial scales.
We investigate this apparent scalar variability by comparing the different millennial-scale trends in the summed probability distributions with regional and
global paleonvironmental data.
[218]             Chair
Robinson, Margaret
[111]             The Hopewell Problem: A Discussion of Digital Methods for Legacy Collections at Hopewell Mound Group
The Hopewell culture was a unique explosion of cultural practices characterized by monumental earthwork construction, elaborate funerary practices and
extensive exchange networks of exotic materials. The presence of these monumental burial mounds and earthwork structures on the Midwest landscape
captured the interest of the earliest American archaeologists resulting in extensive archaeological excavations in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
century. The vast legacy collections that resulted from these excavations are plagued by confusion and layers of historical complexity. The Hopewell
collection is one example of how this lack of transparency has driven researchers away from tackling the inconsistencies of the archaeological data which
has limited the usability of the collection. Replacing large monographs, digital databases and visual representations are the future of archaeological
investigation and offer a unique perspective into interpreting the Hopewell legacy collections. This project aims to recreate the Hopewell Mound Group
archaeological site by reorienting the legacy collections into a digital platform increasing visibility of the archaeological record to stimulate further research
interest through visual exploration. The purpose of this poster is to outline the challenges of reconstituting and interpreting legacy collections within a digital
medium and to provide some methodology for mitigating those challenges.
Robinson, Mark (University of Exeter)
[167]             Dual Organisation and Mortuary Ritual: Architectural and Archaeobotanical Evidence for the Southern Proto-Je, Brazil and Argentina
Circa A.D. 1000 the Mound and Enclosure Complex (MEC) began appearing on the landscape of southern Brazil and Misiones, Argentina. The MEC mark
a distinct change in funerary practice reflecting increasing complexity in social structure. Modern southern Je groups exhibit dual social organisation,
characterised by exogamic, patrilineal moieties, dividing all beings, objects, and natural phenomena into two cosmological categories. Archaeological
research is beginning to identify the early evolution and precursors to these later social forms. Survey and excavation of an MEC in Santa Catarina suggest
dual social structure is manifested in the funerary landscape at multiple levels, from the plateau level to internal mound division. Charcoal identifications
from earth ovens at PM01 in Misiones, Argentina, reveal highly specific species selection for ceremonial wood fuel that is determined by moiety
membership. These finding provide insight into past social organisation and advocate methodologies that can target these phenomena.
Robinson, Jess (Vermont State Archaeologist), John Crock (University of Vermont) and Wetherbee Dorshow (University of New Mexico)
[218]             Paleoindian uses of Maritime Environments in the Far Northeast
This paper explores the Paleoindian uses of the Champlain Sea (an inland arm of the Atlantic Ocean) over the course of the Paleoindian period.
Environmental Changes that may have precipitated changes in subsistence and settlement patterns will also be discussed. Finally, scant but intriguing
information from the Atlantic Continental shelf in the Far Northeastern region will be used as a proxy to explore and evaluate the settlement patterns
demonstrated farther inland.
Robison, Jade (College of Wooster), Olivia Navarro-Farr (College of Wooster) and P. Nick Kardulias (College of Wooster)
[145]             Phoenician Colonization of Nuragic Sardinia: A World-Systems Model of Periphery-Semiperiphery Interaction
The arrival of the Bronze Age (2300–1000 B.C.) ushered in many changes in the Mediterranean, including the emergence of the Nuragic culture on the
island of Sardinia (Italy). The Nuragic culture takes its name from the nuraghi, the more than 7,000 dry-stone towers that dominate the landscape. The
Nuragic population engaged in an extensive trade network within the Mediterranean throughout the Middle and Late Bronze Age (1700–1000 B.C.), trading
with Mycenae, Cyprus, and mainland Italy. Contact with foreigners intensified the development of a common cultural identity and the emergence of an elite
group. Subsequently, during the Early Iron Age, the Phoenicians also established colonies on Sardinia. This resulted in the incorporation of the island into
an intensive trade network that originated in the Near East. In this poster, I argue this network can best be understood from a world-systems perspective.
Specifically, I discuss my investigation of Nuragic-Phoenician relations utilizing a proposed world-systems model of periphery-semiperiphery interaction. I
demonstrate how the strategic use of bronzetti, statuary, and specialized architecture by Nuragic elite reflected their ability to negotiate their incorporation
in that ancient world-system.
Robles, Fernando [26] see Andrews, Anthony
Robles , Nelly M. [231] see Vera, Jaime
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             380
Robles Garcia, Nelly (Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia)
[231]            Monte Alban arqueologico y Monte Alban social
El estatus de Monte Alban como sitio de Patrimonio Mundial implica su manejo adecuado en la vida contemporánea. Aunque la tendencia general sería
esperar que el sitio sea reconocido en su imagen histórica-social por los sectores académicos, económicos y los medios como un ejemplo de buenas
prácticas, la realidad nos mueve a considerar como prioridad un esquema de gestión que tienda hacia una imagen de inclusion de las comunidades
alrededor del sitio.
Esta ponencia contrasta la imagen arqueológica de Monte Alban, con la imagen de la complejidad social en la que este sitio sobrevive, para dar pie a una
propuesta de desarrollo para el futuro, en la que la participación comunitaria se percibe como una realidad impostergable.
Rocek, Tom [168] see Anderson, Andrea
Rocha, Bruna (UCL - UFOPA)
[23]             Interactions Across the Frontier? Exploring Interpretations of Ceramic Production and Design on the Upper Tapajós
Excavations at ADE sites on the Upper Tapajós River, south of the Amazon, have unearthed ceramics that point to the existence of a cultural frontier along
the Tapajós River’s rapids. At Sawre Muybu (SM) and Pajaú, on the river’s right bank, both fine and coarse pottery present techno-stylistic modes—
including the use of either quartz sand or sponge spicule (cauixí) temper, of applied and punctuated fillets of clay and clay nubbins—that echo elements of
Lower Amazon and Orinocan ceramics belonging to the Incised and Punctuate Tradition (IPT) and Valloid series respectively, previously linked to the
expansion of speakers of Carib languages. As elsewhere in the wider region, one of the hallmarks of the material from SM is hybridity, pointing to
processes of local appropriation, although trade must also be considered. Further upstream, on the left bank of the Tapajós at Terra Preta do Mangabal
however, a different ceramic production grammar prevails overall, with overwhelming use of cauixí, nicked rims and the frequent application of parallel
incisions that at times form lozenges, hypothesised to be related to speakers of macro-Tupian languages. Here, the few unequivocal IPT pieces apparently
bear testimony to the existence of exchange networks stretching north.
Rocha García, Raúl (Raúl Rocha G.) and Arturo Pascual Soto (Arturo Pascual Soto)
[154]            Gobernantes Y Cerámicas Ceremoniales Del Edificio De Las Columnas De El Tajín
Si hay algo que define el estatuto cultural del período Epiclásico en El Tajín, Veracruz, es la transición hacia modelos de gobierno que enfatizan la figura
del soberano como el centro indiscutible de las relaciones sociales de la época. Es a estos nuevos gobernantes a quienes debemos de atribuir en el punto
más alto de la antigua ciudad la edificación del Edificio de las Columnas y de su magnífico conjunto arquitectónico, además de la producción de un grupo
de vasijas negras de forma semiesférica y decoradas con escenas en relieve que suelen aparecer casi exclusivamente en este lugar del asentamiento. La
ponencia discute el período de su elaboración y el uso ceremonial que se les confirió de antiguo a tan singulares objetos.
Rochelo, Mark (Florida Atlantic University) and Donna Selch (Florida Atlantic University)
[7]              Analyzing Historically Significant Archeological Sites to 1800s Survey Plats of Southeast Florida
The landscape of southeast Florida has been dramatically altered over the past 150 years due to anthropogenic influences. The earliest, most detailed
surveys of this region were conducted by the U.S. Surveyor General Land Office from 1846–1870, with an extended survey and map production caused by
the American Civil War. These land plats were surveyed along the township and range to be used as the fundamental legal record for real estate for
southeast Florida. However, southeast Florida has been inhabited for thousands of years by pre-historic Native American tribes. Remnants of these
cultures have been observed and documented on maps, including the 1800s plats of which none known have been publicly geo-rectified. This research
includes geo-rectifying and mosaicking these hand-drawn maps, then digitizing the identified features, including archaeological sites, in ArcGIS. Combining
this data with previously identified and documented archaeological sites establishes a clearer image of historical native land use.
Rochelo, Mark [246] see Selch, Donna
Rock, Carolyn, Meggan Blessing (Florida Museum of Natural History), Nicole Cannarozzi (Florida Museum of Natural History), Arlene Fradkin
(Florida Atlantic University) and Michelle LeFebvre (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[7]              Reptiles Rule: Patterns of Prehistoric Consumption in the Interior of Southern Florida
This poster discusses patterns of prehistoric consumption in light of results from recent archaeological investigations at black earth middens in the interior
of southern Florida. The amount of faunal remains recovered from these sites may represent the largest single zooarchaeological project ever conducted
for this region. More than 350,000 animal bones were identified from six sites, whose occupation dates ranged from the Archaic to Historic periods.
Identified fauna revealed the overwhelming importance of reptiles, especially snakes and turtles, to the diet. Overall ratios of identified specimens by class
included 76 percent Reptilia (reptiles), 21 percent Actinopterygii (ray-finned fishes), 2 percent Amphibia (amphibians), 1 percent Mammalia (mammals), 0.4
percent Aves (birds), and 0.1 percent Chondrichthyes (cartilaginous fishes). Changes in consumption practices over time, as well as potential trading or
seasonal migration patterns, will be discussed.
Rock, Carolyn [164] see Manzano, Bruce
Rockman, Marcy (U.S. National Park Service) and Marissa Morgan (University of Maryland-College Park)
[191]            The NPS Cultural Resources Climate Change Impacts Table
The US National Park Service (NPS) is actively preparing for climate change and its current and potential effects across all of the cultural resources for
which it has responsibility for management and guidance. These include archeological resources, cultural landscape, ethnographic resources, museum
objects, and structures and buildings. However, the agency currently lacks data detailing how cultural resources will be affected by changing climates. To
address this gap in knowledge, the NPS Climate Change Response Program in collaboration with the Cultural Resources Partnerships, and Science
Directorate has prepared the NPS Cultural Resources Climate Change Impacts Table. This table provides detailed information exhibiting how climate
change can or may affect cultural resources, organized by major observable climate change phenomena (e.g., sea level rise, temperature change) across
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  381
each type of cultural resource. This will be an invaluable tool for park managers and NPS partners to identify both the dramatic and the subtle impacts in
order to prepare and plan for the continued protection, preservation, and documentation of resources in an uncertain future.
Rockwell, Heather (University of Wyoming)
[274]             Simulating Clovis Technological Diffusion
Explanations for the rapid appearance of Clovis technology across the North American landscape as a population migration. Detractors from this
hypothesis argue that the spread of Clovis more closely resembles the movement of a technology through a small, highly mobile population. Using a
computer simulation approach this paper explores the conditions under which it would be possible for such a technological spread to occur. This simulation
explores the requirements of population size, residential mobility and logistical mobility patterns in order to successfully spread Clovis technology
throughout North America. The results of this simulation suggest that under most mobility schemes it would be highly possible that Clovis could have
spread in such a manner.
Roddick, Andrew [41] see Rivas-Tello, Daiana
Roddick, Andrew (McMaster University) and John W. Janusek (Vanderbilt University )
[105]             Powerful Things: Stone Sculpture and Landscape Animacy in the Lake Titicaca Basin
Archaeologists working in the Lake Titicaca Basin have become accustomed to treating Formative material traits—whether a style of decorated pottery,
ritual architecture, or stone sculpture—as the “Yayamama Religious Tradition.” This term, originally defined by Sergio Chavez and Karen Mohr Chavez,
has become a shorthand to refer to what is presumed to be a common approach to ceremonialism across the Titicaca Basin (see also Chavez 2004). More
recently, scholars have associated it with the emergence of a new kind of leadership associated with the Late Formative around 200 B.C. Recent work
indicates substantial heterogeneity in sculptural practices and social landscapes during the Late Formative. In this paper we emphasize the material
imagery of sculptures recently discovered in a variety of contexts, including the southern (Khonkho Wankane and the Taraco Peninsula) and eastern
(Huata and Escoma) Lake Titicaca Basin. We argue that the power of Late Formative lithic materiality stemmed not from centralized authorities but from
local political centers and their attention to animate landscapes.
Rodell, Roland [258] see Green, William
Rodning, Christopher (Tulane University) and Jayur Mehta (Tulane University)
[60]              Resilience, Hierarchy, and the Native American Cultural Landscapes of the Yazoo Basin and the Mississippi Delta
Within the field of ecology, resilience is the capacity of an ecosystem to withstand change and to regenerate itself after disturbance. Adapted to the
archaeological study of past cultural systems, the concept of resilience refers to the capacity of a cultural system or a cultural landscape to endure change.
Archaeologists have primarily recognized resiliency in cultural systems of regions characterized by arid conditions, either permanently or periodically. This
paper considers prehistoric Native American settlement patterns and monumentality in the Yazoo Basin of Mississippi and the Mississippi River Delta of
southeastern Louisiana, where cultural practices and landscapes have been shaped largely by water, rather than aridity. Water has impacted the Yazoo
Basin and the Mississippi Delta in different ways, and those effects had different outcomes on the arrangements of monuments, settlements, and people
within Native American landscapes during prehistory. Our treatment of these topics and these study areas is guided by Carole Crumley's concepts of
historical ecology and landscape history, and we also follow Professor Crumley's approach to studying past landscapes in drawing upon relevant
paleoenvironmental, archaeological, and ethnohistoric evidence.
Rodriguez, Enrique (University of Texas)
[128]             Social Archaeology and Debating Local Scholars
How can archaeologists both benefit from interaction with local communities and also debate with local scholars? Engaging with local scholars can
sometimes require walking a fine line between imposing foreign values in a colonizing manner and accepting ideas that are either incorrect or that promote
oppression and inequality. Theoretically-informed social archaeology can help us engage with local scholars with respect and debate their ideas with the
goals of promoting social justice, and without the colonizing effects of imposing ideas on others. In this presentation I will examine how Elizabeth Brumfiel
debated a local scholar during our field season in 2007 for promoting ideas that she considered sexist in a public forum. The example shows that the
usefulness of archaeology need not be immediately apparent from the moment of research design for archaeology to be socially relevant. The example
also shows that grounding knowledge in social theory and in the details of substantive cases can be used to debate and change oppressive ideas in the
present without falling in the imposition of ideas associated with colonialism.
[5]               Discussant
Rodriguez, Rodolfo [56] see Ghezzi, Ivan
Rodriguez, Yasha and Paola Schiappacasse
[141]             Legal Analysis of the George Latimer and Agustin Stahl Collections: Can We or Can’t We Reclaim, That’s the Question!
In 1874, upon his death, George Latimer bequeathed his collection of archaeological artifacts from Puerto Rico to the Smithsonian Institution in
Washington, DC. In the early twentieth century Agustin Stahl sold his collections to the American Museum of Natural History in New York City. For many
decades archaeologists have hoped to be able to request the return of archaeological collections of Puerto Rican pre-Colonial artifacts located in museums
within the United States. These two collections are used as a case study in which we analyze the legal framework and legal arguments that could be made
in a formal request. The first part of this presentation will delineate a brief history of the Latimer and Stahl collections in order to address their provenance,
their potential relationship to well documented sites within the island, and their importance for archaeological interpretation. The second part will analyze
the legal status of those two collections at the time of their acquisition by the museums and the legal arguments and/or precedents that could form the
basis for repatriation.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 382
Rodríguez, Freddy [122] see Bernal, Marcela
Rodríguez, Carol (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú)
[205]              Ceramic Ware as an Expression of Art, Ritual, and Cultural Identity: The Case of the Cerro De Oro Bowl
This research focuses on the analysis of one of the most common and representative types of bowls identified at the archaeological site of Cerro de Oro
(Cañete Valley, Perú). According to prior morphological and stylistic analysis, we have determined that this type of bowl was the preferred support for the
display of geometric and figurative iconographic representations recording its variations throughout time. Taking this apparent preference into account, this
talk intends to analyze the contexts of origin of such vessels. Preliminarily, we believe that its role as a service vessel goes beyond the everyday use and is
related to rituals that involve feastings and celebrations of great magnitude. In addition, its location in different archaeological sites surrounding the valley
suggests its possible use as a symbol of cultural identity and as the expression of a unique style in formation.
Rodríguez Suárez, Roberto [220] see Chinique De Armas, Yadira
Rogers, J. Daniel (Smithsonian Institution) and Wendy Cegielski (Arizona State University)
[4]                The Role of Agent-Based Modeling in Archaeology
Published applications of Agent-Based Modeling (ABM) in archaeology have tripled within the last five years. However, the scope of the research topics
investigated has not increased accordingly. A consensus exists among ABM practitioners, that once generally accepted in archaeology, ABM can make
revolutionary advances within the overall research paradigm. Within the archaeological community unresolved concerns center on whether ABMs are
sufficiently grounded in empirical data, are aligned with theoretical trajectories, and on the difficult task of mastering the computational systems. It is worth
exploring these aspects of the disjuncture between the mainstream and ABM practitioners for two reasons—to frame a discussion of qualities of ABM that
make it transformative and to provide guidelines for broadening ABM’s applicability.
Rogers, Michael (Southern Connecticut State University) and Sileshi Semaw (Centro Nacional de Investigación sobre la Evolució)
[22]               The YAS-1 Middle Stone Age site at Gona, Afar, Ethiopia
Tentatively dated to MIS 5/4, the YAS-1 (Ya’alu South 1) site at Gona, Ethiopia is a high-density open-air archaeological site preserving classic Middle
Stone Age (MSA) stone tools such as Levallois cores, points, and blades in addition to a variety of fossil fauna, some with bone modifications including cut
marks. While most of the archaeological material has been found on the surface over the last ten years, recent excavations have documented both lithics
and fauna in situ. Though the zooarchaeological remains and depositional context of the site will be discussed, the emphasis here will be on the lithic
assemblage, which includes Levallois points, Levallois blades, Levallois cores including asymmetrical discoids or “Aduma cores,” prismatic blades, blade
cores, and a small number of retouched tools. Both obsidian and silicates (mainly cherts) were used to manufacture both points and blades. Ongoing and
future research at the site will hope to refine the site’s age, identify the obsidian source(s) of the obsidian artifacts, and expand the excavated
archaeological sample.
Rogers, Thatcher
[64]               Spatiotemporal Trends in Ceramics and Architecture in Domestic Paquime, Chihuahua, Mexico
A recent examination of domestic architecture at Paquime demonstrated support for structural differences present throughout the Medio Period following Di
Peso's phases. No known analysis, though, outside of Di Peso's publications has examined the ceramics data to assess whether differences exist between
rooms or units. This paper examines the connection between differences in ceramic types and distributions and those present in structural elements of
architecture. The broader implications of results provide insight into cultural trends through the Medio period that accompanied sociopolitical
transformation.
Rogoff, David (Methodist University)
[54]               Using Archaeology to Pursue Social Justice at Punta Laguna, Mexico
Over the last several decades, the citizens of Punta Laguna, Mexico have developed a successful ecotourism venture in the spider monkey preserve in
which they live. However, recent challenges to the usufruct agreement through which the preserve operates have jeopardized the future of the community's
business. At present, the archaeological site of Punta Laguna, which lies within the preserve's boundaries, is little more than a passive backdrop to other
tourist activities. We propose developing an archaeological project that serves the academic community by documenting a Postclassic Maya center, while
simultaneously serving the local community by expanding their tourism services and providing additional support for their land rights.
[54]               Chair
Roksandic, Ivan (University of Winnipeg)
[220]              Potential Early Connections Between the Greater Antilles and Lower Central America in the Light of Toponomastic Analysis
This presentation looks at the paterns of interaction in the Western Caribbean at the time of early migrations onto the islands, with a special focus on the
potential long-distance connection between Lower Central America and the Greater Antilles indicated by several important observations: a recent
comparative study of ancient DNA from the pre-contact site of Canímar Abajo in western Cuba; circulation of some plant species (e.g., pollo maize; Zamia);
the practice of dental modification on skeletal remains from Canímar Abajo, previously not identified among Pre-Columbian Caribbean groups; and a
recent bathymetric reconstruction indicating that the sea levels in the period from 8000-4000 BP were 5-8 meters lower than today exposing a number of
small islands over the Nicaraguan Rise. In that context, toponomastic analysis of several groups of place names from western Cuba, commonly interpreted
as either Island Arawak or Warao, shows that they actually display recurrent morphophonological structures similar to Chibchan languages spoken in
Lower Central America and Colombia.
Roksandic, Mirjana [220] see Chinique De Armas, Yadira
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              383
Rolleri, Lucas [37] see Johnston, Cheryl
Romain, William (The Ancient Earthworks Project)
[17]              The Milky Way Path of Souls and Adena-Hopewell Earthworks
In this presentation I consider Adena-Hopewell earthworks from a relational perspective. For decades, archaeologists have focused on individual sites. But
what if it was found that the significance of certain sites unfolded in their relationships to other earthworks as well as other dimensions? In this presentation
I use LiDAR imagery, archaeoastronomic analyses, and ethnohistoric data to explore the idea the Newark Earthworks, Great Hopewell Road, Mound City,
Serpent Mound, and others were part of a dynamic relational web related to the Milky Way Path of Souls and journey of the soul to the Land of the Dead.
Each site 'did' something in the sense of enabling, facilitating, guiding, constraining or otherwise affecting the movements and experiences of people, living
and dead along the Milky Way Path. The sites considered span a distance of about 89 miles (143 km) across south-central Ohio. As such this relational
network may be one of the world's earliest and longest metaphorical representations of the journey of the soul after death.
Romano, Francisco, Sergio Castro (Universidad Nacional de Colombia) and Sergio González (Universidad Nacional de Colombia)
[97]              Regional Demographics: Growth, Mobility and Development in the ancient populations of Cundinamarca and Boyacá Regions, Colombia,
                  South America
This paper deals with population dynamics and changes in ancient pre-Hispanic societies settled in the regions of Villa de Leiva, Fuquene and Funza from
the Cundinamarca and Boyacá Basin, Colombia, South America. Based on these three different regional datasets, this research wants to contribute to
analytical modeling development in order to understand population dynamics. Since a comparative perspective among nearby regions we accounting for
substantial variability in demographic past behavior of mobility dynamics, population growth and development that led to differential settlement patterns,
social institutions and social organization change. Unevenness results in the range of demographic behavior among these three sequences of regional
change question the apparent homogeneity of social and institutional development in ancient societies that inhabited the Cundinamarca and Boyacá basin.
Romero, Danielle, Barbara Roth (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Darrell Creel
[267]             Archaeological Investigations at the Elk Ridge Site, Mimbres Valley, New Mexico
Recent excavations conducted by the University of Nevada, Las Vegas in conjunction with the Gila National Forest Service took place at the Elk Ridge
Ruin, a large Classic Period (A.D. 1000–1150) pueblo in the Mimbres River Valley, New Mexico. This project was done as part of mitigation efforts to
protect the site from flood waters in an arroyo that cut through the western portion of the site. Excavations were done in three pueblo rooms that were
positioned along the arroyo cut and were the most threatened by future flooding episodes. Despite the fact that portions of these rooms had been
previously eroded, recovered artifact assemblages were complete enough to yield interesting information on the occupation of the pueblo. Analysis of floor
assemblages including ceramic vessels and groundstone shed light on domestic household activities and possible activities related to the ritual closing of
one of the rooms. Architectural and artifact data from the largest room documented numerous floor adobe applications and episodes of remodeling in
which doorways and a vent had been sealed or modified reflecting construction/alterations of adjoining rooms over time. This poster summarizes the
findings from the first year of excavation.
Romero Padilla, Laura Angélica (Laura Romero Padilla)
[136]             El paisaje, la memoria y los sentidos: ritos de iniciación en el complejo templo-cueva del Kisim en el sitio de CALICA, Quintana Roo
Gracias a las evidencias reunidas por la recién impulsada arqueología de cuevas se ha demostrado una constante, entre la interacción de estos espacios,
con las diferentes esferas de la sociedad maya, llámese política, económica o religiosa. Pareciera un elemento indisociable y no podía ser de otra manera
porque las cuevas formaron parte del paisaje, incluso antes de la presencia humana. Fueron los primeros refugios de los hombres, el habitar cotidiano
que el tiempo transformó en lazos. Es precisamente ese vínculo el generador de una memoria y un conocimiento sobre la esencia de estos espacios. La
caverna del complejo templo-cueva del Kisim en el sitio de CALICA, Quintana Roo es un ejemplo del paisaje vivido. Esta propuesta sugiere que los mayas
realizaron el recorrido con el fin de impregnarse de la esencia misma de la cueva a través de una experiencia sensorial como parte de un rito iniciático que
culminaba en el templo. El paisaje entonces se muestra como una compleja red social donde fueron entretejidos memorias, vínculos y experiencias,
emanando incluso de las entrañas de la tierra.
Roney, John R. [168] see Hard, Robert
Rooney, Matthew (University of South Florida)
[213]             Investigating Alternative Subsistence Strategies among Homeless Individuals in University, Hillsborough County, Florida
Homelessness is one of the most pressing social and political issues of our time. At least 570,000 people in the United States currently experience
homelessness, and at least 175,000 of these live in unsheltered locations, which implies both exposure to weather and inadequate access to drinking
water and sanitation resources. Most rehabilitation programs focus on returning such individuals to "normal" productive society, but research shows that
many have abandoned wage labor and are instead pursuing urban foraging as a subsistence strategy. Therefore, in order to better understand
contemporary homelessness and inform programs and policies, combined archaeological and ethnographic studies of material culture and foraging
patterns among the urban homeless are necessary. This paper contains the results of research on this subject, focusing on a small area of Hillsborough
County, Florida, that contains a high rate of homelessness. The question that drives this research is: how do homeless individuals survive using alternative
subsistence strategies? The researcher used both archaeological surface survey of camp sites and participant mapping to provide answers to this
question.
Roop, Tobin [208] see MacDonald, Douglas
Roosevelt, Christopher H. [184] see Plekhov, Daniel
Rorabaugh, Adam (Drayton Archaeological Research)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                384
[272]              Credibility Enhancing Displays and the Changing Expression of Coast Salish Social Commitments
Recent developments in evolutionary psychology expanding on signalling theory provide key insights to the connections between expressing social
commitments and resource rights. Credibility enhancing displays (CREDs) are a means to convince individuals of commitment to belief systems and can
link costly acts or extravagant displays to social success. In the Salish Sea the transition from labrets to cranial modification from 3200–1000 B.P. has often
been framed in terms reflecting a shift from achieved to ascribed social status. Other researchers have argued that labrets may reflect village scale identity
not tied to political power. We suggest that an explicitly evolutionary approach provides novel insights into the changing material expressions of Coast
Salish social commitments, specifically reciprocal resource access. The shift to cranial modification reflects increased CRED investment and cost, but not
necessarily a transition towards ascribed status but instead may be changing expressions of the same forms of social commitments.
[272]              Chair
Rosado Ramirez, Roberto (Northwestern University) and Jessica Harrison
[238]              Occupational History of Three Ancient Maya Saltworks in Paynes Creek National Park, Belize
In this poster, we present the results of archaeological research at three currently submerged Classic Period Maya saltworks in Paynes Creek National
Park, Southern Belize. Through the study of marine sediment columns, we document environmental and anthropogenic changes over time at these
locations. By conducting macroscopic analysis, loss-on ignition, and microscopic characterization of marine sediment samples, we were able to identify the
effects of human activities as well as sea level rise on the surrounding mangrove forest. These data, in conjunction with material cultural remains, provide
insight into human-environment interaction in vulnerable coastal contexts, as well as the impacts of environmental change on Maya sites abandoned at the
end of the Classic Period.
Rosales, Erika [168] see Sandoval, Cindy
Roscoe, Paul (University of Maine)
[52]               On Losing One’s Head in New Guinea: Head Rituals among New Guinea Hunter-Gatherers and Fisher-Foragers
Although commonly thought of as a land of horticulturalists, contact-era New Guinea was home to a number of ‘simple’ hunter-gatherer and complex fisher-
forager groups. This paper surveys what we know of how these communities treated the human head in mortuary and other rituals and the cosmological
contexts in which these rites were embedded. The fisher-forager cases are of special interest because at contact they were all head-hunters, an activity
that generated elaborate ritual complexes associated with growth, initiation, fertility, and entropic fluctuations in the local universe.
Rose, Nicole (The Graduate Center of the City University of New York)
[150]              Scaling Down: Kalmyk Steppe Pastoralist Strategies and Small-Scale Migration
A key theme in both archaeological and historical research of the Eurasian steppe has been the practice of pastoral nomadism. Researchers have
particularly focused on issues of mobility within this economic strategy. Perhaps due to academic preoccupation with origins and the attractiveness of both
grand-narratives and historical analogy, large scale migration has received a lot of academic and popular attention. However, pastoral nomadism as an
economic strategy often only employs small-scale migration and/or seasonal migration due to resource pressures. This paper explores some of the
archaeological and physical anthropological research conducted by the Steppe Expedition of the State Historical Museum of Moscow, narrowing the focus
to a single region for more intensive analysis. Such research highlights these smaller-scale nomadic strategies employed by the pastoralist groups of the
Kalmyk steppe in Bronze Age and Early Iron Age Russia. This research builds on the study of the stratigraphy and planigraphy of the kurgan cemeteries
that make up most of the archaeological record of the region of Kalmykia, as well as the burial package, pollen, and isotopic data which emerges from
individual burials. The possible contribution of non-morphological ceramic data to further explore these nomadic economic strategies will also be
considered.
Rosell, Jordi (URV-IPHES), Ruth Blasco (Departament de Prehistòria, Universitat Autònoma d), Florent Rivals (URV, IPHES, ICREA, Tarragona,
Spain), M. Gema Chacón (URV, IPHES, Tarragona, Spain-Département de Préhis) and Andrea Picin (Department of Prehistory and Early History,
Friedr)
[278]              Changes in Occupational Patterns during the Middle Paleolithic: The Case of Teixoneres Cave Unit III (MIS 3, Moià, Barcelona, Spain)
The aim of this work is to contribute to the debate about Neanderthal behavioral diversity from the Middle Paleolithic site of Teixoneres Cave (MIS 3,
Barcelona, Spain). During the formation of Unit-III, the landscape was dominated by a deciduous forest with wet meadows and a progressive climatic
tendency toward cooling and aridity. The alternation between large carnivores and human groups marks the upper part of the unit. In this sub-unit, human
occupations correspond to small groups that sporadically used the cave during their transit through the territory; such occupations include isolated hearths
at the entrance of the cave, a significant balance between exogenous and autochtonous raw materials, the use of previously configured supports and the
occasional processing of ungulates and small prey. However, this dynamic changes at the bottom of the unit. In this case, the presence of carnivore
activities decreases, and a higher human occupational stability occurs, shown by higher indices of autochthonous raw material, more complexity in the
knapping activities and a high diversity of processed prey. These modifications in the occupational patterns could be the consequence of adaptation to the
new climatic conditions, an alteration of the human traditions in the territory or a combination of both.
Rosenfeld, Silvana (University of South Dakota)
[122]              Food preparation and status: ch’arki versus roasting at Chavin de Huantar
Based on the chronicles and ethnohistorical documents, the consumption of (more) camelid meat has been linked to groups of high status or rank in the
Andes. However, were all camelid dishes created equal? At the site of Chavin de Huantar, previous (Miller and Burger 1995) and recent zooarchaeological
investigations provide evidence for the consumption of ch’arki (traditional way to dry meat on the bone) and the consumption of roasted meat in different
areas. Can the particular preparation of camelid meat be a factor for social distinction? Can we link a distinctive cuisine with certain activities at the site?
Preliminary data suggest a complex picture: Ch’arki appears associated with areas of lithic tool manufacture, while roasted meat appears associated with
bone tool manufacture. Many of the bone tools have been interpreted as part of hallucinogenic plant consumption paraphernalia, thus possible linking this
area to a middle or high status artisans. The unelaborated lithic tools manufactured in the area associated with ch’arki could suggest a low rank population.
It appears that the specialized craft production in Chavin was also associated with particular ways of consuming camelid meat in which fresh meat
symbolized a higher social status than dry meat.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 385
Rosenswig, Robert (University at Albany)
[235]             The Izapa Polity
Long-known as an important Late Formative political center, Izapa was one of a string of early states extending down the Pacific coast from Chiapas to El
Salvador. Izapa’s extensive sculpture, part of a pan-regional public art style, demonstrates ties with both the Guatemalan Highlands and Isthmian
traditions. Philip Drucker first brought Izapa to world attention during the 1940s in the pages of National Geographic Magazine. In the 1960s, the New
World Archaeological Foundation (NWAF) established a ceramic chronology and produced wonderfully detailed maps and drawings of the monumental
architecture and sculpture that define the site core. Yet, despite these early efforts, surprisingly little is actually understood about the organization of the
Izapa state. This poster reports the results of 300 sq km of lidar data that map out the location, layout and orientation of Izapa itself as well as over three
dozen lower order centers. Together these data lay-out the Izapa polity in its entirety.
Rossen, Jack [90] see Watson, Jessica
Rossen, Jack (Ithaca College), Mahealani Pai (Kamehameha Schools), Keonelehua Kalawe (Kamehameha Schools) and Brooke Hansen (Ithaca
College )
[227]             Collaboration and Indigenous Archaeology at Maluaka on the Big Island of Hawai’i
A collaborative archaeological project on the Big Island of Hawaii involves excavation and intensive water flotation to recover plant remains at Maluaka, a
ten acre parcel of the North Kona agricultural field system above Keauhou traditionally known as the Kuahewa. The work is conducted in collaboration with
Kamehameha Schools, a private charitable educational trust endowed by the will of Hawaiian Princess Bernice Pauahi Bishop (1831–1884). The project
involves linkages with elementary, intermediate and high school students, and at-risk youths. The long-term goal is to revitalize the ancient agricultural
terraces and platform system, utilizing Native knowledge and fine-grained archaeological and archaeobotanical data to understand spirituality, technology,
layout, and plant patterns at the site. This paper describes the project and the process and results of the 2015 test excavations.
Rossi, Franco (Boston University)
[15]              Making and Keeping Secret Knowledge at Xultun, Guatemala
As repositories for scientific secrets and ritual expertise, the four extant Maya codex books have proven an indispensable source for understanding ancient
systems of religion and socio-political thought. But despite the undoubted existence of codex books during the much earlier Late Classic period (600–900
C.E.), the tropical climate’s decay-inducing effect on organic material has thus far prevented their recovery in the archaeological record. In this paper, I
discuss the Los Sabios mural at Xultun as a window into earlier codex traditions. The texts on the Los Sabios mural are distinctly akin to those found in
these codex books—detailing highly similar forms of seasonal and astronomical data inscribed in minute characters. As such, the Los Sabios mural texts
not only constitute one of the closest artifacts we currently have to a Classic period codex, but also reveal previously unknown ties between the practice of
mural making and that of codex making.
Rostain, Stéphen (PhD. National Center for Scientific Research, France)
[263]             Amazonian Mounds. When Human Sciences Met Earth Sciences
Because the subject of the archaeological study disappears nowadays and exists only as traces, it is necessary to diversify the points of view to
comprehend the past. The interdisciplinary approach helps to interpret better the human and natural components of the environment. On the basis of two
Amazonian cases, from French Guiana and from Ecuador, it will be shown how cooperation between various disciplines improves considerably the
interpretation.
The first case concerns thousands of small mounds found along the Guianas coast. They are remnants of an agricultural technique widely used in flooded
areas during the late precolumbian Period. The Guianas coast has a long history of human impact and the actual landscape partially results of a millenary
cultural action. The multiplicity of expertise completed successfully to a general understanding of these structures.
In the Upper Amazon, the Sangay site of the Upano Valley is famous for hundreds of artificial mounds. More to the north, on the Pastaza bank, the Zulay
site presents various small hills that were also commonly considered human-made. It is true that pre-Columbian communities lived sometimes on their top,
but our recent interdisciplinary project proved their natural origin.
[23]              Discussant
Roth, Barbara [64] see Ferguson, Jeffrey
Rousseau, Jane [284] see Morgan, Michele
Rowe, Timothy [65] see Huckell, Bruce
Rowe, Robert
[155]             Mammoth and Mastodons….They are what’s for Dinner
The Pleistocene…basically a no-man’s time that is stuck between the disciplines of archaeology and paleontology when it comes to the animals that
inhabited that period of time. For American archaeologists, they are often old, sometimes too old to consider them as having archaeological connotations.
For Paleontologists, these are not fossils and by some paleontologist’s standards are considered too young for paleontological studies. It is important to
archaeologists to understand these animals and the role that they played on the landscape. In doing so these animals shape the human condition by
causing adjustments in environmental niches that the humans hunt and function in. Each of these large now-extinct animals, mammoth, mastodons,
camelops, and many others had their particularly environmental needs. Using field examples from Iowa, Colorado, Montana, and Wyoming the remains of
these animals can be used to ascertain the environment that each lived in and in doing so this data can be used to widen the studies of the prehistoric
environment in which you find the earliest of humankind in the Americas.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                           386
Rowsell, Keri [84] see McGrath, Krista
Rubertone, Patricia
[128]            Archaeological Histories of Urban Indians and Why They Matter
Social archaeology today takes research far beyond questions of “subsistence and dating.” It pushes inquiries into historic and recent pasts and is
unapologetic in its embrace of anthropologically-informed, hybrid methodologies. Not in the least, it maintains a keen awareness of the role that socially-
engaged research can play in the contemporary world. Since the 1990s, multifaceted and collaborative archaeological studies of Native Americans have
systematically challenged dominant, and damaging, narratives about their colonial experiences. Providing compelling evidence for Native persistence that
allows for change, this research comments on the complex realities of practices of survivance that created presence over absence, renounced domination,
and rejected victimry, and thus, involved more than instincts of survival and subsistence. Ongoing research on indigenous communities of diverse ancestry
in late nineteenth and early twentieth century New England contributes to understanding how issues of race, authenticity, and urban renewal were used in
attempts to erase them from the landscape. Their efforts to maintain an Indian presence in modern, urban contexts is the next chapter of Native survivance
to be written, and one that has important implications for tribal groups in the region still striving for federal recognition.
Rubin de Rubin, Julio [167] see Silva, Rosicler
Ruby, Bret (National Park Service, Hopewell Culture National Historical Park)
[34]             Ground Truthing The Great Circle and other Big Data Anomalies at the Hopewell Mound Group
The monumental mounds and earthworks at Hopewell Mound Group have attracted attention since the dawn of American archaeology. By the early
twentieth century, the site’s imposing earthworks, exotic raw materials, and exquisitely crafted artifacts were widely recognized as the most flamboyant
expression of a newly defined “Hopewell culture.” Yet attention was focused narrowly on mounds and mortuary contexts, ignoring the vast spaces in
between. Agricultural plowing steadily eroded above-grade features. Today, most visitors experience the site as a featureless plain. However, recent large-
scale geomagnetic surveys successfully documented the subsurface integrity of many plowed-down mounds and earthworks, and revealed a host of
anomalies both large and small filling the spaces between the monuments. This presentation describes the results of two seasons of targeted excavations
intended to ground truth several intriguing anomalies. One focused on the “Great Circle,” a circular earthwork nearly 120 meters in diameter thought to
have been entirely obliterated by plowing before 1891. Our excavations revealed a deep encircling ditch flanked on the interior by a row of deep pits that
likely supported huge wooden posts—an enormous Hopewell “woodhenge.” The second season revealed a gigantic but enigmatic pit feature with an
estimated volume approaching 15 cubic meters.
[34]             Chair
Rudolph, Nigel (Florida Public Archaeology Network - CRC) and Jeff Moates (Florida Public Archaeology Network - CRC/WCRC)
[260]            Collaboration in Progress: FPAN Central Regional Center and the Florida Park Service.
Among the many places that the Florida Public Archaeology Network (FPAN) uses as a base of operation, the relationship the Central Region has with the
Crystal River Archaeological State Parks is unlike any other. Housed within the visitor’s center at the Crystal River Preserve State Park, FPAN’s Central
Region is the only regional center located at a National Historic Landmark prehistoric mound complex. This provides the center with a unique opportunity
for outreach, education, and promotion of this important site and the compatible mission of the Florida Park Service. The distinct relationship comes with
distinct successes and challenges. This paper navigates these opportunities including development of site-based interpretation and collaboration on
existing State Park programs. Also considered are challenges such as working within the bureaucratic framework of the Florida Department of
Environmental Protection and ethical considerations necessary at a prehistoric mound complex.
Rudolph, Nigel [260] see Gidusko, Kevin
Ruehli, Frank [223] see Warinner, Christina
Ruff, Alexander [134] see Mathwich, Nicole
Ruhl, Donna (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[7]              Ancient Watercraft on Changing Landscapes
This poster is a summary of the results of a multiyear study of drought-exposed dugout canoes, oral histories, steward-preserved dugouts, and revisited
extant canoe collections, coupled with many new radiocarbon dates on these heretofore unstudied canoes. Along with dugout dates, location and
quantities have revealed additional insights about mobility, paleoenvironment, waterscapes, settlement change, economies, and overall significance of
these underrepresented yet unique artifacts. Modern and paleohydrological studies of sea level impact on coastal shorelines have neglected this impact on
interior waterways, flow and water tables. Beyond the enhanced understanding of the significance of dugout canoes, dates are corroborating sea level
rises and declines to canoes presence and absence in interior areas and raising further questions regarding settlement patterns through time, migration,
transportation, paleoenvironment, paleohydrology, and lifeways in and around Florida’s ancient waterways.
Rühli, Frank J. [103] see Viganò, Claudia
Ruiz perez, Javier [125] see Lancelotti, Carla
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             387
Runggaldier, Astrid [221] see Harrison-Buck, Eleanor
Russ, Jon [6] see Hunt, Ryan
Russ, Jon (Rhodes College), Karen Steelman (University of Central Arkansas), Marvin Rowe, Chris von Nagy (Florida State University) and Mary
Pohl (Florida State University)
[230]              Chemical and Radiocarbon Analyses of Paint Samples from Oxtotitlán
The prehistoric rock paintings in the Oxtotitlán site are thought to be among the earliest of Mexico and represent the beginning of the highly influential
Mexican muralism tradition. The proposed antiquity of the murals is based primarily on stylistic interpretation of the motifs represented in the paintings. Our
objective was to use radiocarbon analyses of organic matter in the paint and biofilms covering paint layers to provide more direct evidence as to the ages
of the artifacts. Small paint chips were collected from three murals, including a black and red shield image, a deteriorated area without a decipherable
motif, and from the polychromatic Raptor Lord Mural (C-1 Mural). Non-painted surfaces adjacent to the paintings were collected to provide background
information. Two strategies were used to determine or constrain the ages of the artifacts. First was the extraction of organic carbon directly from the paint
using a low-temperature oxygen plasma, converting it to carbon dioxide that was cryogenically isolated for the AMS radiocarbon analysis. Second, in cases
where the paint did not contain datable organic carbon or the background deemed too high, we radiocarbon dated the calcium oxalate biofilm covering the
paint to provide a minimum age of the artifact.
Russell, Bradley [26] see Masson, Marilyn
Russell, Bradley (College of Saint Rose) and Kendra Farstad (University at Albany - SUNY)
[27]               Ethnoarchaeology of a Three Generation Yucatec Maya House Compound
Since our team began work at the Ancient Maya political center of Mayapán (1150–1450), we have increasingly relied on insights derived from working
with the modern residents of the nearby village of Telchaquillo, Yucatán. We have successfully applied the Direct Historical Approach to explore the
function and remains of house groups, food production, lime plaster production and ritual activity. During the 2015 season of the Economic Foundations of
Mayapán Project, we had the opportunity to document a diverse and complex house group that had been home to multiple generations of the same family.
We recorded and mapped numerous structures within the compound including multiple homes and associated residential structures occupied over the past
80 years, features related to livestock production and other domestic activities. We also recorded an impressive array of trees and plants producing a wide
variety of agricultural and other products. We recorded family histories and linked them to the remains, revealing shifting land use patterns within the
compound over time. This paper will present our initial findings of the study and discuss how the results relate to archaeological features and remains that
we have spent the past 15 years recording at the nearby ancient center.
Rutecki, Dawn (Indiana University)
[240]              Food and Religious Practices at Spiro: Implications for Understanding Social Complexity
Recent reanalyzes of the Mississippian Ideological Interaction Sphere have invoked reinvigorated, multi-dimensional research that examines symbolism,
social organization, and subsistence practices. Through a reanalysis of faunal remains from Spiro Mounds, OK, this paper interrogates the presence of
faunal remains and materials to better contextualize their use through a lens of concurrent religious practices at the site from C.E. 1000–1400. By
contextualizing the remains within broader discussions of images on ritual paraphernalia, I argue that use of these animals both as subsistence and
symbolic markers provides a more useful way to understand the entangled worldviews of this community, while providing insight into how religiously
influenced food practices may have impacted social organization.
[5]                Moderator
[186]              Discussant
Ruuska, Alex (Northern Michigan University)
[175]              Shamanistic Rock Art Motifs: Dynamic and Emplaced Performances of the Sacred among the Ojibway
The Ojibway on the northern and southern shores of Lake Superior of North America created transitory as well as relatively permanent material
expressions of sacred experiences and cultural narratives. Using examples of 'spirit objects' expressed via emplaced pictographs in the landscape in
Ontario Canada and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, Mide’wiwin birch bark scrolls, and culturally modified ‘storied’ trees, this paper compares and
contrasts dynamic and emplaced expressions of the sacred, and the interplay between the two. In process, I explore the role of 'spirit objects' in marking
places, promoting a sense of the cultural past, emplacement and displacement, and “ancestral memory.”
Ryan, Susan (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center) and Rebecca Simon (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center)
[40]               Beyond Excavation and Laboratory Work: New Directions in Crow Canyon Archaeological Center’s College Field School Curricula
The Crow Canyon Archaeological Center was created in 1983 to advance and share knowledge of the human experience through archaeological research,
education programs, and partnerships with American Indians. Since its creation, over 70,000 students and adults have participated in the Center’s
innovative experiential education, research, and travel programs. Crow Canyon’s programs vary in a number of ways in order to highlight different aspects
of its tripartite mission. In 2015, Crow Canyon launched its first college accredited archaeological field school. This poster presents information on how the
Center’s mission influenced the unique development of the field school’s graduate and undergraduate curriculum and, in turn, how it is anticipated to
influence students entering the discipline. This poster provides information on curricula utilized during Crow Canyon’s field school that promotes
archaeological ethics, public outreach, independent research, collaboration with descendant communities, multi-vocal learning, and service learning in
addition to traditional archaeological method and theory provided in field and laboratory settings.
Ryan, Ethan [124] see Barnett, Kristen
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             388
Ryan, Philippa (The British Museum)
[177]             Cereals and Agricultural Risk Management in northern Sudan, Past and Present
Nubian agricultural practices are rapidly altering due to infrastructure development, as well as technological and environmental changes. We have been
interviewing Nubian farmers about crop choices, land-use and irrigation. Farmer interviews have focused on a car- and electricity-free Nile island, Ernetta,
where many 'traditional' practices have continued for a comparatively long time. We are also interviewing farmers in other villages throughout the north to
understand variability. This research is part of a broader project “Sustainability and subsistence systems in a changing Sudan” (funded by the AHRC 2013–
2016) which compares present-day and ancient crop choices to investigate agricultural risk management within Nile settlements. Managing risk can include
using a diverse range of crops with different growing tolerances and land-use strategies. In this paper, we will discuss changes in cereals grown and
agricultural practices over the last century, as well as land-use and irrigation in Nubia. By examining which crops or practices are considered ‘traditional’,
we are forming reference points from which to make comparisons with the archaeological record. Amara West (1300–800 B.C.), an ancient Nile Island
town, will be discussed as a case study.
Ryzewski, Krysta (Wayne State University)
[48]              Discussant
Sabloff, Jeremy (Santa Fe Institute)
[54]              Discussant
Sabol, Donald [110] see Buck, Paul
Safi, Kristin (Washington State University) and Andrew Duff (Washington State University)
[194]             Exchange and Resource Procurement During the Chaco Era in the American Southwest
The great houses of Chaco Canyon and the similar monumental buildings scattered across the northern Southwest during the Pueblo II period (A.D. 900–
1150) are often discussed in terms of a regional system. One aspect of recent research is evaluating the movement of goods between great houses as an
indication of the degree to which these communities were well integrated into a social or economic system. This paper examines patterns of non-local
resource procurement and exchange among three great house communities in the southern Cibola sub-region using obsidian and ceramic compositional
data. We analyze samples from great house and non-great house contexts to delineate patterns of resource access or exchange that indicate participation
in a broader economic or social system. Our results suggest two patterns of resource movement. First, access to long distance obsidian varied widely and
does not appear to have been controlled by great house occupants. In contrast, exchanged ceramics were present in higher proportions at great houses,
with household sites mirroring their associated great house in the source community for non-local wares. Access and exchange relationships were also
maintained with non-great house communities, suggesting a more complex socioeconomic picture of the Pueblo II Southwest than was previously
understood.
Sagebiel, Kerry
[109]             Discussant
Sahle, Yonatan (Center for Advanced Study, University of Tübingen, GERMANY)
[22]              Late Pleistocene Behaviors: Perspectives from the Middle Awash, Ethiopia
Behavioral contexts across the critical period associated with the evolution and successful dispersal(s) of anatomically modern humans (AMH) within and
beyond Africa are inadequately understood. Although the genetic and fossil evidence in hand largely advocates eastern Africa as the most likely source
and dispersal route of AMH, the sparseness of archaeological evidence relevant to this period limits behavioral inferences from the region. As a result,
evidence for behaviors considered “modern” derives predominantly from South African occurrences, making an exhaustive study of the behavioral contexts
of AMH in eastern Africa long overdue. Here, we present results of work to date on Late Pleistocene occurrences in the Middle Awash study area of
Ethiopia, including analyses of lithic assemblages from Aduma and Halibee that have been found in association with rich faunal remains and AMH. The
spatial and chronostratigraphic positioning of these and other MSA occurrences provide a unique opportunity to examine technological and behavioral
trends during the period 50-100 ka. The results have implications for hypotheses about Late Pleistocene AMH dispersal(s) and their relationships to
cultural, physical, and biological factors in this crucial part of Africa.
[22]              Chair
Sahle, Yonatan [22] see Brandt, Steven
Sain, Douglas (University of Tennessee)
[159]             Pre Clovis at Topper (38AL23): Evaluating the Role of Human versus Natural Agency in the Formation of Lithic Deposits from a Pleistocene
                  Terrace in the American Southeast
This paper examines the lithic materials from the presumed pre-Clovis deposits at the Topper Site (38AL23), a Paleoindian quarry and stone tool
manufacture site in Allendale County, South Carolina. Prior research at Topper identified flakes and possible chipped stone tools from Pleistocene-aged
sediments that predate Clovis, traditionally considered the earliest culture complex in the region. The goal of this study is to document the nature of the
pre-Clovis assemblage at Topper, and to explore possible ways it may have formed. Did human or natural processes play a role in the production of the
reported assemblage? Experimental analyses demonstrate that chert is susceptible to fracture when exposed to episodes of weathering. Natural
processes can result in the formation of detachments that resemble the morphological properties of flakes and bend breaks but lack the technological
attributes that are characteristic of human lithic manufacture. The presence of technological attributes consistent with human agency on flakes and bend
breaks from Pleistocene deposits at Topper support the proposition that these items served a functional role for pre-Clovis occupants at the site. The
results of this study present a unique record of the behaviors of Late Pleistocene hunter-gatherers of the southeast U.S.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              389
Sakai, Sachiko [292] see Ozorio De Almeida, Fernando
Sakai, Sachiko (California State University Long Beach)
[292]            Changes in Production and Distribution Patterns of Olivine-Tempered Ceramics in the Arizona Strip and Adjacent Areas
Artifact assemblages from the Arizona Strip and adjacent area are characterized by widely distributed ceramics tempered with olivine, a volcanic mineral.
Sources of olivine lie in the vicinity of Mt. Trumbull and Tuweep, near the northwestern part of the Grand Canyon. The olivine-tempered ceramics were
distributed mostly westward from Mt. Trumbull, up to 100 km to the lowland Virgin area in southern Nevada between A.D. 200 and 1350. Ultimately, the
goal of this study is to understand why ceramic production and circulation patterns changed during the Ancestral Pueblo occupation of this marginal
environmental area. To investigate this issue, fine grained study of change in ceramic production and distribution patterns, by controlling time and space
without ambiguous assumptions is necessary. The use of 14C, however, is not the ideal option in this study, since the many sites in Mt. Trumbull were
occupied by multiple generations with very limited 14C dates, in addition to ambiguity of applying 14C dating to the ceramics. Thus, in this study,
compositional analysis using LA-ICP-MS was combined with optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating. This paper will discuss how the use of clay
resources changed over time based on the OSL dates of 113 ceramics with compositional data.
[292]            Chair
Salado, Mercedes [176] see Scheinsohn, Vivian
Salazar, Lucy, Richard Burger (Yale University) and Michael Glascock (University of Missouri)
[57]             The INAA Analysis of Pottery from Machu Picchu: An Initial Assessment
This paper presents the results of INAA analysis of pottery recovered at Machu Picchu by the 1912 Yale Peruvian Scientific Expedition directed by Hiram
Bingham III. Samples of ceramics representing the full range of forms and from a diversity of sectors at the site were studied in the Archaeometry Lab at
the Universty of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR) and compared with coeval Inca pottery from other sites in the Urubamba Valley and from the Cuzco
Basin. The study considers whether the Machu Picchu ceramics were produced locally or brought from the capital and whether there is evidence for long-
distance imports of pottery.
Salazar, Diego [76] see Olguin, Laura
Salazar, Diego (Universidad de Chile)
[259]            Copper Rich, Water Poor: The Southern Atacama under Inka Rule
The hyperarid and thinly populated Atacama area of northern Chile seems an unlikely target of imperial interest. However, archaeological research has
demonstrated direct control over this territory and its people by the Inka, who were drawn to the region by rich copper deposits that have been exploited at
least since the Late Archaic (4500 B.P.). How did the Inka reorganize copper mining technology and labor? How were mining and metallurgical centers
provisioned in this agriculturally marginal region? What role did ideology and ritual play in the imperial incorporation and administration of the Atacama and
in mining? How was this area integrated into the state’s political economy? Historical sources on the region are scarce, but through extensive surveys,
excavations and dating programs developed by different research projects during the last three decades, we now have a wealth of archaeological data to
begin to address these questions. In this paper we attempt to synthesize this information, discuss transformations under Inka rule, and reflect on imperial
expansion and provincial administration in this environmentally and demographically limited, yet copper-rich area.
[259]            Chair
Saldana, Melanie (California State University Los Angeles)
[294]            The Evolving Nature of Landscape: An Example from La Milpa, Belize
In 2014, the California State University, Los Angeles Sacred Landscapes Archaeology Project took over the investigation of what appeared to be a
sinkhole with a small cave chamber at its northern end. In 2015, excavation was continued to bedrock. Lying on bedrock, was a chultun capstone and
examination of the ceiling directly above it disclosed the remains of what had been the entry tube into the feature. The lack of deposition between the
ceiling collapse and the floor suggests that the breakdown had occurred shortly after the construction of the chultun. The Maya then encircled the hole left
by the collapse with a low plastered platform. Artifact density on the platform and in the hole was high but dropped precipitously only a few meters from the
complex. This suggests that the Maya continued what appears to be a fairly intensive utilization centered on this transformed feature.
[93]             Chair
Saldana, Melanie [93] see Scott, Ann
Saldaña, Julio (Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Peru) and Luis Jaime Castillo (Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Peru)
[206]            Feasts and Ritual Practices at San Jose de Moro during the Late Moche Period
San Jose de Moro is an archaeological site with a long cultural sequence of near 1000 years. The first activities performed at this site were funerary, since
a high quantity of funeral contexts and remains of ceremonial activity were found. During the Late Mochica Period, the site was used as sepulcher for high
rank individuals who performed ritual roles for the development of the society. In the last eight field seasons at the site, three important chamber tombs
have been found. They were surrounded by extensive evidence of mass production of food and beverage. Based on this we can assume the realization of
important ritual activities that followed the burial of elite characters from the Late Moche society.
In this poster we plan to characterize the nature of the activities that were carried out at San Jose de Moro during and after the burial of the so-called
Priests and Priestesses. Also we intend to determine the scale of these activities as well as the way that they evolved through time based on the study of
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               390
the stratigraphy from the excavations.
Salerno, Jennifer [83] see Damour, Melanie
Salgado, Carlos [183] see Velasquez, Veronica
Salgado-Flores, Sebastian (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[270]            Political Ecology of Postclassic Maya Plant Use at Lake Mensabak, Chiapas, México.
This presentation examines a case study of changes in Maya plant use at several closely located sites during the middle-to-late Postclassic Period
(~1300–1525 C.E.) at Lake Mensabak, Chiapas, Mexico. These sites were inhabited contemporaneously and exhibit substantive differences in size and
political/economic importance, making the archaeobotanical assemblages recovered from them uniquely suited for a study focusing on how they were
created by social processes. It specifically examines whether these sites exhibit differences in the range of plants that were brought to and processed at
them, and whether/how that variation changed over time. These changes in the assemblages are interpreted not only as indicators of availability external to
society, but as indicators of differential access to and incentives for the exploitation of specific resources.
Salinas, Jennifer [122] see Salinas Acero, Jennifer
Salinas Acero, Jennifer (UC Berkeley)
[122]            Changing Food Practices at Tequendama, Aguazuque, and Zipacon (Sabana de Bogotá, Colombia)
The process of domestication has interested archaeologists working in the Andes for decades but for many years problems of preservation and access to
certain analyses have caused a lag in the recovery of concrete evidence. Although, previous research carried out in the 1970s and 1980s at the
preceramic sites of Tequendama, Aguazuque, and Zipacon on the altiplano of the Eastern Cordillera of Colombia yielded a wealth of paleoenvironmental,
tool use, and faunal data, few botanical remains were recovered from these projects. This research helped create window into understanding the changes
in the social and economic practices of these early societies but more recent excavations at these sites have employed a multiproxy paleoethnobotanical
approach that includes the collection of column samples for macrobotanical and microbotanical analysis to overcome problems with preservation biases.
The supplementation of this new data set to the information that already exists will allow us to explore socio-cultural changes that were occuring during the
mid-holocene through the lens of diachronic changes in foodways on the Sabana de Bogotá. By directing inquiry into changing food practices we will begin
to understand, not only how these early populations interacted with, but also how they conceptualized, their environment.
[122]            Chair
Sallum, Marianne and Plácido Cali (CALI, P.)
[70]             Colonial Process in the Portuguese America: Tupi Settlement at the Brazilian Southern Shore
This represents a preliminary paper about the colonial process in Portuguese America and the development of the historical archaeology of indigenous
peoples in Brazil. It uses as reference the archaeological remains of a Tupi settlement, on the south shore of the state of Sao Paulo, called Peruíbe. For
many years Brazilian historiography built a history of America’s discovery and European colonization with indigenous peoples treated as passive victims of
colonial encounter, fated to disappearance. In the last decades this perspective was overcome by works that sought to demonstrate the agency of
indigenous people in the construction of their own history. Historical archaeology, in turn, dealt with the study of contexts of interrelation between
indigenous and colonizers, trying to understand processes of acculturation. In recent years archaeologists have been criticizing this perspective and
reevaluating a recent periods of indigenous people. Investigations have been done to show indigenous resistance strategies against colonizer the
maintenance of their ways of life when faced with colonialism and capitalism. Therefore, my ongoing research aims to contribute to this new research
agenda and, more specifically, to the construction of a critical and post-colonialist history of the Tupi people from the pre-colonial period until the 19th
century.
Salyers, Kimberly (University of California, Santa Cruz)
[251]            Entanglement of Memories in Mesoamerica and Applications in the Palenque Region
As social archaeologists, we have long affirmed the fluidity of social structures, yet we continue to experience proactive interference from the political
economy lessons long embedded in our memory. Through the review of social memory applications in Mesoamerica, this paper discusses how the battle
between the individual and the social approaches to memory fall victim to our current entanglements of memory. Building from this review, I will consider
how incorporating applications of ArcGIS and ceramic analysis in the Palenque Region aim to untangle the views of lowland Maya’s political economy and
memory.
Sample, Richard A. [78] see Nichols, Kristi Miller
Sampson, Christina (University of Michigan)
[133]            Site Structure, Community Organization, and the Interpretation of Subsistence Remains
Subsistence strategies shape mobility and site use practices. These relationships can be investigated at a regional scale, but they also appear at the level
of daily domestic activities. The interpretation of subsistence remains is enhanced by assessing how specific deposits and activity areas across a site fit
into broader strategies and relate to community organization. At many coastal and riverine sites of the American Southeast, mollusk shell is prevalent and
well-preserved in midden deposits, along with vertebrate bone and other artifacts. These deposits vary in multiple ways, including vertical and horizontal
extent, duration of use, structure of deposit, context of creation, and relationships to other activity areas. This paper focuses on case studies that show how
interpreting shell midden subsistence remains in light of site structure and community organization can reveal opportunities to explore issues including
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              391
labor, ritual, and the interplay of ecology and cultural practices.
Samson, Alice (McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research) and Jago Cooper (British Museum)
[47]              The Use of Fingers and Hands in Mark-Making in Caves in the Indigenous Caribbean
The focus of this paper is on the actions of human fingers, hands, and bodies in the emergence and creation of the extraordinary subterranean cavescapes
of Isla de Mona in the precolumbian and early colonial Caribbean. The interiors of around 30 of the island’s 200 caves have been extensively modified by
scraping substances off, and applying substances to cave walls, leaving marks, extractive patches, meanders, and designs on hundreds of square metres
of cave surfaces. These activities were carried out by indigenous individuals in the dark zones of cave systems, close to water sources, and predominantly
with fingers and finger-sized tools.
The extent, location, and composition of the mark-making allows inferences to be drawn about the choreography of the activities, including body position,
visual orientation, and gesture. Indigenous bodily techniques strongly contrast with the way Europeans behaved, marked, and moved around these same
spaces. This research highlights the differences in indigenous and European traditions of physical engagement with the world, and the transformation of
physical attitudes through colonisation.
Samuelsen, John (Department of Anthropology, University of Arkansas)
[286]             Caddo Interregional Warfare or Local Burial Practice: Using Strontium Isotopes from Outlying Sites to Assess Origins and Settlement
                  Patterns of a Skull and Mandible Cemetery at the Crenshaw Site
The 352 individuals from a skull and mandible cemetery at the Crenshaw site (3MI6) in southwest Arkansas have been argued to represent non-Caddo
victims of warfare from other regions. Strontium isotopes taken from 80 individuals were processed as part of a NAGPRA grant and have been used to
claim they supported evidence of interregional warfare between the Caddo and the Southern Plains. This paper demonstrates that sampling small animal
teeth from surrounding sites can be used to test the hypothesis that the Caddo were instead bringing the dead and deer from surrounding sites for burial
and feasting rituals. This simultaneously tests if the Caddo had a dispersed settlement pattern and has implications for their ritual community organization.
The results suggest that the Caddo at Crenshaw were most likely expanding the use of skull and mandible burials as they included more distant sites
within their ritual community between A.D. 1200 and 1400. This co-occurs with the adoption of maize as a staple, indicating how ritual practices, diet, and
settlement patterns interact within the cultural system.
San Roman, Manuel (Universidad de Magallanes), Omar Reyes (Universidad de Magallanes), Javier Cárcamo (Universidad de Tarapacá) and
Jimena Torres (Universidad de Paris 1)
[206]             Western Patagonia Subsistence Strategies: Zooarchaeological Studies of Marine Hunter-Fisher-Gatherers of the Chonos Archipelago,
                  Chile
The Chonos archipelago (43°50’–46°50’S) at the western Patagonian channels of Chile was peopled by marine hunter gatherers known as Chonos.
Archaeological occupation spans from 6260 cal years BP unto the eighteenth century. Recently the archaeological record has been described and
characterized through surveys, test pits and systematic excavations in different parts of the region.
This work presents a first synthesis of faunal resource exploitation for a range of islands, considering archaeological assemblage characterization, and
relation with geographical distribution and chronology. The comprehension of space use strategies are implied from a biogeographical point of view for
these groups that inhabited the southernmost South Pacific during the late Holocene.
San Roman, Manuel [207] see Reyes, Omar
Sanchez, Gabriel [132] see Lightfoot, Kent
Sanchez, Gabriel (Department of Anthropology, University of California Berkeley)
[251]             Exploring Traditional Ecological Knowledge in Central California through Ethnographic and Ethnohistorical Records
This paper explores ethnographic and ethno-historical records of Coast Miwok and Kashaya Pomo peoples in Central California to understand twentieth
century memories or traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) of landscape management practices. TEK and traditional resource and environmental
management (TREM) practices are entangled with contemporary issues. These include but are not limited to management practices for indigenous
communities, state, and federal agencies. Understanding how Native people modified the landscape in the past through historical documents and
archaeological research provides a first step for managing contemporary ecosystems.
Sánchez, Rodrigo [259] see Pavlovic, Daniel
Sanchez-Morales, Ismael (School of Anthropology - The University of Arizona)
[67]              The Clovis Lithic Component of Fin del Mundo, Sonora, Mexico.
Fin del Mundo is a Clovis site located in the north-central portion of the state of Sonora, northwestern Mexico. The site comprises multiple localities
including a buried kill of two gomphotheres (cuvieronius sp.), a Clovis camp and raw material procurement areas. The Clovis lithic component at the site
consists of Clovis points, Clovis point preforms, bifaces, unifacial tools and a blade industry. The tool types suggest that Fin del Mundo was occupied for a
long time span, possibly during several intermittent visits, and indicates that local raw materials were used to manufacture most of the stone tools at the
site. At a regional scale, the Clovis lithic assemblage from Fin del Mundo is comparable to those from the Murray Springs, Lehner and Naco sites in the
San Pedro River Valley, southeastern Arizona, located ~250 km to the northeast. Fin del Mundo represents an important locality characterized by the
availability of animal and lithic resources intensively occupied during the final Pleistocene. It is one of the most extensive and important Clovis sites in
Mexico, and extends our knowledge of the Paleoindian occupation of the Northwest Mexico/Southwest USA region.
Sánchez-Morales, Lara (University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras) and Isabel Rivera-Collazo (University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras)
[14]              Sediments as Artifacts: Geoarchaeological Analyses for the Understanding of Social Processes and Subsistance Strategies
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               392
Caribbean and Lowland Neotropical archaeology has emphasized the importance of human relations with their environments, from plant and animal
domestication to ceramic production, agriculture, and settlement patterns. However, in most excavations, sediments have often been overlooked and
simply discarded without further consideration. Sediments hold the micro and macroscopic evidence of human behavior in the past. By ignoring them, we
ignore important pieces of the puzzle that can help us ask and answer new questions. In this presentation we use two archaeological examples from the
Caribbean Island of Puerto Rico, to evaluate what is known and how much more can be gathered from the incorporation of geoarchaeological techniques
as part of the regular archaeological methodology. Our study reveals that the processes of human behavior and patterns of land use are severely simplified
when only the macroscopic assemblage is considered. The study of sediments expands and enhances the complexity of the site formation processes and
behavioral patterns. This allows the evaluation of new questions and innovative implications regarding, for example, patterns of production, consumption
and discard of subsistence resources, or differentiated intra-site use of land-surfaces.
Sandoval, Cindy (CENTRO INAH-DURANGO), Enrique Chacon (CENTRO INAH-CHIHUAHUA), Elsa Olimpia Palacios (CENTRO INAH-DURANGO),
Erika Rosales (UAZ) and Magdalena García (UAZ)
[168]             Archaeological Project pipeline Chihuahua -Durango " (preliminary results)
This paper is a preliminary result of the archaeological survey and recording surface of the “Project Pipeline Chihuahua and Durango.” The relevance and
importance of the identified sites lies in being unique in the area, located in places of possible transit that allowed to humans groups moved from one camp
to another camp and one workstation to another, according to the plain and sometimes even stay overnight at the site. The transit zone of small bands of
hunter-gatherers has been recognized by the dispersion of scarce materials over large areas. There are several hypotheses to explain how human groups
(hunter-gatherers) inhabited these places overcoming constraints; this was based on the high degree of economic strategy and selection of food, like
plants, space and natural resources. As far the material evidence of the sites, ceramics, polished and carved lithics. So far the archaeological research of
Durango and Chihuahua has allowed a glimpse of the importance and complexity of the groups who occupied a long period of time, in which important
moments of the history were developed.
Sandweiss, Daniel (University of Maine)
[28]              The Reitz Stuff: A Faunal Perspective on El Niño from Coastal Peru
For the last 30 years, zooarchaeological data from coastal Peru have provided groundbreaking insight into the Holocene history of El Niño, the interannual
climatic phenomenon that affects global climate and human societies. Elizabeth J. Reitz has authored important studies with both of us on El Niño and
faunal biogeography, and she served as a mentor to one of us in developing biochemical proxies for El Niño. In this paper, we review the history of faunal
studies of El Niño and analyze current understanding of El Niño's past behavior in light of the latest data.
[1]               Moderator
[1]               Discussant
Sandweiss, Dan [90] see St. Amand, Ani
Sanford, Victoria [24] see Walsh-Haney, Heather
Sanger, Matthew (Binghamton University)
[132]             Points of Revelation and Communication: Interpreting Native American “Monument” Construction in the Coastal American Southeast
Native American conceptions of place have only recently been drawn into archaeological interpretations of landscapes and have yet to make a meaningful
impact on the study of built environments, particularly the creation of “monuments.” Drawing on American Indian philosophers and writers, this paper aims
to remedy this shortcoming by (re)examining the creation of some of the oldest human constructions in the American Southeast–Late Archaic shell rings
formed by hunter-gatherers more than 3,000 years ago. Dozens of shell rings have been found across the Southeast and were formed shortly after the
stabilization of sea levels and the creation of the modern coastline. Based on foundational Native American ideas of relational existence, expansive
conceptions of personhood, and localized generation of identity and meaning, I suggest that these shell constructions are best understood as points of
communication between human and non-human worlds and that their presence along the coastline was an attempt to bring newly emergent landforms and
ecozones into the social purview of ring builders.
Sankaranarayanan, Krithivasan [223] see Warinner, Christina
Sankey, Joel [254] see Fairley, Helen
Santana Sagredo, Francisca (Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the History of Art, University of Oxford), Rick Schulting (Research
Laboratory for Archaeology and the Histor), Julia Lee-Thorp (Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the Histor), Carolina Agüero (Instituto
de Investigaciones Arqueológicas y Museo) and Mauricio Uribe (Departamento de Antropología, Universidad de Chile)
[76]              Paired Radiocarbon Dating on Bioanthropological and Textile Samples from the Pica 8 Cemetery (Atacama Desert, northern Chile)
Pica 8 is an inland cemetery of the Late Intermediate Period (A.D. 900–1450) in northern Chile. Previous stable isotope studies indicate highly variable
dietary contributions of marine and terrestrial foods. However, it is unclear whether this variability is related to change over time or to the presence of
groups with different origins. In order to evaluate whether these differences are diachronic or synchronic, radiocarbon dates were carried out on 23
samples. Given the high marine consumption by some individuals (d15N up to 24‰), the dates will be subject to marine reservoir effects. The MRE’s
impact along the Pacific coast of northern Chile is significant, but also spatiotemporally variable. Here, we report 9 paired radiocarbon dates on human
bone and camelid textiles from the same graves. Five additional human samples were dated to represent the full range of dietary variability based on the
stable isotope values. Obtaining these new 23 dates not only helps to better understand the high variability observed in the dietary patterns of Pica 8, but it
also contributes to generate a MRE correction for the LIP of northern Chile.
Santana-Sagredo, Francisca [76] see Retamal, Rodrigo
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               393
Santarelli, Brunella (Metropolitan Museum of Art), Sheila Goff (History Colorado), David Killick (University of Arizona), Kari Schleher (Crow
Canyon Archaeological Center) and David Gonzales (Fort Lewis College)
[289]             Lead Isotopic Studies of Pueblo I Glazes and Archaeological Mineral Specimens
The earliest glazes in the southwest were produced during the Pueblo I period (ca. 700–850 C.E.) in the Upper San Juan region of Colorado. Lead isotope
ratios of these glaze paints were collected using multi-collector ICP-MS in an attempt to identify the source of the lead used by the potters in the production
of the glaze paints. This paper will present the results of this study, and compare it to published ratios of lead ores, as well as archaeological and
geological galena samples from sites in southwestern Colorado and northwestern New Mexico, including galena samples recovered from Chaco Canyon.
The lead isotope ratio suggests that the majority of the Pueblo I glazes were produced using the same lead ore which has been recovered from
archaeological contexts in sites in the area, and as far away as Chaco, in New Mexico. Comparison of the archaeological ratios to geological ratios of
galenas from mines in the San Juan and Rico districts of southwestern Colorado has not yet yielded a match and we continue to search for this source of
lead.
Santiago, Percy [102] see Seki, Yuji
Santiago, Emilio and Reuven Sinensky (University of California Los Angeles)
[268]             Pithouses, Pueblos, Projectile Points, Petroglyphs, and Possible Plazas: An Update on the 2015 Petrified Forest National Park Boundary
                  Expansion Survey
Petrified Forest National Park is in the third and final year of its Boundary Expansion Survey, which has nearly doubled the park’s size to 221,552 acres.
Over the last three years, researchers have identified and recorded over 300 archaeological sites in a variety of ecological zones. Our survey focuses on a
640-acre parcel that encompasses flat grasslands, dune-covered Triassic ridges, washes, and mesa tops. Site types range from large Basketmaker II
habitation sites, to Pueblo II and Pueblo III jacal structures, rock shelters, pithouses, and masonry pueblos ranging from over a single room to 20 rooms.
Our research discuses the temporal and spatial distribution of sites recorded across a grassland capped cuesta in one area of the Boundary Expansion
Survey. We highlight the variability present in a small portion of new park lands and compare the sites from the sandy grasslands atop the cuesta top, the
gently sloping sandy grasslands that climb the cuesta, and the silty flats below the cuesta.
Santini, Lauren (Harvard University)
[19]              Insights on Arboreal Exploitation in Late Classic San Bartolo, Guatemala from Midden Charcoal Analysis
This paper presents findings from analysis of the wood charcoal assemblage recovered from two chultun middens from a household site from the Late
Classic period at the Maya site of San Bartolo, Guatemala. It will include discussion of fuel gathering strategies, subsistence strategies, how the species
identified in the assemblage reflect the relationship the ancient residents of this household had with their local environment, and considerations for future
research in reconstructing ancient forest management tactics.
[19]              Chair
Santini, Lauren [19] see Weber, Sadie
Santoro, Calogero [62] see Osorio, Daniela
Santoro, Calogero (Universidad Tarapacá, Centro Investigaciones del H. Desierto, Arica, Chile)
[62]              Discussant
Santos Correa, Daniel [167] see Silva, Rosicler
Saravia, Myriam [26] see Demarest, Arthur
Sarjeant, Carmen
[252]             In and Out of Contact: Comparing Communication between Sites with Ceramic Technology in Prehistoric Southern Vietnam
Contact and communication between communities in the past can be identified through the comparison of material culture. Systematic studies of ceramic
technological components including morphology, fabric and decoration have indicated that certain sites were exposed to networks of interaction more
consistently than others. In a comparison between An Son and Rach Nui, both located in southern Vietnam with dates and evidence of occupation during
the Neolithic period, from approximately 4000–3000 B.P. Cultural boundaries can be established through interaction between groups rather than social or
geographic isolation. Detailed comparative analyses of ceramics from these two sites indicate that An Son exhibited a greater repertoire of possible
imported ceramics compared to Rach Nui, to suggest the site was isolated in terms of ceramic technology. The two sites appear to have been integrated
into two different interaction spheres within southern Vietnam, based on the ceramic evidence, and this has resulted in differences in the level of external
contact within the region between the sites. These findings from the ceramic evidence are also substantiated from the lithic tool technology. The contrast in
levels of communication between An Son and Rach Nui demonstrate networks of trade and exchange, cultural identity and social boundaries.
Sassaman, Kenneth (Univ of FL - Anthropology)
[17]              Discussant
Sassaman, Kenneth [41] see Gilmore, Zackary
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              394
Sattenspiel, Lisa [168] see Warren, Amy
Saunders, Michael (Tulane University)
[273]             Long-Term Highland Maya Environmental Interaction: Integrating Archaeological, Ethnographic and Ecological Data
My ethnographic research documenting the sacred geography of the northern rim of Lake Atitlán, Guatemala, has identified numerous contemporary
sacred locations linked to ecologically critical areas. Some of these are archaeological monuments, while surface surveys of most others evidence pre-
Hispanic materials. Additionally, previous survey (and limited excavation) documented a number of area archaeological sites dating to the Maya Preclassic,
with some exhibiting habitation up to the present; many of these also appear to be correlated to environmental variables. Subsequent ethnographic
investigation indicates current (and pervasive) environmental management, with practices of agriculture, agro-forestry, water and soil management, and
even local micro-climatic manipulation being collectively utilized to manage local ecological processes; archaeological data reveals not only the temporal
depth necessary for the development of such strategies but their implicit sustainability. Moreover, it appears such experientially-gained understanding is
embedded in core cultural formulations regarding the antepasados (ancestors), with sacred sites serving as the metaphorical bridge between past and
present populations. Thus, integrating data from archaeological, ecological, and ethnographic research can provide evidence of sustainable (over the long-
term) ecological management and highlights the necessity of integrating archaeology into the study of environmental and socio-ecological resilience and
long-term sustainability.
[273]             Chair
Savage, Sheila [240] see Hammerstedt, Scott
Sayer, Duncan (University of Central Lancashire)
[25]              The Emotive Agency of Infants and Children in Early Anglo-Saxon Inhumation Cemeteries
Infant and child graves have often received ambiguous interpretation when found in archaeological context. In 2012, a child’s grave was excavated in the
sixth century cemetery at Oakington Cambridgeshire. Sometime after deposition its feet were truncated by a large adult grave, however, the child’s bones
were repositioned on its legs, an action which impels continuing agency influencing the gravediggers long after the child had died and been buried. Child
mortality was high in many past societies, but the loss of a child was not ambiguous and nor would it have been without difficulty for small communities.
The construction of a grave, its relative position within the cemetery and its post depositional biography can be used to consider how infant and child
burials were integrated into the fabric and routine of early Anglo-Saxon community and reinforced localized societal narratives. This paper will use case
studies from the UK to explore how individual communities developed different depositional methods and will explore single and multiple infant burials
designed to evoke a response in the funerary. It will also explore the internal construction of mortuary space to look at the grouping of infants and children
as well as their relative dispersal.
Sayle, Kerry [103] see Hamilton, Derek
Sayre, Matthew [19] see Mayer, Aaron
Sayre, Matthew (University of South Dakota) and Nicco La Mattina (University of South Dakota)
[99]              Analogist Ontology at Chavín de Huantár
The ontological turn in Anthropology has revealed new possibilities for considering the relationships between humans, material things, and “other-than-
human persons,” as well as reassessing the Western notion of a nature/culture dichotomy. One site where these insights have begun to be applied is
Chavín de Huantár in Peru. The iconography of the site is well known for its mixed human/animal hybrids, a style that prompted John Rowe to consider the
art figuratively as visual kennings, with certain elements serving as comparisons to other beings by means of substitution. While Mary Weismantel,
amongst others, has challenged Rowe’s figurative interpretation, her recent work also raises the possibility of gaining insight from Viveiros de Castro’s
perspectivist theory. Here we consider how an archaeologically grounded approach, acknowledging that the Chavín domestic economy was focused on
farming rather than hunting, thusly problematizing the basic mode of relation axiomatic to perspectivism, can relate to the ontological turn. In particular, we
analyze how these theoretical trends can develop the implications of economic modes of production based on hierarchical redistribution rather than on
predation. Finally, we examine how the analogist ontology, proposed by Descola, allows for insights into the composite chimerical figures of the Chavín
aesthetic.
Scaffidi, Beth
[215]             Narration, Mediation, and Transformation: Dismembered Heads from Middle Horizon Uraca (Majes Valley, Arequipa, Peru) and the Andean
                  Feline-Hunter Mythology
Excavations of two sectors of the cemetery site of Uraca in the Lower Majes Valley (coastal Arequipa, Peru) yielded human skeletons with evidence of
post-mortem processing, including defleshing, removal of the soft tissues of the eye orbit, and drilling holes into the frontal and parietal bones. The 11
beheaded individuals were young adult or adult males. In addition, six defleshed (and unarticulated) mandibles belonged to likely males, whose crania
were not recovered. Decoration styles, processing strategies, and social use (and re-use) differed between sectors. Associated with the Sector IIC human
trophies, we found a skull and paws of an indigenous pampas cat. Similar to the human trophies, the cat’s eyes had been cut out and stuffed with red cord.
This paper examines these findings in light of Van Gennep’s tripartite division of death rituals into rites of separation, margin, and aggregation, as well as in
light of the Andean hunter-feline mythology. I engage with the idea that making, handling, and displaying these trophies served key functions in dealing
with the crisis of death, serving to communicate conquest, mediate foreign spirits/ power, and harness or transform that volatile power into a generative
force for the conquering community.
Scaramelli, Franz (Centro de Antropologia, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas) and Kay Scaramelli (Universidad Central de
Venezuela)
[175]             Rock Art in the Construction of Social Space in the Parguaza River, Venezuela
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 395
The rock paintings of the Parguaza River form part of a tradition that extends back thousands of years. We can only speculate on why the paintings were
made, who made them, or what their original meaning may have been. However, rock art provides an excellent index of the symbolic world of the peoples
who settled the area, as manifested in different traditions. Local belief systems refer to ancestral territorial ties, and the mythical and ritual significance of
mountains, caves, and rock art manifestations. These ethnographic sources can be used to advance ideas about the significance of rock art, as they
illustrate the role of rock paintings in ritual activities used to mark the territory of an exclusive and potentially endogamous network of communities. In an
attempt to understand the role of rock art in the production of social space, we will examine local toponyms, ceremonies, and myths, referring to different
natural and cultural features of the territory including accounts of the elaboration of rock art. Panels painted in superimposed layers and styles may have
served to establish cultural ties to the landscape; these were reinforced through re-utilization by successive populations prior to and beyond the time of
European contact.
Scaramelli, Kay [175] see Scaramelli, Franz
Scarborough, Vernon [64] see Carr, Christopher
Scarborough, Vernon (University of Cincinnati)
[262]             Discussant
Scarry, C. Margaret (Univ. of North Carolina-Chapel Hill) and Kathleen Deagan (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[28]              Shaping the South: Environmental Archaeology's Impact on Colonial Archaeology of the American South and the Caribbean
This paper argues that the incorporation of environmental archaeological data into long-term research programs can significantly influence theoretical and
methodological practice thereby enriching and sometimes reshaping interpretations. We draw on our respective experiences of producing, consuming and
integrating environmental data to reflect on the benefits of such collaborative endeavors. To illustrate our points, we use examples from the American
South and the Caribbean to explore the ways in which routine incorporation of environmental data has shaped the development of historical archaeology
and contributed to understanding colonial histories in these regions.
Scattolin, Maria Cristina [57] see Lazzari, Marisa
Scerri, Eleanor (University of Oxford) and Richard Jennings (University of Oxford)
[22]              Developing Population Size Estimates for the Saharo-Arabian Late Pleistocene and Expectations of their Demographic Effects
Similarities between stone tools in northeast Africa and Southwest Asia are considered to reflect either one or more of a number of processes including
technological convergence in similar ecological zones, demic dispersal and cultural transfer/cultural diffusion. However, determining the likelihood of these
effects is contingent upon accurate estimates of population size—a variable that is rarely discussed explicitly. In this paper, upper and lower bounds for
population sizes in the northeast African Late Pleistocene are extracted from modelled net primary productivity in three time slices, at 130 thousand years
ago (ka), 125ka and 115ka. These data are then used to simulate the likelihood of a number of demographic outcomes potentially affecting the similarities
in the archaeological record between Late Pleistocene sites in northeast Africa and others in the Arabian Peninsula. Finally, the results are considered
more broadly for understanding the out-of-Africa process.
Schaan, Denise P. [263] see Alves, Daiana
Schaan, Denise
[263]             Historical Ecology: Archaeology for a Sustainable Future
Historical Ecology is a research program that seeks to integrate diverse perspectives from human and natural sciences to improve our understanding on
the relations between societies and their changing landscapes. Investigations in historical ecology draw from different corpus of data, including the
participation of the public, not only to solve scientific problems, but also to provide answers to social and political situations. Archaeology has a major role
in the production of knowledge on the use of landscapes over vast periods of time, so it can contribute significantly to inform public policies to better plan
the future. Drawing on Amazonian case studies, this paper shows the possibilities of such an approach, including the advantages of working in networks
such as IHOPE-The Integrated History and Future of People on Earth.
[263]             Chair
Schaan Pahl, Denise [263] see Iriarte, Jose
Schachner, Greg [178] see Lesure, Richard
Scharf, Elizabeth (University of North Dakota) and Melinda Leach (University of North Dakota)
[37]              Reflections on Teaching and Assessing Student Learning in Introductory Archaeology
In this presentation, we present several of the means that we have used to collect data on student learning and the student experience in our introductory
archaeology classes. Standardized institutional student evaluation forms, learning-response surveys, instructor-generated evaluation forms, hands-on lab
activities, assignments, pre- and post-semester surveys (the “knowledge surveyor”), and evaluation of student products with rubrics will be described and
discussed, along with their roles in formative and summative assessment. Course modifications and evaluation of department/program and university
learning goals will be explored, along with a look at student perceptions of learning. Multiple uses for these data will be examined along with a look at
change over time in direct and indirect assessment results.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                396
Scharf, Elizabeth [37] see Leach, Melinda
Scheel-Ybert, Rita [49] see Mateus, Jorge
Scheiber, Laura (Indiana University) and Amanda Burtt (Indiana University)
[123]              Investigating High-Altitude Campsites in the Rocky Mountains: A Decade Later
Interpreting past hunter-gatherer use of mountains has been hampered through the years by difficult access, excessive ground vegetation, and wilderness
restrictions. With the regular occurrence of forest fires that have exposed hundreds of sites during the last decade, our knowledge of campsite structure
and landscape use has dramatically improved. We now know that remote campsites often contain tens of thousands of artifacts that represent a greater
commitment to mountain resources and places than previously considered. What used to be rare is no longer unusual but is nonetheless still impressive. In
this paper, we focus on a three-year project at the Caldwell Creek site (48FR7091) in the Absaroka Mountains of Wyoming. In addition to an overwhelming
number of lithic flakes, a 2011 fire also revealed diagnostic Late Period artifacts, including projectile points, knives/bifaces, and the largest number of
Intermountain Ware ceramics found in the state. We discuss these assemblages as well as new recording methodologies employed to document these
types of sites.
[123]              Chair
Scheinsohn, Vivian [94] see Rizzo, Florencia
Scheinsohn, Vivian (INAPL-CONICET/ University of Buenos Aires), Pablo Marcelo Fernández (INAPL-CONICET/ University of Buenos Aires),
Mercedes Grisel Fernández, Florencia Garrone (Laboratorio de Genética Forense, Equipo Argentino ) and Mercedes Salado (Equipo Argentino
de Antropología Forense)
[176]              Taxonomical Identification by Cytochrome b: A Patagonian Case
The application of traditional zooarchaeological methods in the analysis of faunal specimens recovered in Acevedo 1 site (Chubut, Argentina) led us to a
low level of taxonomic identification. Therefore we decided to implement new ways to strengthen its information capacity. We joined hence the Laboratory
of Forensic Genetics of the Argentine Forensic Anthropology Team (LGF-EAAF), which had developed locally a protocol for identify animal species in
forensic contexts by Cytochrome b analysis. As a first step we tested the protocols by a blind test in order to identify bone subactual samples. The second
step was calibrating its use in an archaeological context applying the protocol to Acevedo 1 site. Among the archaeological samples huemul
(Hippocamelus bisulcus, South Andean Deer), was identified. This is the first archaeological identification of this endemic deer of the Andean Patagonian
forest in Western Chubut and the first to be achieved by Cytochrome b. As a conclusion, the protocol was effective in solving the problem of determining
forensic species. The results obtained allow the determination of archaeological samples depending on the genetic material degradation but the destructive
nature of the analysis and its costs make that its application must be assessed properly.
Scherer, Andrew [59] see Golden, Charles
Schermer, Shirley [266] see Pope, Melody
Schiappacasse, Paola (Universidad de Puerto Rico)
[141]              Why are Archaeological Collections Relevant in the 21st Century? The Caribbean Experience
The late 19th century and beginning of the 20th century provides us with numerous examples of the acquisition of collections carried out by museums.
When archaeologists talk about those collections, housed at museums worldwide, the discussions are often directed towards how the lack of context limits
or nullifies their research potential. I argue that we need to go back and carefully re-examine the research prospects of these collections. This presentation
considers several avenues for research that can be developed in order to use the collections from a collections management perspective, and also to
develop research projects using the artifacts as an important part.
From a collections management perspective we can trace the origin of the collection, looking at who was involved in the acquisition, registration and
cataloging processes of these artifacts. Second, we need to fully understand the changes that have resulted from deaccessioning, exchanges and loans.
Thirdly, I argue that the scientific potential has not been lost but instead we need to pose questions that re-examine what we really know about these
artifacts. Drawing from current research in the Caribbean I will demonstrate that it is possible to develop insightful research projects that concentrate on
museum collections.
[141]              Chair
Schiappacasse, Paola [141] see Rodriguez, Yasha
Schieppati, Frank [131] see Hayward, Michele
Schilt, Flora [211] see Thompson, Jessica
Schleher, Kari [289] see Santarelli, Brunella
Schmader, Matthew (University of New Mexico)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                397
[131]            Shape Shifters, Spirit Guides, and Portals to Other Worlds in Puebloan Rock Images of the Southwest
Rock imagery in the puebloan region of the southwestern United States often combines elements from different animal, human, and plant sources.
Blended elements may depict or refer to other-wordly states of being. Beings made from combined elements shift from shapes familiar in the present world
and transport the frame of reference to the spirit world. Specific animal forms may be selected because they are spirit guides, have specific powers, or are
guardians of cardinal directions from mythical times. Other worlds, especially the world below, may refer to mythical times before animals and people were
fully formed, or may refer to the land of the dead or the underworld. Some animals, such as birds, are chosen as messengers of prayers or offerings while
others are chosen because of their healing powers (such as bears). Many images refer to the transformation that occurs when dancers wear kachina
masks and then assume the attributes of those kachinas. Examples will be presented from images dating to the late pre-European contact (A.D. 1300 to
A.D. 1540) found in Petroglyph National Monument, New Mexico.
Schmidt, Christopher [52] see Osterholt, Amber
Schmidt, Paul
[230]            Radiocarbon Dates from Baño Negro and Cerro Quiotepec, Chilapa, Guerrero
Recent dates from two sites in the Chilapa area of the Montaña Baja of Guerrero state, Baño Negro and Cerro Quiotepec-Oxtotitlan, throw light on the
Formative horizon temporality in the area, including the Oxtotitlan rock shelter. Baño Negro ceramics indicate continuous Early through Late Formative
occupation, and the radiocarbon dates confirm Early Formative occupation, perhaps earlier than previously thought.
[230]            Chair
Schmidt , Ryan [147] see Karsten, Jordan
Schmidt Shoenberg, Paul [230] see Schmitz, Kirk
Schmitt, Dave (RPA)
[69]             From Dirt to Behavior: An Introduction
This paper presents an introduction to the life and times of David B. Madsen and a collection of presentations that celebrate his significant contributions.
Perhaps best known for his unparalleled investigations of Great Basin paleoecology and Fremont period farmers and foragers, Madsen’s voluminous and
enduring record also includes books and articles on late Pleistocene-Holocene paleontology, the peopling of North America, the Asian Upper Paleolithic
and the transition to agriculture, the prehistory of western China, and the initial peopling of the Tibetan Plateau and the development of high altitude
adaptations. His diverse, interdisciplinary approaches to the archaeological record are truly “from dirt to behavior” as they characteristically incorporate
geomorphology, paleoecology, climate change, ethnography, and human behavioral ecology. His collected works have greatly enhanced ecological and
archaeological studies around the world and his methods, theoretical approaches, and results of investigations will continue to influence earth and social
science research for generations to come.
[69]             Chair
Schmitz, Kirk, Amanda R. Harvey (University of Nevada, Reno), Christopher Von-Nagy (University of Nevada, Reno; Florida State Universi),
Eliseo Padilla Gutiérrez (Instituto de Investigaciones Antropológicas UNAM) and Paul Schmidt Shoenberg (Instituto de Investigaciones
Antropológicas UNAM)
[230]            Contextualizing the Art: Excavations at Oxtotitlán Cave, Guerrero, Mexico
This paper presents findings from the 2014–2015 field seasons of the Urban Origins Project at Oxtotitlán cave in Guerrero, Mexico. Collaborative
archaeological methods at the Quiotepec-Oxtotitlán site resulted in extensive survey, preliminary mapping, and excavations at the cave and in the
surrounding area. Excavation units were placed in association with the murals, at the mouth of the rockshelter in the northern part of the cave complex, and
in the botanical garden within the protected component of the archaeological site. Units in the rockshelter revealed cultural material that differed from that
of the botanical garden, suggesting specialized use of space. Both lithic and ceramic analyses indicate intense activity during the Middle and Late
Formative Periods, and exhibit ties to local cultural complexes as well as long distance interaction and trade. In particular, stylistic elements of the art and
aspects of the Oxtotitlán ceramic assemblage resemble contemporaneous material culture from the greater Isthmian area, notably Chalcatzingo in the
Morelos highlands. Future plans guided by these excavations include the placement of new units in unstudied areas to further document ritual behavior at
the cave, and the continued support of the Acatalán communities’ preservation and education program at Oxtotitlán cave.
Schneider, Anna (University of Colorado, Boulder)
[64]             American Southwest, Mexican Northwest: An Examination of Ground and Chipped Stone Artifacts from Garden Canyon Village
Garden Canyon Village is a large multi-component formative period site located in southeastern Arizona on the Fort Huachuca military reservation. Located
10 miles north of the U.S.-Mexico Border and 65 miles southeast of the Tucson Basin, Garden Canyon Village was located on the frontier of Hohokam,
Mogollon, Casas Grandes, and Trincheras culture areas. This poster presents the final results from an analysis of Garden Canyon Village’s ground and
chipped stone artifacts. In addition to providing insight into raw materials, lithic technology, subsistence strategies, and regional trade, this project
addresses Garden Canyon Village's position in the larger Southwest. The diversity of artifact types and source analysis of non-local materials has revealed
that Garden Canyon Village was a crossroads for the movement of goods and an important transition zone between the major culture areas of the
Southwest.
Schneider, Adam (University of Colorado at Boulder)
[74]             A Tale of Two Cities: The Role of Cultural Factors in Determining Resilience to Climate Change
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                398
In recent decades, there has been an increasing interest at both the scholarly and public level in the relationship between social transformation and climate
change in the past, and especially in the potential role of climate change as a cause of societal collapse. However, this focus has also raised some
concerns that too much emphasis is being placed upon environmental factors in some archaeological collapse models, and consequently that important
social factors are not being adequately taken into account.
In order to highlight how cultural factors affect the impacts of climate change upon past societies, in this paper I will consider how drought affected two
cities: Nineveh (in northern Iraq) and Sijilmasa (in southeastern Morocco). I will argue that although both cities were situated in arid environments, their
relative resilience to drought can be attributed primarily to a complex of unique historical factors. Consequently, this “tale of two cities” demonstrates the
need to ensure that the role of cultural factors in determining the relative impact of climatic fluctuations upon past societies is not underemphasized in our
explanations for collapse.
[74]              Chair
Schober, Theresa [133] see Peres, Tanya
Schober, Theresa (University of Florida)
[221]             Historical Illustration as Narrative: A Critical Inquiry
The integration of research-driven results with visual media is an integral component of effective museum exhibitions, general interest publications and
public programs in archaeology. Annual archaeology month activities, for example, often result in the design of posters to attract audiences and illustrate
attributes of indigenous cultures. To what degree does this popular form of visual communication reflect contemporary theoretical perspectives on gender
and identity rather than reinforce traditional biases? This paper explores how this imagery is developed, by whom, and the resultant portrayals of
masculinity and femininity through a systematic analysis of visual representations of the Calusa of southwest Florida, an archaeologically and historically
known chiefdom. In contrast with textual analysis of gender roles in historical documents and archaeological discourse, contemporary Western values
weigh heavily in artistic execution, mediated through interaction with publishers, educators, administrators, and other stakeholders. This subconscious and
overtly positivist messaging impacts the general public’s understanding of the complexities of gender roles in history where female depictions are both
minimized and marginalized.
Schoenfelder, Meagan [265] see Field Murray, Wendi
Schoenholzer, David (Department of Economics, UC Berkeley), Ernesto Dal Bo (Haas School of Business and Travers Department of ) and
Kirsten Vacca (Anthropology Department, UC Berkeley)
[247]             Integrating Archaeological Evidence on the Origins and Transformation of Sociopolitical Complexity During the Holocene
Investigating changes in sociopolitical complexity is an important theme in archaeological research. Building upon previous work, the research project
presented in this paper investigates the changes in complexity worldwide, questioning where increasing complexity first occurred and whether identifiable
stages exist. The assessment compares patterns of change by pulling from archaeological and economic theories and data. Global archaeological sites
are recorded from authoritative sources and digitized in a dataset that records, through the use of covariates, time since initial settlement of regions and the
subsequent changes in complexity. Covariates that have been identified for each site incorporate geographic, technological and ethnographic variables.
Approaching the question of increasing complexity at the granularity of the archaeological ‘site’ as opposed to pre-established cultural complexes allows for
a more explicit analysis that considers the impact of regional change on the daily lives of ancient peoples. The future goals of the project include the
incorporation of site information from a wide range of regional experts in order to build a robust database that will allow for an increasingly sound analysis
utilizing multiple lines of evidence. The resulting data will add to our archaeological and economic knowledge of temporal and spatial change in
sociopolitical complexity.
Schoenike, Katelyn (College of Wooster), Olivia Navarro-Farr (Professor College of Wooster) and Fox Georgia (California State University,
Chico)
[183]             Diverse Identities of Plantation Life: Midden excavation on Betty's Hope Plantation
Betty’s Hope Plantation, on the island of Antigua has been excavated by California State University, Chico, since 2007. The site incorporates a wide-range
of diverse use-areas including the Great House, a rum distillery, and slave quarters. Excavations have revealed that every area of the plantation represents
a unique community with distinct material culture. In the 2014 season, researchers discovered a midden that appears to have been utilized by two of these
diverse plantation communities. The midden, located between the great house and the slave village, was most likely employed by members from both
communities. It therefore represents a context that incorporates vastly different cultural expressions and practices on the plantation. Although the
Codrington family kept extensive plantation records revealing their elite status and identity they simultaneously overlooked that of the slave population
which are limited to the remains found in the midden. This evidence, largely inthe forms of Afro-Antiguan wear indicates those enslaved peoples
incorporated their own cultural customs from areas of West Africa. In this poster, I discuss the collective identities on the plantation that are represented
through the material culture in this unique midden and how I teased out the cultural expressions of those most underrepresented peoples.
Schoeninger, Margaret J. [44] see Streuli, Samantha A.
Scholl, Michael (College of Staten Island, CUNY)
[60]              Historical Ecology and Planning for the Future: Mapping the Historical Trajectory of American Agriculture
Carole L. Crumley has long advocated broadly inclusive studies that reach across disciplines to bring together social and environmental data from multiple
geographic and temporal scales in order to draw lessons from the past. This work reports the use of those approaches to map the changes in colonial
American agriculture and on-going research into 19th century westward expansion. What is becoming clear is that U.S. has a long-term trajectory which
continues to move away from the sustaining strategies of yeoman (owner-occupiers) to short-term strategies of farmers using hired labor on rented land. Is
that the direction that Americans wish to keep traveling?
Schollmeyer, Karen (Archaeology Southwest) and Matthew A. Peeples (Arizona State Univeristy)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              399
[64]               Population Changes and Intraregional Variability in the Mimbres Region of Southwest New Mexico, A.D. 1000–1450
Population estimates are the foundation for many current interpretations of social changes, human demands on resources, and land use patterns in the
Mimbres region over time. Population estimates for the area currently rely on either local datasets for specific subregions, or regional data from the early
1980s. This poster presents updated population estimates for the Upper Gila, Mimbres Valley, and Eastern Mimbres areas between A.D. 1000 and 1450. A
large regional database allows us to examine the changing demographic history of the region over time and highlights intraregional variability over this 450
year period. Although relative population changes over time at a regional scale follow the pattern outlined by earlier studies, there are substantial
differences in the population histories of each of the three subregions, and in the absolute population values for the region as a whole.
Scholnick, Jonathan [272] see Munson, Jessica
Scholnick, Jonathan (UC Davis) and Ryan Nichols (California State University, Fullerton)
[272]              Reading the Chisel’s Chippings: Changing Religious Attitudes about Death and Eighteenth-Century New England Gravestones
The eighteenth century was a dynamic period of religious change, particularly in New England, as the Calvinistic influence of the Puritan settlers waned
and new denominations emerged. This was also a time of rapidly changing funerary ritual, when the inscriptions on grave markers shifted from emphases
on marking the remains of the decedent to commemorating them, and gravestone motifs became more diverse. This study examines the ways that
religious attitudes towards death change, using a database of texts and decorative attributes inscribed on eighteenth-century New England gravestones,
and their linkage with prominent decorative motifs on grave markers. Some argue that changes in grave marker decorations, epitaphs, and inscriptions
reflect ideological changes, while others argue these changes reflect long-term social changes. Specifically, this study examines spread of novel decorative
and linguistic elements found on gravestones during this period. Not only do the textual shifts in gravestone inscription enable us to characterize the
diffusion of religious ideas, the linkage between decorative imagery and religious ideas informs middle range theories about the archaeology of religion.
Schott, Amy (University of Arizona, Petrified Forest National Park)
[120]              Archaeological Site Distribution in Relation to Soils and Geomorphic Characteristics in Dune Landscapes in Northeastern Arizona
The Petrified Forest National Park in northeastern Arizona contains abundant archaeology sites located in dune settings. Archaeological research in the
area has shown apparent correlation between archaeological site locations and dune geomorphology, suggesting that prehistoric inhabitants frequently
targeted dunes for habitation sites. It has been proposed that this relationship may be due to extensive use of dune soils for agriculture. This paper
investigates soils and geomorphology of dune environments in Petrified Forest to characterize the relationship between archaeological site location and
landscape characteristics such as soil type, landform position, and microenvironmental properties within dunes. This research will contribute to a better
understanding of how prehistoric inhabitants used the dune landscape, and specifically what landscape characteristics may have contributed to making
dune soils available for farming. In addition, the spatial relationship between archaeological site location and geomorphic patterns is explored to better
understand site formation processes, site distribution, and site visibility in eolian settings in Petrified Forest National Park.
Schott, Amy [268] see Reitze, William
Schroder, Whittaker [59] see Golden, Charles
Schroder, Whittaker (University of Pennsylvania)
[228]              Hilltops and States in the Usumacinta River Basin
The ordering of space has been a focus of state-building initiatives since the formation of the earliest centralized polities. Landscape archaeologists are
especially well situated to contribute to discussions regarding how states succeed and fail to control diverse populations in topographically complex areas.
During the Late Classic period, the Middle Usumacinta Basin supported numerous regional polities, including Piedras Negras and Yaxchilan, that vied for
supremacy over terrain broken by hills, valleys, and rivers that at times aided and challenged their efforts. The role of peripheral populations in this political
landscape raises questions as to the influence of more localized political dynamics to the macro-political struggles of the Maya area. A comparison of
hilltop sites, geographically and topographically peripheral to the Piedras Negras polity, reveals that in some cases hilltops were crucial to state monitoring
of the political landscape, while elsewhere, hilltop settlements may reflect the acts of refugees "voting with their feet" to evade being governed. Recent
survey and preliminary excavations at the site of El Infiernito, in particular, have raised many of the theoretical issues archaeologists face working in hilltop
environments. Through settlement patterns, GIS analysis, and further excavation, El Infiernito is expected to address such challenges.
[228]              Chair
Schroeder, Hannes [160] see Ziesemer, Kirsten
Schroeder, Hannes (Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University)
[160]              Ancient Taino Genome Sheds New Light on the Peopling of the Caribbean
The Tainos were the first people to encounter Columbus when he set foot in the New World. The Taino culture emerged in the Caribbean around 1200 CE
but the ancestral origins of the Tainos remain a matter of debate. Some scholars believe that the ancestors of the Tainos originated in the Amazon Basin,
while others contend that they may have spread from the Colombian Andes via a Circum-Caribbean route. Theoretically, the ancestors of the Tainos could
have entered the Caribbean from, any or all parts of the American mainland, including North, Central and South America. Ancient DNA holds the key to
solving this problem, as we can directly test some of the hypotheses put forward by archeologists and linguists. However, until now ancient DNA studies in
the Caribbean have been hampered by poor preservation. Here we report the genome sequence of a thousand-year-old (894–1017 cal AD, 95 percent
prob.) Lucayan-Taino individual whose remains were recovered from the site of Preacher's Cave in the Bahamas. We sequenced the genome to an
average depth of 10.8× and show that the ancestry of the Taino can be reliably traced to the fluvial settlements of the Upper Orinoco Valley in South
America.
Schroedl, Gerald (University of Tennessee)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               400
[126]             Changing Patterns of Status among White Soldiers and Africans at Brimstone Hill Fortress
British occupation of Brimstone Hill Fortress on St. Kitts from 1690 to 1854 developed in response to local conditions relating to the economics and
organization of enslaved labor and to the strategic needs of maintaining a military garrison. The use, size, placement, and chronology of structures, and
their associated material culture show that African slaves differed depending on ownership and military status, whereas branch affiliation (Ordnance,
Medical, Artillery, or Infantry) and to a lesser degree marital status among officers and enlisted men characterized white troops. The housing conditions
and diet for small numbers of African workers was comparable to enlisted white soldiers and for black soldiers too as their numbers increased and they
replaced white soldiers in the post emancipation era.
Schroll, Andrew [94] see Marks, Theodore
Schryver, James (University of Minnesota, Morris)
[161]             Crusader Archaeology at the Crossroads of the 21st Century
Crusader Archaeology at the beginning of the 21st century occupies a somewhat strange position. While certain aspects of the field are at the forefront of
interdisciplinary approaches to archaeological evidence, others remain focused on basic issues of identification, categorization, and preservation. In part
this is due to the nature of the field itself. In addition, some studies can only focus on preserving a particular monument from further decay before moving
on to the next one. The port city of Famagusta is a case in point. Meanwhile, in other cases, international and interdisciplinary teams have been able to
complete thorough studies of monuments that can serve as models for future projects. The same trends apply to our knowledge of other aspects of
Crusader archaeology ranging in scale from pottery to site types. In terms of theory, the issue of identity and cultural contact remain a strong focus in
many countries, and we continue to grow in our understanding of this complex field. All the while, the current political situation in many of the relevant
countries continues to present both challenges, but also reminders of the ways in which medieval archaeology can have a special relevance for our world
today.
Schubert, Ashley (University of Michigan)
[225]             Continuity and Change in the Pisgah Built Environment
Previous studies of Mississippian towns and villages have extensively detailed the various elements of community organization and built environment that
reflect the incorporation of widely shared Mississippian ideas and beliefs. How these towns were built and rebuilt over time demonstrates how regional
processes of expansion and integration played out at the presumed edge of the Mississippian world. This paper examines the evolving built environment
during the Pisgah period in western North Carolina and how the various architectural and spatial elements were used to organize community space.
Recent radiocarbon dating at the Cane River site (31Yc91), Garden Creek site (31Hw1), and Warren Wilson site (31Bn29) provides new insights into how
extra-local interaction with Mississippian groups influenced Pisgah traditions throughout the Appalachian Summit.
Schulenburg, Marcus (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee) and Robert Cook (The Ohio State University)
[225]             Filling the Built Environment: Using Ceramic Characteristics to Examine Fort Ancient Village Life
In the Middle Ohio Valley, the Early Fort Ancient period (A.D. 1000–1200) saw significant changes to social organization reflected in the built environment.
Among the most archaeologically visible of these developments was a new style of settlement—the formal village—typically consisting of spatially
differentiated zones arranged in concentric circles. This study selects two Early Fort Ancient village sites from the Cincinnati area, Guard (12D29) and
Turpin (33HA19); each site displays patterns of spatially differentiated architecture and activity. To further understand the nature of this segregation of
space and activity, we focus on the use of ceramics with particular attention on their technical and stylistic attributes as mechanisms through which
participants shared information. We use X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) in conjunction with physical attributes to examine vessel function, the construction
techniques of Fort Ancient potters, and the identification of non-local vessels. We use these data to create fuller pictures of the social organization and
activities within each site, but also to expand our understanding of the different patterns that occur within the region during this period of social change.
Schulting, Rick
[52]              New research on the Mesolithic ‘skull nests’ of Ofnet cave, SW Germany
Since their discovery in the early twentieth century, there has been controversy over the chronology of the two ‘skull nests’ found within Ofnet cave in
southwest Germany. Initially the focus was on whether they dated to the Palaeolithic, Mesolithic or Neolithic. The first radiocarbon dates at least resolved
this issue in favour of the Mesolithic, but the considerable range obtained fueled a second debate: were the skulls deposited in a single event, which,
together with the peri-mortem injuries present on many of the skulls, would suggest a massacre; or, alternatively, was this part of a regional mortuary rite
given to certain members of the community, resulting in repeated deposition over some centuries? Here, we report the preliminary results of a new project
aimed at resolving the chronology of Ofnet through a series of new 14C dates, and, in doing so, to address the nature of the head-related rituals that are
clearly implicated whichever scenario is accepted, though with rather different consequences both for the people involved, and for our understanding of
Central European Mesolithic hunter-gatherers.
[52]              Chair
Schulting, Rick [76] see Santana Sagredo, Francisca
Schurr, Mark [111] see Dawson, Emily
Schurr, Mark (University of Notre Dame), Erica Ausel (Indiana University - Bloomington) and Della Cook (Indiana University - Bloomington)
[116]             Burial Diversity at the Angel Site: How Many People and How Many Ways?
The Angel site is a Middle Mississippian civic-ceremonial center that sat on the northeastern periphery of the Mississippian world. Excavations at the site,
especially during the WPA era and a series of archaeological field schools just after World War II, created a collection representing several hundred human
burials. Previous studies of this collection have emphasized relatively intact burials, either primary fleshed inhumations or easily identified secondary
burials of single individuals. Although the modal burial at Angel was a fleshed inhumation of a single individual in an extended supine position, a great
variety of burial methods were used including multiple secondary burials and individuals who underwent some degree of cremation. Understanding the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               401
significance and meaning of these diverse treatments is complicated by site taphonomy; many burials were disturbed prehistorically, causing fragmentation
and comingling, or were excavated without a full appreciation of the need to distinguish between various possible activities or practices that produced
commingling or burnt human remains. This paper provides possible interpretations in a regional context for non-modal burial practices including partial
cremations and their spatial and temporal relationships to burned and unburned structures, secondary burials, and the recent identification of previously
unrecognized multiple-individual secondary burials.
Schwab, Christian [95] see Weinelt, Mara
Schwadron, Margo [28] see Quitmyer, Irvy
Schwadron, Margo (NPS-Southeast Archeological Center)
[132]             Monuments From The Sea: The Prehistoric Shellscapes of the Ten Thousand Islands, Fl
The Ten Thousand Islands, Everglades, Florida contain an impressive maritime landscape, composed of entire islands constructed and terraformed with
shell midden. These shell work sites are the tangible and complex vestiges of hunter-fisher-gatherer communities. Shell work formations include extensive
complexes of mounds and features. Similarities in temporal and spatial patterning among shell islands suggest that communities were interrelated across a
broad region. Shell work islands and their various features were formed and constructed to create new land, functional activity spaces, habitable places
and dwellings, and to support fish/shellfish production and other subsistence activities. Other terraforming of shell work islands created architecture, sacred
places, ceremonial landscapes, and monuments to memorialize significant people, places and memories tied to the landscape. Though shell work sites are
complex sites analogous to palimpsests, they are more than just shell midden accumulations, amalgamations of shell mounds, or assemblages of features;
they are distinct and socially constructed prehistoric landscapes. In order to understand these complex histories, they need to be examined on several
complementary temporal and spatial scales, and I incorporate a multi-scalar landscape approach, including examining sites as individually constructed
features, as human centered social landscapes, and within a larger, regional settlement pattern context.
[132]             Chair
Schwartz, Glenn (Johns Hopkins University)
[12]              Kurd Qaburstan, A “Second Generation” Urban Site on the Erbil Plain
While the emergence and early trajectory of urbanism has been extensively studied in southern Mesopotamia and in Syria, similar research has been
conspicuously rare in northern Iraq. Fieldwork at Kurd Qaburstan (ancient Qabra?) on the Erbil plain conducted by the Johns Hopkins University now
affords an opportunity to investigate a major Bronze Age urban center of northern Iraq. Since its main period of occupation is the Middle Bronze Age (Old
Babylonian period, early second millennium B.C.), work at Kurd Qaburstan is designed to study the nature of an urban community in an era of “second
generation” urbanism, following the first urban florescence in the Early Bronze Age (third millennium B.C.). Paradigms of Middle Bronze Age “hollow cities”
replicating third millennium urban design but lacking dense populations are tested, as are hypotheses of heterarchy. The results of two field seasons (2013
and 2014) include excavated exposures documenting Middle and Late Bronze occupation and geophysical prospection exposing 30 hectares of the Middle
Bronze city and revealing some of its organizational characteristics.
[12]              Chair
Schwartz, Austin [267] see Arakawa, Fumiyasu
Schwartz, Christopher (Arizona State University), Ben Nelson (Arizona State University) and David Abbott (Arizona State University)
[289]             Differences in Mesoamerican Connections Across Hohokam Canal Systems of the Phoenix Basin, Arizona
Material evidence of interaction between people of the U.S. Southwest and Mesoamerica is detected as early as ca. 2000 B.C.E. Markers of long-distance
interaction increase in diversity and abundance over time, growing to include copper bells, iron pyrite mirrors, and other objects and symbols. These
markers moved up to 2000 km by social actions and exchange mechanisms that remain obscure. Although the Hohokam had stronger ties to Mesoamerica
than any region in the U.S. southwest, more could be done to examine local variation in that interaction. For example, to what extent were Hohokam canal
systems differentially engaged in acquisition of nonlocal and “Mesoamerican-like objects?” Phoenix Basin Hohokam settlements can be grouped into canal
systems, or irrigation cooperatives that researchers suggest functioned as discrete social units. In this study, we evaluate whether settlements in Phoenix
Basin Canal Systems 1 and 2 were differentially engaged in distant interactions and how their involvement changed over time. Both systems developed
over centuries, yet recent studies suggest that CS1 grew more slowly at first, later expanding relatively quickly. We suspect that distant objects and
symbols played a greater role in the formalization of social relationships crucial to the more rapidly forming irrigation cooperative.
[289]             Chair
Schwarz, Kevin (ASC Group, Inc.)
[291]             Costly Signaling, Cost Masking, and the Classic-Postclassic Transition: Slipped Ceramics and other Media in the Context of the Petén
                  Lakes Region, Guatemala.
Costly signaling theory indicates that highly visible acts of public generosity and display, which exact costs not easily recouped, however, can provide
social benefits to those engaged in these acts. Such signaling is associated with the strength or fitness of the provider. Analyzing primarily slipped
ceramics in display contexts but also making comparative references to obsidian use and architecture, this paper explores how Maya elites and rural sub-
elites engaged in costly signaling and modified their actions by cost shifting and cost masking. The presentation focuses on the Lake Petén Itzá basin and
its surroundings from the Late Classic to Postclassic transition. Costly signaling has been implicated by archaeologists in the rise of complex societies.
However, costly signaling theory, with some modifications, might equally apply to theorizing political collapse and the regeneration of complex societies
thereafter.
Schweikart, John [37] see Johnston, Cheryl
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 402
Schwendler, Rebecca (PaleoWest Archaeology)
[170]            Beers with Lawrence and Insights into Magdalenian Visual Display at El Mirón Cave
In 1996, Lawrence Guy Straus embarked on new adventures in fieldwork at El Mirón Cave in Cantabria, northern Spain. As a young University of New
Mexico graduate student the author joined him there from 1997–2000. Excavating literally thousands of Magdalenian artifacts and features in the cave’s
corral area and visiting other Magdalenian caves on weekends made Lawrence’s fact-filled and captivating classroom lectures come alive. The author’s
fascination with personal ornamentation and long-distance trade and exchange melded with Lawrence’s suggestion of a grand synthesis of existing
Magdalenian information. That combination set her on a long, challenging, but ultimately rewarding path of dissertation research that explored relationships
among visual display, population density, and social mechanisms of colonization. As one of the very special, favored Magdalenian caves in Cantabria, El
Mirón has continued to yield information that, when examined in the context of larger regional patterns, provides further insights into Magdalenian social
behavior across space and time. El Mirón helped Lawrence’s university career end with a flourish and will continue to provide fodder for years of
professional contributions by Lawrence in retirement and by his students and colleagues.
Scott, Becki [79] see Vandam, Ralf
Scott, Ann (University of Texas at Austin/aci consulting)
[93]             Cave 1 at the Site of at the Site of Chawak But’o’ob: An Interpretation of Subterranean Space in Northern Belize
During the 2013 season, a team from California State University, Los Angeles worked with the Rio Bravo Archaeological Survey directed by Stanley
Walling to conduct a preliminary assessment of Cave 1 (RB-47-142-X) at the site of Chawak But’o’ob. Located within the heart of the site’s public
architecture, Cave 1 is surrounded by a ballcourt, a sweatbath and a sinkhole. Though our survey and excavation revealed utilization of the cave that
differed from other areas of the Maya lowlands, its location within the heart of the site’s public architecture is significant in that caves are associated with
people’s first emergence onto the earth’s surface and thus forms the basis of the group’s claim to the land. There is a great deal of freedom in the
placement of architectural elements but natural elements, which are immovable, probably determined the elaboration of this space.
[93]             Chair
Scott, Alyssa (University of California Berkeley)
[251]            Memory and Life in Ninteenth-Century Sacramento
In 1979, a trunk of artifacts was discovered concealed within a Sacramento house. The artifacts, photographs, and documents pertain primarily to the life
of May Woolsey, who died in 1879 at age 12. This paper seeks to investigate the assemblage and explore how interpretations involving memory can
contribute towards an understanding of identity, childhood, and biography. The association of the artifacts in the assemblage, the curation of the artifacts,
and the context of the trunk all have implications regarding the lives of the people who were connected to it. By considering themes of memory, this paper
will examine identity, personhood, family, and biography in nineteenth-century California. This paper also contemplates different scales and types of
memory which are useful for archaeological interpretation.
[251]            Chair
Scott Cummings, Linda (PaleoResearch Institute, Inc.)
[125]            Spatial Analysis of Domestic Structures
Cooking, food processing, and consumption all contribute anthropic activity markers traceable using archaeobotanic analyses and chemical signatures.
Grid square sampling illuminates patterns for comparison with distribution of artifacts and architectural elements, revealing patterned activities that identify
food storage in vessels, grinding, and cooking. Multiple lines of evidence, each providing only a portion of the record, contribute to better understanding
economic activity and provide opportunity to assess human interactions within that space. Representing results of spatial analysis using Surfer depicts
people going about their daily lives.
Scott Cummings, Linda [177] see Banks, Kimball
Scott-Ireton, Della (Florida Public Archaeology Network), Jeffrey Moates (Florida Public Archaeology Network) and Nicole Grinnan (Florida
Public Archaeology Network)
[260]            The Best Days at FPAN are Under Water: The SSEAS and HADS Programs for Sport Divers and Diving Leadership
FPAN’s development of the Submerged Sites Education & Archaeological Stewardship (SSEAS) program targeted to sport divers and the Heritage
Awareness Diving Seminar (HADS) targeted to diving leadership has led to gains in the appreciation and protection of the underwater cultural heritage, in
Florida and elsewhere. In presenting these programs, FPAN staff have worked with divers ranging from newly certified to long-time educators, in the
process learning as much as we teach. This paper describes these programs and how they are intended to encourage divers to become active in
preserving underwater cultural heritage, monitoring historic wrecksites, and making their own discoveries, thereby producing information instead of simply
consuming information.
Scudder, Kelley [142] see Pateman, Michael
Searcy, Michael [275] see King, Daniel
Searcy, Michael (Brigham Young University) and Todd Pitezel (University of Arizona, Arizona State Museum)
[289]            Excavations at Vista del Valle, a Viejo Period Site of the Casas Grandes Cultural Tradition in Chihuahua, Mexico
In the summer of 2015 we conducted excavations at a site located along the Palanganas River, just south of the Casas Grandes River Valley in
northwestern Chihuahua, Mexico. This represents the first excavation of a Viejo Period site (A.D. 700–1200) in this vicinity since the 1960s. We discovered
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               403
remnants of at least five structures, and fully excavated three. This paper reports our findings and compares them to previous work carried out in the
region.
Searle, Jeremy [223] see Boivin, Nicole
Sebastian Dring, Katherine [61] see Silliman, Stephen
Seebach, John (Colorado Mesa University)
[40]             Thirst for Knowledge: Teaching Typology and Social Organization through the Stylistic Attributes of Water Bottles
Residents of Grand Junction, Colorado must necessarily adapt to the arid, high-elevation climate of the northern Colorado Plateau. One highly visible
adaptation to aridity is the personal transport of potable liquids in an array of vessels. Such vessels are ubiquitous among Colorado Mesa University
students, staff and faculty, and they provide a readily accessible source of data with which to illustrate the uses of typology, style and the material
correlates of social organization. In a multi-week project, introductory archaeology students are challenged to discern patterns in water bottle use among
their classmates and professors. They first create a water bottle typology, and later document style through the presence of appliqués and other decorative
features. Finally, students collect basic demographic data on bottle owners. With these data in hand, students are then tasked with finding correlations
between certain bottle types and particular groups of people, whether certain decorative aspects correspond to sex/gender, and whether “exotic” bottles
are somehow special. From a pedagogical perspective, highlighting items students themselves use and decorate makes it easier to explain concepts that
might seem esoteric when using more traditional archaeological examples.
Seeman, Mark [285] see Hill, Mark
Segard, Jill [50] see Ambrosino, Gordon
Seibert, Michael (NPS- Southeast Archeological Center)
[229]            Reinterpreting the Battle of Cowpens, 1781
In August 2015, the Southeast Archeological Center undertook a large-scale systematic survey of the core battlefield and surrounding environs of
Cowpens National Battlefield. The survey covered over 50 acres using Federal and State archaeologists in conjunction with volunteers from throughout the
southeastern United States. The project nearly doubled the footprint of the battle, in addition to uncovering several artifacts that are key to interpreting
troop movements and actions across the landscape. The resounding success was due in large part to this collaboration of State, Federal, and Private
organizations that came together with the singular focus of better understanding the events of January 17, 1781. These partnerships are being further
developed to carry the momentum of the project by developing outreach, research design, and providing support to Revolutionary War sites throughout the
southeast as part of the buildup for the 250th anniversary of the American Revolution the goal of which is to shed light on the importance of the Southern
Campaigns of the American Revolution as a deciding factor in American Independence.
Seidemann, Ryan [6] see Halling, Christine
Seidemann, Ryan (Louisiana Department of Justice) and Christine Halling (Louisiana Department of Justice)
[187]            Lessons Learned from the Courts: Forensic Archaeology and Anthropology in Recent United States Jurisprudence
Unlike many other aspects of archaeology, forensic archaeology and anthropology is, in part, only as effective as the courts believe it to be. While peer
review is the gold standard for assessing the integrity and viability of the scientific aspects of forensic archaeology and anthropology, passing muster in a
court of law can be a different—and sometimes counterintuitive—standard. Although some recent research in this area has examined the impact of court
attempts to “police” the integrity of science in forensic anthropology expert testimony, this presentation casts its net wider. We examine broadly the
treatment and discussion of forensic archaeology and anthropology in the jurisprudence not to divine expert standards, but rather to assess overall
reception of these areas of inquiry by the courts. Through this presentation, we review several years-worth of jurisprudential commentary on forensic
archaeology and anthropology with an eye towards providing guidance for practitioners to assist them in navigating potential pitfalls of operating within the
legal system in the United States.
Seidensticker, Susanna [206] see Jackson, Brittany
Seidita, Max (University of Central Florida) and Lucas Martindale Johnson (University of Florida)
[236]            Using pXRF to Test for the Market Exchange of Obsidian at Postclassic Santa Rita Corozal, Belize
This poster discusses the levels of access to various obsidian sources and source regions as a prerequisite to testing a market exchange model for the
distribution of obsidian during the Postclassic period (A.D 1150–1530) at Santa Rita Corozal, Belize. A sample of 247 obsidian artifacts dating to the
Postclassic period were assayed using portable X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (pXRF) to determine the obsidian sources being exploited. Five sources
were identified in the assemblage, including obsidian from Otumba, Mexico which had not previously been found in the Chetumal Bay region. The
proportion of sources and source regions being exploited was compared across the social statuses of 15 structures using ANOVA tests. It was determined
that no one status had exclusive access to a single source or source region. Additionally, no statistical difference was found in the proportion of obsidian
sources or source regions being consumed across statuses. These patterns indicate that access to obsidian sources were not being restricted at Santa
Rita Corozal during this the Postclassic period. The research presented here better characterizes the nature of the regional and local economy by strongly
suggesting that obsidian was being distributed via market exchange.
Seifried, Rebecca (University of Illinois at Chicago)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                404
[166]             The Post-Medieval Settlements and Road Network of the Mani Peninsula, Greece
In the past 50 years, a great deal of archaeological research in Mani has focused on its Byzantine churches and the enigmatic abandoned settlements that
surround them. Far less has been written about the centuries following the collapse of the Byzantine Empire (i.e., the post-Medieval Period), when the
Ottoman Empire took control. This paper gives a brief overview of the most important sources of historical information about the post-Medieval settlements
in Mani. A reassessment of a list dated to 1618 underscores its importance in identifying settlement names, not least because it is the only known register
that follows a geographical path around the peninsula. This unique characteristic allows for the proposal of several modifications to the toponym
identifications that have been put forth by scholars so far. The paper also discusses recent fieldwork undertaken to record the settlements and the
road/path network in Mani. Together with the historical data, the archaeological information was used to build a GIS database and settlement catalog. The
rich dataset produced by this research can be used to trace the evolution of settlement hierarchy, community organization, and network properties over the
entire post-Medieval period.
Seinfeld, Daniel M. [7] see Harper, Charlie
Seinfeld, Daniel (Florida Bureau of Archaeological Research)
[290]             Mortuary Ritual at the Fort Center Mound-Charnel Pond Complex (8GL12): New Insights from an Accidental (Re)Discovery
William Sears’s reconstruction of a Hopewellian charnel platform with wood carvings at Fort Center (8GL12) is one of the more vivid imaginings of
prehistoric ritual in Florida archaeology. This model has been influential in our thinking about ritual in the Okeechobee area. It was long believed that
Sears’s excavations completely destroyed the pond-mound complex and that further data recovery would be impossible. Recently, wallowing wild hogs
(Sus scrofa) uncovered wood artifacts in the Fort Center mound-charnel pond complex. Salvage excavations revealed that Sears left behind these ancient
wood items during his work in the 1960s. These carvings, including wood posts, provided samples for radiometeric dating. Calibrated AMS dates reveal
that the wood and the human remains in the pond were deposited during A.D. 600–1000. In light of these new dates and other recent research at the site,
a reanalysis of Sears’ excavations shows a dynamic construction history at the mound-charnel pond complex. For over 1,500 years, the people of Fort
Center reinvented mortuary ritual practices at this location. This model shows the importance of mounds and watery places in designating persistent
sacred places on south Florida landscapes.
Seitz, Christian [188] see Pattee, Aaron
Seki, Yuji, Diana Alemán (Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos), Percy Santiago (Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos), Nagisa
Nakagawa (University of the Advanced Studies) and Megumi Arata (National Museum of Ethnology)
[102]             Sealing Ritual Spaces of a Formative Site by the Early Cajamarca Culture
Pacopampa is one of the largest ceremonial centers in the Formative Period located at the north highlands of Peru. Almost all the ritual space was
destroyed after the Formative Period, however, the square sunken court was reused by the people belonging to the Early Cajamarca Period. Some
platforms and rooms were constructed at the center of the court and a series of ritual activities associated with a lot of miniature pottery could be observed.
After that unusual activities the court was orderly sealed by thick fill. In this presentation we will show the summary of the ritual activities held there and the
process of sealing of the court.
Selch, Donna [7] see Rochelo, Mark
Selch, Donna (Florida Atlantic University), Mark Rochelo (Florida Atlantic University) and Chris Davenport (Palm Beach County Historic
Preservation)
[246]             Exploring the use of LiDAR Remote Sensing Data to Illuminate Belle Glade Earthworks
Locating and mapping methodology of archaeological earthworks for the prehistoric Native American Belle Glade culture can be improved by applying
airborne LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) employing FUSION software and the Ground Filter program to these remote areas. This study compares the
standard utilization of vendor created classes for ground classification to FUSION's software ground filter program. The two case study locations contain
Belle Glade type B circular–linear earthwork formations that were utilized for quantifying the results of each LiDAR processing methodology and
visualization method through comparison of identifiable formations. Florida's northern Everglade's landscape and South Florida's tropical climate make
traditional methods for archaeological earthwork identification difficult. However, FUSION’s ground filter program provides more data and discernible
features that are not possible from the standard method in both study sites in addition to providing reference points for georectification of the original scaled
maps.
Seligson, Ken (University of Wisconsin-Madison)
[127]             Lord of the Ring Structures: Burnt Lime Production and the Ancient Puuc Economy
Burnt lime was one of the most significant and ubiquitous materials utilized in the daily lives of the ancient Maya. Lime was a key ingredient in the mortar
that they used to construct monumental edifices and residential structures, as well as the lime plaster that they used to coat the facades, floors and interior
walls of these structures. Lime was also crucial for maintaining a viable maize-based diet through the nixtamalization process. The recent identification of a
series of ring structures hypothesized to be pit-kilns for producing burnt lime in and around the ancient Puuc site of Kiuic in the north-central Yucatán
Peninsula provides a great opportunity to investigate the organization of the ancient lime production industry. Spatial analyses of the locations of the ring
kilns in relation to other archaeological features such as residential and public architectural compounds, as well as other limestone industry features and
topographical variables provide information regarding the important role that burnt lime production played in the ancient economy of the region.
[127]             Chair
Sellen, Adam (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México)
[58]              Latin America’s New White Elephant: Museums and Exhibits of Pre-Hispanic Material Culture in the Post-Industrial City
The “Bilbao effect,” or “Guggenheim effect” as it is also known, posits that spectacular architecture designed by star architects can help renew a city’s
cultural sector and turn around a languishing economy. Many world museums in post-industrial cities have tried, with varying degrees of success, to
reproduce the model implemented in Bilbao. In this talk we will explore how a focus on “wow-factor” architecture has transformed museums in Latin
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   405
America, and in particular how this approach has impacted their exhibiting practices and the visitor’s overall experience of pre-Hispanic material culture.
Sellet, Frederic [123] see Arnhold, Nicholas
Selover, Stephanie (University of Washington)
[74]              The Rise of Fortification Systems in Anatolia at the Collapse of the Early Bronze Age
The end of the Early Bronze Age (ca. 2000 B.C.E.) saw the collapse or the decline of a number of civilizations and settlements throughout the ancient Near
East, and is an oft discussed topic in the study of the archaeology and history of the region. This paper takes a micro look at this phenomenon within
Central and Southeastern Anatolia, using the creation, upkeep and collapse of complex fortification systems as a proxy for violence and the preparedness
for violence in the region. Before the Early Bronze Age, few settlements were fortified in Anatolia, a marked difference between Anatolia and other ancient
Near Eastern regions, including Mesopotamia and Northern Syria. By the end of the Early Bronze Age, virtually all archaeologically known urban centers
were fortified, with a variety of different fortification technologies evident. The rise of fortification systems in Anatolia coincided with the rise of socially
complex societies and the threat of outside violence, and began a new urban layout that would continue through the rest of the Bronze Age.
Seltzer, Heather (University of Colorado Boulder)
[65]              An Iconic Rebellion: Exploring Spanish Impact on Pueblo Iconography
The mission period of the American southwest during the late 1500s and early 1600s, is defined by the adoption of Spanish Catholicism by the Pueblo
people. Missionaries gradually introduced the Pueblo people to Catholicism in order to obliterate and replace the Pueblo peoples’ traditional religion. The
result of the Pueblo people resisting the Spanish, created a form of religious syncretism in which Pueblo people were forced to blend Christianity with their
traditional religion in order to conserve their religious beliefs. The research goal of this study is to explore changes in iconography from pre-contact to post-
contact by examining an assemblage of pottery from that time period in the Rio Grande area. It will look at the iconography of the Pueblo people during the
time of Spanish contact to see how religious expression was changed by exploring revitalization efforts by the Pueblo people. The results of this study are
presented here with retrospect on what religious motifs are represented and not represented in the pre-contact and post-contact pottery assemblage as
compared to other forms of iconography, such as rock art and textiles, to understand the Pueblo people’s religion and the change in religious expression
due to the impact of Christianity.
Semaw, Sileshi [22] see Rogers, Michael
Semon, Anna (University of North Carolina)
[225]             Investigating Late Mississippian Incised Pottery on St. Catherines Island, GA
Recent excavations at Fallen Tree (9Li8), St. Catherines Island, GA have recovered thousands of ceramics. Although the majority of the decorated sherds
are complicated stamped, more than 500 sherds are incised, which is more than any St. Catherines Island Mississippian site. In this paper, I characterize
Late Mississippian mortuary and village incised pottery on St. Catherines based on temper, rim attributes, designs, and incising techniques. In addition, I
examine vessel forms and sizes to discuss differences between assemblages. Finally, I explore the various incised pottery designs and compare with
similar designs on other Late Mississippian artifacts.
Senatore, Maria (CONICET-UBA-UNPA)
[39]              Material texts in Historical Archaeology. Exploring material dimensions of 19th century whaling logbooks
Global growth of whaling activity in the nineteenth century brought the incorporation of remote and unknown areas such as Antarctica to the modern
capitalist world. Logbooks were the official records of the activities of whaling voyages. Even before maps, written words in logbooks comprised the first
records written in-situ about the experience of these newly incorporated spaces. Thee logbooks were often produced as a process, day by day, while the
action was taking place. Due to the rich and detailed information in these records, logbooks have been traditionally studied with a main focus on their
content. The goal of this work is to read beyond the words by exploring some of the material aspects of manuscript logbooks that we consider particularly
meaningful. Logbooks were part of the material world of whaling expeditions, and we study these books/objects in their material dimension. Both the
content as well as the physical form containing and organizing the text gain analytical relevance. These analyses focus on a set of logbooks of whaling
expeditions departing from New England. We believe that the material aspects of these manuscripts could be part of the discussions about the exploration
of new or unknown spaces in the nineteenth century.
Sepúlveda , Marcela [62] see Osorio, Daniela
Sereno-Uribe, Juan
[235]             Amacuzac archaeological project.
Arqlgo. Pablo Sereno Uribe. INAH Guerrero.
 The Chimalacatlán archaeological project has focused its research in the southern section of the state of Morelos. Initially, this archaeological site was
excavated by the archaeologist Florencia Müller in 1943.
 The first actions developed by the Chimalacatlan archaeological project centered on the conservation and restoration of the different buildings along the
site, focusing on those buildings that were extremely damaged. Subsequently, several surveys were conducted with the objective to record all the
important architectonical elements. During these surveys, there were many more archaeological sites located around Chimalacatlán.
 Therefore, we think that it is imperative to extend the present study region to include the states of Morelos and Guerrero and to continue with surveys and
excavations of the different sites established along the river Amacuzac. This river is the actual frontier between the states of Morelos and Guerrero.
Accomplishing this will enable a greater understanding of an important and wider archaeological region.
 That is why, in the poster we are going to present, the current results of the excavations of two sites located at the south of Morelos, very clouse to the
state limit with Guerrero.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             406
Serra Puche, Mari Carmen (IIA-UNAM), Aurelio López Corral (Centro INAH Tlaxcala México) and Alonso Gabriel Vicencio Castellanos (UDLAP)
[179]             Changes in Obsidian Supply During the Classic to Postclassic Transition in Prehispanic Puebla-Tlaxcala
The Puebla-Tlaxcala region witnessed several shifts in political and economic power during the Classic to Postclassic transition. This area played a pivotal
role in the development of cultural complexity following the demographic rearrangements that followed the fall of Teotihuacan as a pan-regional state
power. However, little research has been carried on understanding shifts in exchange networks, especially on the trade of obsidian materials. Using XRF-p
analysis, this paper seeks to provide new data on the economy of obsidian trade from the sites Xochitecatl-Cacaxtla, Cholula, Metepec and Tepeticpac.
Here, we analyze shifts in obsidian procurement exchange webs and the implication on key resource access and control among local state entities.
Serra Puche, Mari Carmen [179] see Lopez Corral, Aurelio
Serrand, Nathalie [220] see Bonnissent, Dominique
Serrand, Nathalie (INRAP Guadeloupe) and Dominique BONNISSENT
[222]             The Saint-Martin Island's (French Lesser Antilles) Amerindian Archaeomalacological Record : Insight into a Six Millennia History of
                  Interacting Pre-Columbian Societies and Environments
Substantial archaeomalacological assemblages have been studied from seven precolumbian sites on the French part of the island of Saint-Martin (Lesser
Antilles). Most of these sites were excavated through salvage archaeology procedures on large surfaces, allowing relative comprehension of their structural
and functional organization, as well as the recovery of solid molluscs samples. These seven ensembles line the complete known chronological sequence of
the island's Amerindian occupation, from the fourth millennium B.C. to the fifteenth century A.D. They therefore yield elements for diachronic considerations
on the Amerindian exploitation systems of a specific resource—in this case molluscs—and their evolution through time in relation with macro-parameters
(i.e., cultural evolutions and changes, paleoenvironmental parameters).
Serrano, Carlo (Sacharxeos)
[282]             Diversidad y Complementariedad en los Desarrollos Sociales Precolombinos de las Cuencas Upano y Palora, Morona Santiago, Ecuador
En Pablo Sexto, Amazonía Sur del Ecuador, se ha descubierto una variabilidad, en cuanto a modos de vida de sus pobladores, a través de los años
(2.000 a.C.–1.700 d.C.). El estudio llevado a cabo en esta zona, fue financiado por SENESCYT e INPC, para la obtención de datos paleobotánicos.
Dentro de este contexto, la posición teórica adoptada fue la Ecología Histórica, entendiendo a la cultura material: cerámica, lítica y suelos, como productos
tecnológicos, culturales, económicos y políticos, que tienen estrecha vinculación con el medioambiente.
Ha sido determinante, entonces, el análisis sobre la utilización de geoformas y del suelo en espacios “agrícolas,” y la construcción de plataformas
artificiales. Mediante las excavaciones y fechados realizados, se determinó la existencia de grupos móviles a-cerámicos (2.000–1.600 a.C.), sociedades
constructoras de montículos (1–200 d.C.) y cazadores-recolectores-horticultores (900–1.700 d.C.), en las cuencas de los ríos Upano, Tuna y Palora
Una de las inferencias propuestas en torno a estos grupos, tiene que ver con la diversidad y alternancia económica y política, que no necesariamente
busca un desarrollo lineal, encaminado hacia sociedades complejas o cacicales, sino más bien, se demuestra, la complementariedad y heterogeneidad en
los desarrollos culturales locales.
Sesma, Elena [10] see Battle-Baptiste, Whitney
Settle, Kathleen [111] see Greene, James
Sever, Thomas (U. of Alabama, Huntsville)
[53]              Prehistoric Rootpaths in Costa Rica: Transportation and Communication in a Tropical Forest
 The objective of this research is to understand human adaptation and survival in a tropical forest environment that was buried through time by six volcanic
eruptions. Through the use of remote sensing and GIS technology an ancient footpath network has been discovered that connects villages, cemeteries,
springs, and other cultural features upon a forested landscape. A combination of aerial and satellite data was used to locate archeological features invisible
to the human eye. This information allowed us to document social integration and cultural development with quantitative information from a landscape
perspective.
Seyler, Samantha (New College of Florida)
[92]              A Technical Attribute Analysis of Textile Band Production at Uraca, Peru
As with other forms of technology, normative patterns in textile production can suggest information about the communities of weavers that produced them.
Through an analysis of technical attributes, this poster establishes the normative patterns involved in the production of textile bands at the mortuary site of
Uraca in the Majes Valley of Peru and suggests how these patterns relate Uraca to broader textile traditions within the region. More specifically, it
examines how Uraca relates to the Siguas textile tradition, associated with the south coastal valleys of the Department of Arequipa. This poster also
examines textile bands recovered at Uraca that do not fit within these patterns of production and what they might indicate about the population interred
there.
[92]              Chair
Sgheiza, Valerie [286] see Cox, Maria
Shaffer, Gary (USDA/NRCS)
[188]             Transmission of Architectural Knowledge through Agricultural Practice
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 407
This paper explores an example of cultural transmission from Neolithic to modern times in central and southern Italy: the passing on of architectural
knowledge through agricultural practice. Excavation and analysis of wattle and daub buildings from the Stentinello period (sixth and fifth millennia B.C.) of
Calabria and observation of their twentieth-century counterparts prompted study of the continuation of this architectural tradition. Several constructional
components have multiple utility in rural life and may have become enmeshed in cycles of general farming practices. For example, willow shoots used to
tie together wooden wall frames were used in later times to tie grape vines, fasten branches when grafting, and make baskets. The mud employed as
daub also served historically as a plaster to cover tree grafts and beehives of woven withies. Furthermore, plants used as temper in architectural daub
could be added to clay that covered tree grafts. The study presents new data from art history, classical and historical literature (both agricultural manuals
and fiction), and ethnography to understand how new generations learned constructional skills through frequent farming activities and helped to keep a
building method alive.
Shaffer Foster, Jennifer (Medaille College)
[152]             Folklore and Fairy Forts: Re-Use of Archaeological Landscapes in Ireland
The re-use of sites and landscapes in both ancient and contemporary contexts is widely recognized in archaeology. In Ireland, many sites show evidence
of use throughout prehistory and into the historical era, although the meaning of these places changed substantially over time and continues to evolve
today. This paper will examine historical and contemporary folklore surrounding archaeological sites in Ireland, focusing largely on the nineteenth and
twentieth century understanding of raths, Early Medieval domestic sites, as “fairy forts.” Fairies, otherworldly creatures, could be benevolent and generous
or cause destruction, illness, or even death. Wise farmers have long respected the fairies and have avoided disturbing their homes—the fairy trees,
bushes, and “forts” that dot the island. Yet fairy legends are not just tales of magic and the supernatural; these legends, rooted in specific places in the
landscape, helped people mediate local and regional power relationships and uphold social mores. Today these legends not only survive but are spread
by tourism, and therefore raths and other archaeological sites are understood in different but overlapping local, regional, and international contexts.
Shakour, Katherine (University of South Florida)
[71]              Why We Need to Succeed: Assessing the Outcomes of Community Archaeology Practices in County Galway, Ireland
Public involvement and collaboration with communities are major concerns for archaeologists around the world. Community outreach efforts are major
components of research projects and require an immense amount of resources. Further, different stakeholders have varied responses to those efforts. This
paper uses data from the Cultural Landscapes of the Irish Coast (CLIC) project’s community outreach on Inishark and Inishbofin, County Galway, Ireland,
islands five miles into the Atlantic Ocean. This paper explores the community outreach methods the CLIC project uses and demonstrates through
examples with diverse stakeholders, while stressing the importance of regional variation with practices and anticipated outcomes. The paper explores
strategies the CLIC project employs to determine when community engaged practices are successful and ways to measure effectiveness and value. This
paper discusses the benefits to understanding public archaeology outcomes and how to express the positive outcomes to various groups including those
that fund archaeological research.
Shanks, Jeffrey (National Park Service)
[164]             Midden, Mounds, and Mortuary Cults—Excavations at the Swift Creek and Weeden Island Byrd Hammock Site in Wakulla County, Florida
Recent investigations of Swift Creek and Weeden Island mound-midden complexes at Byrd Hammock in Wakulla County, Florida, and on Tyndall Air Force
Base in Bay County, Florida, and show that there were direct and/or indirect interactions among these Woodland sites. Geophysical surveys of village
plazas, comparisons of ceramic stamped patterns, and other data show the presence of a intraregional social network with shared expressions of ideology
and settlement patterning that underwent similar changes between the Middle and Late Woodland periods. One of the primary changes appears to be the
introduction of new mortuary practices coincident with the appearance of Weeden Island ceramic styles across the northwest Florida Gulf Coast.
Shantry, Kate [272] see Rorabaugh, Adam
Sharma, Sukanya
[71]              The People, the Megaliths, and the Changing Times in Cherrapunjee
The megaliths of Cherrapunjee, are part of a prehistoric cultural tradition which is intricately woven with the socio-cultural life of the Khasis and Jaintias. But
material changes in the nature of society and the economy in the latter half of the twentieth century have resulted in new identity formations in
Cherrapunjee and this has undermined some of the presumed certainties of cultural identity. This study documented local community attitudes regarding
the megaliths and how the community accessed, interacted and used the sites today. A framework for managing archaeological heritage by integrating
global and local conservation approaches in Cherrapunjee was developed.
Sharma Ogle, Mini (Portland General Electric)
[39]              Of Power Poles, Fishing Poles and Post Holes: Developing a CRM Plan for an Electric Utility
Environmental regulations, spatial planning, and striving for consistency in managing cultural resources within the electric utility industry will be discussed
using Portland General Electric’s (PGE) projects. Poster will address issues from the perspective of project development and prioritizing resources ranging
from salmon to archaeological sites. Specifically, the issue of managing cultural resources in situations where FERC compliance or Section 106 is not the
driving force is explored. PGE is in the process of developing an internal cultural resources management plan that provides guidelines for such situations.
Sharp, Kayeleigh (Southern Illinois University Carbondale)
[45]              Unexpected Social Complexity in the mid-Zaña Valley, North Coast, Peru
Based on recent fieldworks, this paper argues for a major rethinking of the Gallinazo-Mochica relationship. Investigations in the mid-Zaña Valley have
revealed unexpected architectural and social complexity at the site of Songoy-Cojal. The predominantly residential Cojal shows an abundant co-presence
of stylistically Gallinazo and Mochica remains. In addition to fineline decorated ceramics perhaps from farther south, there is a strong Gallinazo-like
presence, which may be characteristic of in the Lambayeque region (i.e., La Leche, Lambayeque and Zaña valley region). This evidence, combined with
the presence of highly differentiated architectural configurations suggests distinct social and/or functional interrelationships around the site. This important
discovery suggests that the users and perhaps makers of Gallinazo- and Mochica-style artifacts were engaged in unexpectedly complex social
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 408
relationships that endured centuries longer than previously expected. This paper examines some of the possible implications of the intense co-presence of
these two distinct stylistic traditions, indicating that our perception of the relationship between non-Mochica and Mochica peoples is in need of significant
refinements.
Sharp, Kayeleigh [205] see Litschi, Melissa
Sharpe, Ashley (University of Florida)
[134]              Isotopic Evidence of Animal Management and Long-Distance Exchange at the Maya Site of Ceibal, Guatemala
Animal management and resource exchange are essential to the development of state-level societies. Archaeological evidence for these activities has
been particularly difficult to track in the Maya area, but recent advances in isotopic research may allow a novel opportunity to observe these practices. This
study reviews new evidence for animal management and long-distance exchange at the lowland site of Ceibal, Guatemala, a large Maya community
occupied throughout the Preclassic and Classic periods (c. 1000 B.C.–A.D. 900). Evidence for animal diet and husbandry practices is assessed using
stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes, while the presence of non-local animals at the site is evaluated using strontium, oxygen, and lead isotopic data. Lead
isotopic testing has not been used to assess human or animal movements in the Maya region previously, and so this is the first such study to incorporate
its use in the Maya lowlands.
[134]              Chair
Sharpe, Ryan [214] see Fayek, Mostafa
Sharratt, Nicola (Georgia State University)
[74]               Resilience, Incursion, Incorporation: A Multi-Scalar Approach to the Temporality of Collapse in the South-Central Andes
Cross-cultural literature highlights the importance of differentiating between political, societal, and ‘cultural’ collapse. Focusing largely on the short-term
aftermath of collapse, this scholarship demonstrates that even in the clearest examples of political fragmentation, considerable stability in other
components of past societies is often archaeologically visible. Less attention has been paid to longer-term impacts and responses. Taking the
disintegration of the Tiwanaku state in the south central Andes circa AD 1000 as an example, I consider the temporal scales involved in collapse. Focusing
on a small village in the Moquegua Valley, Peru, on the periphery of the Tiwanaku polity, that was established as the state fragmented, I explore how this
community and its neighbors were affected by and responded to socio-political upheaval over time. I suggest that as elsewhere, in the first few centuries
after the overthrow of Tiwanaku political authority, many elements of social organization and cultural practice were maintained at the local level. Drawing
on excavation data spanning approximately 500 years, I then turn to the longer term ramifications of Tiwanaku state collapse, and explore how the
immediate choices made by the community made it vulnerable to outside incursion and ultimately contributed to ‘cultural collapse.’
[219]              Chair
Sharratt, Nicola [204] see Hundman, Brittany
Shaw, Anna (Eckerd College)
[142]              Settlement Survey of Newfield Plantation, Cat Island, Bahamas
In the wake of the American Revolution, exiled British Loyalists transformed the landscapes of the Bahama Islands. They developed sprawling plantation
complexes on outlying islands where only small or transient settlements had once existed. A recent survey of Newfield Plantation, which was established
on Cat Island by a member of a North Carolina Loyalist family, sheds light on the changes that occurred. Field investigation has yielded new data on the
spatial organization and architectural elaboration of the early nineteenth-century estate, including housing for enslaved laborers. The findings speak to
relationships embedded in both human ecology and dialectics of power. In turn, these relationships incorporated nested sets of boundaries and
peripheries. The material remains at Newfield focus attention on the roles of spatial contexts, as well as the meanings of creolization in rural Bahamian
lifeways before and after emancipation.
Shaw, Ryan [261] see Rabinowitz, Adam
Shaw, Justine (College of the Redwoods)
[273]              The Resilience of the Maya in Northern Yucatan during the Terminal Classic
Resilience theory has typically been applied to living people by sociologists or psychologists or to components of the natural world by ecologists. Whatever
its application, its scale is that of a community or system, with the focus is often on why particular components are able to persist when the system is
inevitably disturbed, transformed, or reorganized, while others fare less well. Such systems move between stability and transformation in an adaptive
cycle, with both environmental changes and human responses occurring. The transformations that took place in the Maya Lowlands before, during, and
after the Terminal Classic can be analyzed in light of resilience theory, as society moved through phases of growth, conservation, release, and
reorganization. Data from the Cochuah region, in the context of trends throughout the Maya Lowlands, are used to follow dynamic settlement pattern
changes as society moved through collapse, release, and reorganization phases.
Shearin, Emily
[237]              Pigments in Peril: Degradation of Precolumbian Mesoamerican Murals
Precolumbian Mesoamerican murals are cultural representations of numerous civilizations, often mirroring the lifestyles, beliefs, rituals, and traditions of
various peoples such as the Olmec, Maya, Toltec, and Aztecs. The pigments used to create these murals are highly susceptible to degradation.
Degradation not only affects the appearance of the murals, but can result in the breakdown of the chemical structure of pigments causing flaking,
powdering, and foundation issues. This project aims to help the preservation of these important cultural pieces, by studying the chemical processes that lie
behind the degradation of frequently used pre-Columbian mural pigments. Understanding these chemical processes is a crucial step to identifying
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             409
deterioration areas, measuring damage, delaying and/or stopping damage all together. With the pigments of Mesoamerican murals already identified, the
next step was to look at the common chemical processes causing deterioration including: camera light, excavation damage, heat, UV exposure, water, and
human touch. By measuring the time it takes these processes to occur, a time table was created, based off numerous degradation factors on multiple
pigments, which has never been previously researched. The degradation scale created will aid in future studies of preservation, conservation, and
restoration of prehistoric Mesoamerican mural pigments.
Sheets, Payson (University of Colorado)
[59]              Production, Maintenance, and Exchange in a Young Maya Community: Ceren, El Salvador
What is now El Salvador was devastated by the Ilopango eruption, probably in A.D. 536. A small group of Maya immigrants founded the Ceren village in
the uncontested landscape some three decades later. Only about four generations lived in and constructed the functioning community before it was buried
by the tephra from the Loma Caldera eruption in about A.D. 650. Production and maintenance activities of the recently discovered sacbe are presented,
along with its various functions. Evidence indicates it was designed, built, and maintained by villagers with no influence/contact from outsiders. Production
and maintenance of household and communal buildings were equally internal processes. Each household had a service relationship to the community,
evidenced by special-purpose buildings, or by an agro-economic specialization in one case. Food production was achieved by sophisticated agroforestry.
Seed crops were planted on small ridges to increase water infiltration and decrease erosion. One root crop (manioc) was planted in elevated beds on
slopes for drainage, while another (malanga) favored wet areas. Crop rotation involved manioc and maize. Fruit trees provided shade and food. Each
household overproduced commodities for exchange within the village, and for exchange in nearby markets. Markets provided specialty products
unavailable to villagers directly.
[53]              Discussant
Shelia, Teona [87] see Ferring, Reid
Shelton, China [19] see Allen, Susan
Shen, Chen (Royal Ontario Museum)
[10]              Application of Heritage Value in Museum Engagement
Museums play a pivotal role in engaging in diversified communities and public at large, as cultural heritage value is applied to an understanding of the past
that is relevant to everyday life today. Museums hold significant collections of natural and cultural worlds over the age that witnessed climatic changes,
natural disasters, and humanly-powered manipulations. The survival objects displayed in the galleries and exhibition today are keys to engaging the public
into the dialogues of cultural heritages preservations. Museum provide platforms for the public in today’s growing multi-cultural municipals to make
meaningful links to the past of their own through today’s available technologies and social media, that would raise their awareness to heritage values and
give their voice to policy-making of cultural heritage for their communities.
Shen, Chen [38] see Brown, Kelly
Sherman, Diana [265] see Montoya, Amy
Sherwood, Sarah (Sewanee: The University of the South), Gerald Smith (Sewanee: The University of the South), Stephen Carmody (Sewanee:
The University of the South), Alex Friedl (Sewanee: The University of the South) and Patrick Vestal (Sewanee: The University of the South)
[6]               Multidisciplinary Research on “Rebels Rest”: A 150-Year-Old Log Frame House Site in Sewanee, Tennessee
This poster summarizes the preliminary results from a multidisciplinary research project that began as a salvage project when a 22 room, 150-year-old log
frame house burnt on the campus at the University of the South in Sewanee, TN. Faculty, students and volunteers are actively involved in an integrated
program that includes archival research, architectural history, dendrochronology, dendroecology, geoarchaeology, paleoethnobotany, zooarchaeology, and
historical archaeology. The seven acre site included two homes, one constructed in 1860 and the final in 1866, and several outbuildings. The site offers
significant challenges archaeologically as it represents a palimpsest of over 150 years of intensive use in an area composed of shallow and easily eroded
soils. The occupants of these households represented a small group of affluent, white, Episcopal Euroamerican Plantation owners who had come to the
remote Southern Cumberland Plateau to avoid the heat and fevers of the deep south and to build a University to rival any in the north. We present
preliminary summaries of the data from these integrated research foci to begin to reveal everyday life within this small community in a local and market
economy. Comparisons are drawn between local excavations of small subsistence farmsteads in this rural community.
Shi, Feng [10] see Wei, Qiaowei
Shimada, Izumi (Southern Illinois University)
[255]             Molding in Ceramic Production: Challenging Pervasive Views
The use of one or more pairs of concave molds has been a major ceramic formation method throughout much of the world. This method has traditionally
been seen as a rational solution to efficiently producing a large number of standardized products. This paper questions these views as being overly
generalized or untenable in terms of data from excavated ceramic workshops and examination of products pertaining to Mochica and Sicán cultures on
Peru's north coast and to the persistent figurine tradition of coastal Ecuador. For example, at the 1,000-year-old Middle Sicán workshop at Huaca Sialupe,
vessels of same sizes and shapes were made using different sets of molds in contiguous rooms. This is antithetical to the commonly held view of molding
associated with efficient production of standardized vessels. Figurines in these areas were predominantly produced using single press-molds. A key
implication is that the molds were used to assure a faithful reproduction of important images or icons. Much the same can be said about the famed Mochica
portrait vessels. Overall, our views of mold-based production need to balance producer and consumer's perspectives and take into account of the nature of
products and use.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               410
Shimek, Rachael [265] see Clauter, Jody
Shirar, Scott (University of Alaska Museum of the North), Joshua D. Reuther (University of Alaska Museum of the North), Joan B. Coltrain
(University of Utah), Owen K. Mason (GeoArch Alaska) and Shelby L. Anderson (Portland State University)
[217]             Exploring the Differences in Radiocarbon Ages of Seals and Caribou: A Case Study from Kotzebue Sound
J. Louis Giddings’ pioneering work in chronology building in Northwest Alaska laid the groundwork for this case study, where we explore differences
between the radiocarbon ages of seals and caribou from Late Holocene archaeological sites in the Kotzebue Sound region. Samples were recovered from
distinct cultural features like house floors and cache pits which date between 130 and 1600 BP, including two samples from a house excavated by
Giddings in Kotzebue in 1941. Our comparisons of radiocarbon dates on caribou and seal bones show average differences in ages between 750–890
years. Our comparisons of charcoal/wood and seal radiocarbon ages also indicate offsets of 750–915 years between these two materials. These offset
results on prehistoric samples are also in accordance with radiocarbon ages measured on historic seals living and collected in the 1930s that are estimated
to date between 830 and 860 B.P. Further, we examine differences among local reservoirs through time and to the global marine reservoir estimates. We
also point out contributions of significant collaborators to the project: Adam Freeburg, National Park Service, and Pete Bowers, NLURA.
Shiratori, Yuko (The Graduate Center, CUNY)
[291]             Terminal Classic to Early Contact Period Obsidian in the Petén Lakes Region: Inter- and Intra-Site Variation of Raw Materials
Recently, obsidian studies in the Maya area have benefited from the instrumental sourcing of large samples to reconstruct political and domestic
economies. This paper summarizes results of the largest portable x-ray florescence (PXRF) source attribution study of obsidian in the Petén lakes region
from the sites of Tayasal and Nixtun-Ch'ich'. Cluster analysis of the chemical profiles of 1,123 obsidian specimens suggests that two sites had varying
strategies of procurement that emphasized participation with Ixtepeque, El Chayal, and San Martin Jilotepeque exchange networks. Inter- and intra-site
diachronic analysis of obsidian procurement patterns represents changes through time from the Terminal Classic to the early Contact period (A.D. 900–
1697). The large sample size of this study permits a more refined understanding of obsidian acquisition in from individual residences. Results are
compared to previously published data from the surrounding sites of Nojpeten, Quexil, San Jeronimo II, Ixlú, and Zacpetén to further understand social
changes in the subregion, and reveals the entangled economic relations among political groups.
[291]             Chair
Shirazi, Sabrina (Smithsonian and University of Maryland), Courtney Hofman (University of Oklahoma), Torben Rick (Smithsonian National
Museum of Natural History) and Jesus Maldonado (Smithsonian Center for Conservation and Evolutiona)
[110]              Using Environmental DNA to Examine Human-Animal Interactions on the California Channel Islands
Conducting aDNA analyses can be limited by the preservation and availability of biological remains at archaeological sites. Soil can contain DNA
(environmental DNA [eDNA]) from the animals and plants that were present In the landscape and provide a record of prehistoric plant and animal
distributions. We designed and tested a protocol to capture DNA from several extinct and extant taxa from soil on the California Channel Islands as a
potential tool for understanding the biogeography of island mammals and birds. This eDNA approach allows us to examine human-animal interactions that
could otherwise not be identified.
Shirazi, Sabrina [160] see Hofman, Courtney
Shock, Myrtle (UFOPA)
[167]             News from Unknown Parts of the Amazon, Interfluvial Sites Come to Light
The expansion of archaeological research in the Amazon Basin, from the margins of major tributaries to small rivers and headwaters is populating empty
portions of our maps. In the region of Presidente Figueiredo, Amazonas State, Brazil, occupation of the interfluvial zone was neither ephemeral nor short
lived with sites every 2 kilometers, on average. One extensively excavated site, Claudio Cutião, was occupied for over 1,000 years beginning around 1600
B.P. The formation of anthropic dark earth at 1150 B.P. marked a significant change in human impact on the locale. Another modification occurred near the
end of site occupation when six mounds were constructed in a circular arrangement as seen elsewhere in Amazonia. The sequence of changes in the
site's occupation, utilization and formation are explored in relation to regional cultural patterns and potential human activities, notably fishing in the rapids
that front the site and exploitation of forest plant species.
Short, Laura (Texas A&M)
[140]             Quantum Archaeology: Raman Spectroscopy of FCR in South-Central North America
Macrobotanicals, usually in the form of identifiable charcoal, have formed the basis of our archaeological evidence of what was cooked in earth ovens, and
microbotanicals such as phytoliths, pollen, and starch grains are expanding that knowledge. There are, however, still limitations: for example, inulin does
not have a microbotanical proxy. Inulin is the primary carbohydrate for many important plant foods such as onion, camas, agave and sotol. Raman
spectroscopy, a type of vibrational spectroscopy, is a potential tool to identify these kinds of food residues. Researchers use vibrational spectroscopy to
characterize a substance by measuring the change in a light’s wavelength as it passes through the substance. Raman spectroscopy has been used
extensively in art and archaeology but not yet applied to fire cracked rock. This presentation reports on a Raman spectroscopy analysis of organic residues
on fire cracked rock from earth ovens in south-central North America, attempting to develop a new technique for direct evidence of what was processed in
earth ovens.
Shreve, Nathan (University of Mississippi), Eileen G. Ernenwein (East Tennessee State University), Jay D. Franklin (East Tennessee State
University) and S.D. Dean (East Tennessee State University)
[137]             A Flow of People: Household and Community at the Cane Notch Site, a Protohistoric Cherokee Town on the Nolichucky, Upper East
                  Tennessee
Radiometric dates from the protohistoric Cane Notch Site on the Nolichucky River in upper east Tennessee indicate contemporaneous ceramic
assemblages characterized by multiple traditions. Our work produced wares referable to the Qualla and Overhill series, wares directly associated with 18th
century Cherokee villages elsewhere. Burke wares, from the eastern side of the Appalachians, also occur in large numbers. These “different” wares at
Cane Notch share common attributes, however, that also reflect a local identity. Using geophysics, excavations of selected house floors, and ceramic
attribute analyses (including p-xrf analysis), we explore ways of doing and identity at the Cane Notch Site.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               411
Shreve, Nathan K. [292] see Bolte, Christina
Shuman, Bryan N. [55] see Robinson, Erick
Shuman , Bryan [218] see Kitchel, Nathaniel
Sieg, Lauren (National Museum of the American Indian)
[30]              Gazing at the Horizon: The NAGPRA Stories Yet to be Told
What will NAGPRA look like in 25 or 50 years? The horizon is constantly shifting; it looks bright and dark, clear and complicated. Social research on the
first generation of archaeologists to emerge after the passage of NAGPRA suggests that NAGPRA will remain relevant and important. At the same time,
the increased diversity of this generation and an emerging post-racial world will challenge the concept of identity that lies at the heart of NAGPRA. Digital
technologies will provide new methods for studying the archaeological record and making collections and archives readily accessible to people outside the
academe. The proliferation of digital information, however, will open avenues for cultural appropriation that cannot be remedied through NAGPRA.
Collaborations on research and cultural resource projects will continue to yield benefits in multiple ways, but the repatriation and reburial of human remains
and other collections will necessarily limit some research. A few aspects of NAGPRA implementation are unlikely to change, including attempts to weaken
cultural resource protection laws and the everyday business of implementing NAGPRA at the local level. The wildcard for any predictions is the courts,
whose decisions may run counter to prevailing understandings of the law and change the course of implementation.
[30]              Chair
Siegel, Peter E. [100] see Wells, E. Christian
Siegel, Peter, John Jones (Archaeological Consulting Services), Deborah Pearsall (University of Missouri, Columbia), Nicholas Dunning
(University of Cincinnati) and Pat Farrell (University of Minnesota, Duluth)
[220]             Caribbean Landscapes in the Age of the Anthropocene: The First Colonizers
Identifying first human colonization of new places is challenging, especially when groups were small and material traces of their occupations were
ephemeral. Generating reliable reconstructions of human-colonization patterns from intact archaeological sites may be exceedingly difficult given post-
depositional taphonomic processes and in cases of island and coastal locations the inundation of landscapes resulting from post-Pleistocene sea-level rise.
Paleoenvironmental reconstruction is a better way to identify small-scale human-colonization events than by using archaeological data alone. This is
demonstrated through a sediment-coring project across the Lesser Antilles. Paleoenvironmental data were collected informing on the timing of multiple
island-colonization events and land-use histories spanning the full range of human occupations in the Caribbean, from the initial forays into the islands
through the domination of the landscapes and indigenous people by Europeans. In some areas, our data complement archaeological, paleoecological, and
historical findings from the Lesser Antilles and in others amplify understanding of colonization history. We highlight data relating to the timing and process
of initial colonization in the eastern Caribbean. Paleoenvironmental data provide a basis for revisiting initial-colonization models of the Caribbean.
Archaeological programs addressing human occupations dating to the early to mid-Holocene, especially in dynamic coastal settings, should systematically
incorporate paleoenvironmental investigations.
Sierpe, Victor [207] see Morello Repetto, Flavia
Sievert, April [30] see Thomas, Jayne-Leigh
Sievert, April (Indiana University), Wayne Huxhold (Indiana University), Ben Barnes (Shawnee Tribe) and Kelli Mosteller (Citizen Potawatomi
Nation)
[266]             Tribal History Partnerships and the Great Lakes/Ohio Valley Ethnohistory Collection at Indiana University
Relationships initiated through NAGPRA-related consultation can foster collaborations to provide access to historic resources to federally recognized
tribes. The Great Lakes and Ohio Valley Ethnohistory Collection at the Glenn A. Black Laboratory of Archaeology at IU was gathered by Erminie Wheeler-
Voegelin to provide evidence for twentieth century Indian Claims Commission lawsuits. Tribal scholars are collaborating with IU staff to plan and implement
a digitization program to make archives available online to tribal scholars. In the process an instrumental resource for researching cultural affiliation is
being revitalized and preserved, and tribal scholars acquire sources that meet tribal cultural heritage objectives.
Sillar, Bill (Institute of Archaeology, UCL)
[105]             Viracocha’s Vulcanism: The Cultural Biography of a Volcano
The paper uses archaeological, historical, ethnographic and geological approaches in an investigation of a small volcano in the department of Cuzco, Peru.
Kinsich’ata erupted around 10,000 years ago, but its presence in the landscape is attributed to the animating deity Viracocha in an origin myth that ties
Kinsich’ata into a wider narrative cycle locating the social order within the experienced landscape. Kinsich’ata’s eruption disrupted the landscape, altering
the path of the river Vilcanota and the agricultural potential of the area, and creating a distinctive landscape feature and cultural resource. Archaeological
evidence suggests that the volcano was a focus of activity from the Formative, subsequently both the Wari and the Inca constructed major ritual canters
here, and Kinsich’ata is an Apu (mountain deity) for those living in the area today. The volcanic rubble has provided a location and material for domestic
and state construction, including an Inca ‘temple’ dedicated to Viracocha and artificial lake that were the focus of ritual procession and pilgrimage. This
consider the relationship between mobility and fixed landscape features as pilgrimage, the composition of ritual offerings, and the transport of materials is
used by Andean people to conceptually integrate and engage with animate places.
Silliman, Stephen (University of Massachussets Boston) and Katherine Sebastian Dring (Eastern Pequot Tribal Nation)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              412
[61]             Integrating Community, History, and Objects: Reflections on Eastern Pequot Reservation Archaeology
We use this paper to take stock of more than 12 years of collaboration between the Eastern Pequot Tribal Nation and the University of Massachusetts
Boston in the context of the Eastern Pequot Archaeological Field School. This is important to discuss in a session dedicated to a broader Pequot
archaeology, as the Eastern Pequot and Mashantucket Pequot nations share many cultural, historical, and familial connections, yet have had different
political and economic positions and archaeological programs over the last four decades. Taking stock means not only discussing what archaeological
evidence has been recovered, how this information can speak to different audiences (students, tribal members, archaeologists, politicians), and what
parallels or divergences can be found with respect to the Eastern Pequot’s cousins at Mashantucket, but also raising the question of how to make the
practice of archaeology even more relevant and engaged. In particular, we want to consider how to incorporate archaeological methods and materials into
local knowledge and community social memory and how to enhance the accessibility of information and practice. This engages the ongoing challenge
balance of “giving” and “taking” embedded in the process of archaeological research done with Native communities on their historic lands.
Sills, E. Cory (University of Texas at Tyler)
[238]            Reevaluation of the Placencia Salt Works in the Classic Maya Economy
The Placencia Salt Works in southern Belize are re-evaluated based on 2015 field work, building on previous research by J. Jefferson MacKinnon.
Comparisons are made with the Paynes Creek Salt Works based on a similar salt-water lagoon environment, salt-production artifacts (briquetage), the
presence of earthen mounds, and the absence of preserved wooden architecture at the Placencia Salt Works. Study of the briquetage indicates a similar
process of evaporating brine in pots over fires to make salt. At Sacapulas in the highlands of Guatemala and elsewhere, the salt content of brine is
enriched by pouring it through salty soil prior to the evaporation process—in order to reduce fuel consumption. Only two of the Paynes Creek Salt Works
have earthen mounds, since the other salt works were submerged by sea-level rise and any earthen mounds would have been deflated by wave action.
However, mounds are plentiful at the Placencia Salt Works where wooden buildings may have been constructed in the open spaces. Spatial analysis of the
Placencia mounds provides new insights into salt production and provides an indication of the ancient extent of brine enrichment at the Paynes Creek Salt
Works. Ongoing field research will evaluate the spatial context of production.
[158]            Moderator
[158]            Discussant
Sills, E. Cory [238] see Feathers, Valerie
Silva, Ana Maria [103] see Lillios, Katina
Silva, Rosicler (Pontifica Universidade Católica de Goiás), Julio Rubin de Rubin, Daniel Santos Correa, Sergia Meire da Silva and Jordana
Batista Barbosa
[167]            New Perspective in the GO-CP04 Archaeological Site. Goiás, Brazil.
Research conducted in the 1980s in the area of the GO-CP-04 litho-ceramic archaeological site identified drawings, engravings and a burial ground. The
shelter measurements averaged 40m in length by 4m in width. The radio carbonic dates vary between 4,455+/-115 years B.P. and 1,020+/-40 years B.P.
With the resumption of investigations, a reassessment of the characteristics of the shelter is presented. It is considered that the site area may be more than
50 m long and the slope would be more distant from the dwelling area, in this case, comprising a relatively flat intermediate area, as opposed to the initial
hypothesis of a smaller living area. The results obtained so far are important to the proposition of hypotheses related to the reconstruction of the shelter
and the development of a methodology to be used in places from the end of the Pleistocene and early Holocene.
Silverstein, Jay (Univ of Hawaii/DPAA) and Robert Littman (University of Hawaii)
[224]            More than a Lexicon: Uncovering Evidence of the Events on the Rosetta Stone
The Rosetta Stone is one of the most famous inscriptions in the world, yet few could actually tell you about its content. The topics on the stone relate to
the reign of Ptolemy V and provide critical insight into the nature of Hellenism, imperial structure, indigenous relations, ideological assimilation, and process
and consequences of the Great Rebellion of 204–185 B.C.E. against Macedonian rule. While textual references to the rebellion abound there have been
few archaeological correlates. At Tell Timai (ancient Thmuis) we have evidence suggesting that the violence of the Great Rebellion had profound
repercussions shaping the local and long-term nature of Greek imperial strategy. Archaeological data suggests that Thmuis, a tributary town of the
adjacent regional capital of Mendes, was subject to significant violence during the period of the Great Rebellion. IN the aftermath of the violence there was
a period of rebuilding and the usurpation of the political and economic dominance of Mendes resulting in the shift of the nomarchy from Mendes to Thmuis
and a transition of the primary administrative organization from the theocratic temple complex to a Greek poleis.
Simek, Jan [131] see Yerka, Stephen
Simek, Jan and Alan Cressler
[175]            Landscapes of Mississippian Rock Art in the Southeast
Prehistoric rock art has been relatively unknown in the American Southeast until the past few decades. In the 1970s, Wellman's catalog of North
American rock art contained a handful of sites east of the Mississippi River; today there are hundreds of sites recorded for Tennessee, Alabama, Georgia,
Kentucky, and areas east of the Appalachian Mountains. The great majority of these sites probably date to the Late Prehistoric Period, and there are clear
regional variations in how rock art was produced and in its subject matter. In this paper, we review regional variation in late prehistoric rock art in the
Southeast and examine how rock art reflects ideological landscapes imposed on natural landforms in at least one major case.
Simmons, Scott (University of North Carolina Wilmington)
[32]             Bells, Blades and Bodegas: The Pervasive Influences of Payson Sheets
Payson Sheets has influenced the work of a great number of archaeologists over the years, particularly researchers interested in the nature of households
and the quotidian aspects of domestic life, lithic production and use, and in the field of ‘disaster archaeology.’ This paper highlights some of those
influences in the work of the Maya Archaeometallurgy Project and, more recently, the Ambergris Caye Archaeological Project II, both of which are in
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                413
Belize. This paper focuses on the anthropological investigation of ancient Mesoamerican technologies, an area of research where Payson Sheets has had
a particularly pervasive influence. The results of research on ancient Mesoamerican metallurgy are discussed as well as a more recent program of study
on sourcing obsidian artifacts found on Ambergris Caye using X-Ray fluorescence. Households played an important role in both the production and use of
metal objects at the Maya site of Lamanai, located in northern Belize. On the coastal island of Ambergris Caye, Maya households were consumers of
obsidian that originated from a variety of sources throughout Mesoamerica. The results of household archaeology at these sites also will be discussed in
this paper.
Simmons, Alan (University of Nevada Las Vegas, Department of Anth)
[189]             Why Colonize? A Case Study of the Early Neolithic Colonization of the Island of Cyprus
Why humans colonize unoccupied lands, such as islands, has always intrigued scholars. Over the past few decades, researchers working on the
Mediterranean island of Cyprus have documented both a Late Epipaleolithic occupation and a more substantial early Neolithic colonization episode. The
number of such sites remains limited, but is growing with continuing research. For the Neolithic, both Pre-Pottery Neolithic A and PPNB occupations are
now well-documented, and are as early as mainland sites. These defy earlier beliefs that the Mediterranean islands were not occupied until much later in
the Neolithic. Most, but not all, sites are coastal, reflecting these new immigrants’ sea orientation. Thus, we now know that early colonization occurred, but
the question of why this happened remains largely unanswered. This presentation first examines characteristic elements of early Cypriot Neolithic
settlements. Then, from a circum-Mediterranean framework, it looks at reasons why colonization may have occurred in the first place, at a time when the
greater region was undergoing major social and economic shifts. Issues such as over-population, resource stress, economic or religious opportunity,
internal dissention, or simply the urge to explore are all addressed. Some of these issues are especially relevant given the current immigration crisis in the
Mediterranean.
Simms, Stephanie [127] see Parker, Evan
Simon, Rebecca [40] see Ryan, Susan
Simon, Katie, Christine Markussen (University of Vienna) and Cameron Monroe (Department of Anthropology, UC Santa Cruz)
[183]            Mapping Sans-Souci: Geophysical Survey at the Palace of Henry Christophe, Haiti
The Royal Palace of Sans-Souci, a UNESCO World Heritage Site located in the town of Milot in northern Haiti, served as a central political space within the
short-lived Kingdom of Haiti (1811–1820). Despite the critical importance this site holds for our understanding of state formation in the years following the
Haitian revolution, we know precious little about the construction history of the site itself, which extended back into the Colonial Era. During the summer of
2015, archaeologists from the University of California, Santa Cruz and the University of Arkansas, collaborating with representatives of the Institut de
Sauvegarde du Patrimoine National (ISPAN), initiated preliminary geophysical survey and archaeological excavation at Sans-Souci. This poster presents
the preliminary results of a ground penetrating radar (GPR) survey conducted during this field season. The survey was successful in revealing features,
including walls, terraces and other landscape modifications. These results provide a broader understanding of Sans-Souci’s built environment, and provide
insight into which geophysical methods would be most suitable for investigations in the future.
Simon, Arleyn and Stephen Reichardt (Arizona State University)
[265]            Future Salado Research: Roosevelt Archaeology at ASU Center for Archaeology & Society Repository
Archaeological collections have vital roles in contemporary and future research activities and afford opportunities for in-depth localized studies or broad
regional syntheses. The Center for Archaeology & Society Repository (formerly Archaeological Research Institute) at Arizona State University curates the
Roosevelt Archaeology Projects funded by the U.S. DOI Bureau of Reclamation in cooperation with the Tonto National Forest. These well documented
large scale excavations provide research and catalog databases of Salado Sites in the Tonto Basin of central Arizona dating from AD 1200 through AD
1450. Extensive excavation at large platform mound communities with well documented collections and related analyses files, and field and lab
documentation provide ample empirical evidence for testing of new interpretive models of the Classic Hohokam Period (Salado) dynamics. The research
request process is detailed along with a summary of the collections. In addition, the CASR also manages the extensive ASU Anthropology Collections
which contain many other Southwest archaeological collections. Ongoing public outreach programming highlights research topics on the cultural heritage
of central Arizona.
Simpson, Bethany (UCLA) and Emily Cole (UCLA)
[271]            Karanis and Qara el-Hamra: Spatial Organization of Settlements in the Ancient Fayum, Egypt
The Fayum region of Egypt was transformed by extensive agricultural development in the second century B.C.E.; irrigation projects increased arable land,
and many new towns and villages were founded in order to accommodate a growing population. These settlements were originally designed according to
the Greek tradition of orthogonal grid planning, creating orderly “blocks” of buildings between intersecting streets. However, over time, layers of both civic
and private domestic construction began to obscure the original town layout, and large public streets gave way to more circuitous alleyways between
buildings. Many adaptations, both civic and social, became necessary to negotiate problems of physical access within these settlements.
This presentation utilizes settlement archaeology, space syntax, and modern urban planning theory in order to explore two such Fayum settlements. The
first, Karanis, was a large regional center, while the second site, Qara el-Hamra, was a much smaller village a few kilometers away. The comparison of the
two sites reveals differing strategies in spatial organization, and considers variables including settlement and population size, demography, and length of
habitation. The results show that instead of being reliant on official civic solutions, spatial organization often involved small-scale interactions and simple
social agreements between neighbors.
Sims, Marsha
[175]            “Selfies”: Culture Heroes Shown in Rock Art
Interactions, entry, timing—issues of the “First Americans” have been strongly debated. This research focuses on archaeology, recorded
histories/reenactments by people, and on large-scaled forms tying culture heroes, myths, and legends to images of the Paleoindian and use of the Front
Range of Colorado. Outrepăssé, reverse hinge, or overshot is a technique for stone reduction used in Clovis technology, in the Solutrean of Europe, and in
a workshop/sacred center of Nohmul, a Late Classic site in Meso America. The area above is a ball court, tlacho, where a game of tlachtli is a religious
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            414
contest. The hummingbird, a culture hero, is celebrated in this contest battling giants. His face is painted blue and yellow and he carries a serpent-headed
boomerang. The first animal represented in this conquest is the jaguar and this element is in rock art of the Olmec where tlacho elements originated. Are
lithics sacred? Tlachco as sacred is found in Meso America and in the U.S. southwest. Discussed are sacred use of lithics, culture heroes and
proboscidean, bird, and human forms represented in rock art, and the feasibility of telling a story based on published accounts using these images.
Sinclair, Amanda (University of Toronto)
[198]             New Perspectives on the Identities and Ideologies of Localized Ancient Andean Communities through the Examination of Figurines
This paper explores the quotidian use of figurines by the inhabitants of the village of Ak’awillay in the Cusco region. Most scholars have defined figurines
as political tools used to support state ideologies. This research expands on this effort and focuses on the use of figurines in domestic contexts among
non-state societies. The study of figurines from Ak’awillay and comparative data from archaeological and ethnographic contexts suggest that figurines had
multiple uses and included ancestor veneration, shamanistic aids, and offerings. These results shed light on small scale practices of social reproduction,
the definition of ideologies, household beliefs, and social identities including status and ethnicity.
Sinensky, Reuven [178] see Lesure, Richard
Singer, Zachary (University of Connecticut) and Brian Jones (Connecticut State Museum of Natural History)
[61]              The Paleoindian Period At Mashantucket
Multiple Paleoindian sites have been identified during the Mashantucket Pequot Museum and Research Center’s (MPMRC) long-term study of Paleoindian
occupations around the Mashantucket Pequot Reservation. The recovery of multiple Paleoindian sites affords the opportunity to study Paleoindian lifeways
around the Great Cedar Swamp at Mashantucket. This paper provides an overview of the Paleoindian research conducted by the MPMRC and attempts to
reconstruct Paleoindian land use of the Mashantucket landscape.
Singer, Zachary [61] see Kelly, John
Singleton, Hayley (University of Florida)
[133]             Midden among the Mounds: An Ongoing Study of Faunal Remains from a Platform Mound and Adjacent Midden at the Garden Patch Site
                  (8DI4)
This paper presents the faunal composition of a platform mound and adjacent village midden as a means of understanding subsistence, feasting, and
ceremony at the precolumbian Garden Patch site, a Middle Woodland (ca. A.D. 100 to 500) multi-mound center located on the northwest gulf coast of
Florida. The vertebrate faunal remains from the dense midden of Area X are compared to those of adjacent Mound II, a platform mound constructed of
alternating lenses of shell midden and sand. The results of faunal analysis from both contexts highlight the extensive use of marine resources from the
neighboring marsh and shallow gulf waters. A series of radiocarbon dates aligned with the stratigraphic distribution of faunal remains within Area X and
Mound II suggests that the rapid construction of Mound II coincided with use of the Area X kitchen midden. Given the contemporaneity and proximity of the
two assemblages, a comparison between the two contexts allows for an evaluation of the composition of mound strata in terms of potential feasting
episodes.
Sissay, Fikremariam [181] see Himes, Sarah
Sitek, Matthew (UC San Diego) and Paul Goldstein (UC San Diego)
[207]             Preliminary Research into the Presence of Tiwanaku at the Site of Cerro San Antonio in the Middle Locumba Valley, Peru
This poster presents the findings from a preliminary survey of the site of Cerro San Antonio in the middle Locumba Valley on the far southern coast of
Peru. Ethnohistoric sources suggest limited agrarian potential, yet the site of Cerro San Antonio shows evidence for over 25 hectares of occupation dating
from the Formative through Inca Periods. This includes at least 10 hectares of Tiwanaku domestic occupations. The middle Locumba Valley lies between
two very different peripheral regions of the Tiwanaku state and may be a crucial case study for exploring the timing and direction of state expansion and
collapse. The site has never been subject to problem-oriented research and is greatly endangered by looting. We discuss the extent of Middle Horizon
occupation as well as other general findings, based on a preliminary reconnaissance and surface collections. We will also address current issues of looting
at the site and outline future research plans.
Sitek, Matthew [255] see Huggins, Kathleen
Skaggs, Sheldon [120] see Cartagena, Nicaela
Skaggs, Sheldon (Bronx Community College CUNY), Nicaela Cartagena (Bronx Community College CUNY), Michael Lawrence (Pacbitun
Regional Archaeology Project) and Terry Powis (Kennesaw State University)
[234]             Late Classic Maya Granite Working Community at the Tzib Group, Pacbitun, Belize
The ancient Maya site of Pacbitun is located between two major ecozones, the Belize River Valley and the Mountain Pine Ridge. Excavations from 2012 to
2015 at the Tzib group in the periphery of Pacbitun first revealed evidence of large scale mano and metate production. Excavations into a large mound,
dubbed “Mano Mound” because the surface was covered with mano perform fragments, revealed that it was not only a debris pile, but also the workshop
platform as well. Large granite flakes, hammer stones, and pottery shards were piled on or swept to the edges of the pile, leaving a flat, square or circular
work surface which eventually built up at least 0.75m tall. Shovel testing of the surrounding landscape uncovered evidence that the first mound discovered
and excavated is only one in a group of other granite workshop mounds situated among the residential structures. Based on ceramic dating, the granite
working community was established in the Late Classic (A.D. 700–900) period. Workshops of this nature are rarely found, and most of what we know has
previously only been gleaned from ethnographic data.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            415
Skala, Aurora (UVIc)
[131]            “Showing up” at Rock Art Sites: Ethical Behavior while using DStretch in Heiltsuk and Wuinkinuxv Territories on the BC Coast, Canada
The results of this 2013–15 M.A. research will showcase the successful use of DStretch to bring out hidden images at pictograph sites in a geographically-
remote area where prior photographs are unavailable. The examples used will be taken from First Nations Territories, primarily from Heiltsuk Nation and
Wuikinuxv Nation, on the Central Coast of British Columbia, Canada. Although these examples are a case study of one region, the concepts presented
may offer insight regarding sites worldwide.
These remarkable images will provide a backdrop and entry point for a discussion on rock art research ethics. This presentation will explore some of the
ethical imperatives and challenges, beyond mere legalities, which should be taken into consideration and practiced when researching rock art sites. For
example, levels of permission, flow of information, (data) storage, consultation/collaboration, and restoration.
Skeates, Robin
[248]            Discussant
Skeens, Jeremy (University of Iowa)
[111]            Analysis of Ceramic Sherds from Woodpecker Cave
Four field seasons of excavations by the University of Iowa field school have recovered hundreds of ceramic pottery sherds from the Woodpecker Cave
site. Previous typological analyses of the ceramic assemblage have supported the hypothesis that the site was host to long-term seasonal occupations
spanning hundreds of years. Woodpecker Cave provides a unique opportunity to study variation in technologies used during ceramic production in eastern
Iowa, spanning the Middle Woodland and Late Woodland periods. Further analysis of the ceramic assemblage can provide insight into production
strategies within the region. Examining temper, vessel morphology, and carbonization within the collection of sherds allows for analysis of the technological
choices made during vessel production and the actual function of the vessels after production. Attempts to partially refit vessels will aid in determining
overall shape and size, and provide a better understanding of the soot and carbon patterns present in the collection.
Skidmore, Maeve (Southern Methodist University)
[198]            A New Look into Camelid Management in Middle Horizon Cusco
The Middle Horizon (A.D. 600–1000) brought dramatic changes to the Cusco region, particularly to valleys where Wari colonists settled in this period.
Despite debate and research on the issue, our understanding of how Wari people altered local agropastoral arrangements in this zone remains limited. A
prior study by the authors suggested that Wari populations maintained camelid flocks in a manner similar to that described for the Inca. Specifically it
concluded that animals lived to maturity, potentially to intensify wool production or serve as pack animals. Collection of additional data from Hatun Cotuyoc
faunal assemblages allows us to revisit earlier conclusions and address new questions.
[198]            Chair
Skov, Eric [115] see Koerner, Shannon
Skowronek, Russell (University of Texas Rio Grande Valley), Juan Gonzalez (University of Texas Rio Grande Valley), James Hinthore
(University of Texas Rio Grande Valley) and Ronald Bishop (Smithsonian Institution)
[200]            El Sauz Chert: Physical and Chemical Characterization of a Long-Used Lithic Resource in South Texas
El Sauz chert is a lithic resource in south Texas that was used to make stone tools dating from Early Archaic (3500–6000 B.C.) to Late Prehistoric (A.D.
700) times. Located in Starr County, Texas a few miles north of the Rio Grande are two chert quarries associated with altered rhyolitic ash of the
Catahoula Formation. Given its restricted occurrence, El Sauz chert offers a unique opportunity to study prehistoric exchange and resource procurement.
Tools of this chert are common east of the restricted source locality, but very few artifacts have been found to the west. Previous studies published in
Lithic Technology, have identified distinctive chemical and physical characteristics of El Sauz, including its high aluminum content, abundant vugs, opalized
veins, smeared colorations, and pale yellowish-green fluorescence under short-wave ultraviolet light. Here we present new neutron activation analyses (30
elements) and Portable XRF data (10 elements) to further constrain its origin and mode of formation, and to provide criteria to differentiate tools made from
El Sauz from those derived from other chert sources.
[200]            Chair
Slater, Donald (Phillips Academy, Robert S. Peabody Museum, & Brandeis University)
[294]            Getting Carried Away - A Petroglyphic Litter Scene from Cenote Ceh' Yax, Yucatan, Mexico
During reconnaissance in a dry cenote at the small site of Ceh’ Yax, Mexico, members of the Central Yucatan Archaeological Cave Project discovered an
in-situ monument incised with a petroglyphic scene depicting a dignitary seated within a litter. Although litters are not commonly shown in Mesoamerican
imagery, they do appear on lintels, wall graffiti, codex-style Maya vases, and as ceramic effigies. This paper will present an analysis of Mesoamerican litter
iconography which will demonstrate that the artist who inscribed the monument at Ceh’ Yax followed widely utilized elite-style Classic period graphic
conventions. More broadly, this conclusion indicates that despite the humble size of the settlement of Ceh' Yax, those who utilized the cenote were active
participants in a far-reaching network of cultural exchange.
Slaughter, Mark (Bureau of Reclamation), Richard Anduze (Salt River Project), Jeremy Iliff (Office of Surface Mining and Reclamation
Enforceme), Garry Cantley (Bureau of Indian Affairs) and Terry McClung (Bureau of Indian Affairs)
[64]             Kayenta Mine on Black Mesa
The Black Mesa Archaeological Project (1967–1987) was undertaken to clear archaeological sites to mine coal for the Navajo Generating Station. The
original permit for this work expires in 2019. Working with project proponents, tribes, and other groups/individuals, Federal agencies are in the process of
re-permitting (2019–2044) project features; these include the Kayenta Mine, Navajo Generating Station, a railroad, and two large powerlines. This poster
summarizes the on-going cultural resource activities connected with the re-permitting process.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              416
Slayton, Emma [220] see Hofman, Corinne
Sload, Rebecca
[294]             Reverential Termination of the Sun Pyramid Cave, Teotihuacan
Reverential termination is hypothesized for the human-made cave beneath the Sun Pyramid. While the idea of a mid-third century A.D. termination is not
new and is based on radiocarbon dating and construction of blockages in the rear section of the cave and use of concrete, qualifying the termination as
reverential is a refinement. The most direct information comes from examination of blockage construction, which is supported by two other lines of
evidence. One also lays within the cave and involves analysis of the construction sequences of the four "narrowings," artificially constricted passages in the
front section of the cave whose access was not affected by blockage construction. Original sections of the narrowings appear to have been terminated with
the rest of the cave, followed by enlargements that mimic the originals. The copying indicates continuity of belief and respectful post termination ritual use
of the cave. The other line of evidence is based on the hypothesized, recently published, interplay between cave and Pyramid in which radiocarbon dates,
ceramics, and spatial relationships suggest that Teotihuacanos executed a well-conceived plan for both Pyramid and cave to terminate the mountain cave
and redefine the Pyramid without cave. In all instances, reverence is indicated.
Sloan, Anna (University of Oregon)
[221]             Learning to Listen: Quinhagak Voices Teaching about Gender
This presentation describes how archaeologists are using the knowledge of community stakeholders from the Yup'ik village of Quinhagak, Alaska to
analyze gender dynamics at Nunalleq (GDN-248), a pre-contact village site located on the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta. During the summer of 2015,
Quinhagak residents were invited to participate in semi-structured interviews about gender roles and activities in Yup'ik society and about the relevance of
gender to stakeholder questions about the past. Interview data suggest that gender in Quinhagak is defined by kinship and subsistence obligations, that
people become gendered through processes of learning and teaching, and that values of community cohesion in many ways eclipse gender divisions.
Quinhagak residents are interested in learning more about the gendered lives of their ancestors, with questions that both complement and differ from those
of the archaeological research team. Archaeologists are now using the community-derived knowledge from this project to create a locally-relevant model
for interpreting pre-contact gender dynamics at Nunalleq. Integrating Yup'ik perspectives into this gender analysis creates meaningful opportunities for
community engagement with the Nunalleq site while also honoring the expertise of Indigenous stakeholders in interpreting their heritage.
Slobodin, Sergey [185] see Speakman, Robert
Slotten, Venicia (University of Cincinnati) and David Lentz (University of Cincinnati)
[32]              Weeds, Seeds, and Other Maya Needs
Our understanding of the diet, subsistence, and agricultural practices of ancient Maya commoners has been remarkably enhanced thanks to many years of
archaeological investigations at Cerén led by Payson Sheets. The recovery of paleoethnobotanical remains at the site has revealed not only the storage of
various well-preserved foodstuffs, but also extensive house gardens and agricultural fields filled with lasting impressions and carbonized remains of a
diverse set of plant species including maize, manioc, agave, squash, chili peppers, cotton, and tree crops such as avocado, guava, calabash, nance and
cacao. Besides the annual crops, recent excavations within Cerén’s agricultural fields reveal a strong presence of weedy species and lesser known woods,
suggesting a diverse assemblage of plants comprised the ancient agricultural biome. The large amount of small seeds and achenes recovered from the
cultivated fields for the most part represent annual weedy species that would have been relatively easy to manage by the Cerén inhabitants, if so desired.
Modern Maya associate many useful applications with these intrusive plants and the strong presence of the weeds at Cerén suggests that the weeds
possibly held a positive and tolerable relationship with the villagers.
Sluka, Victoria (University of Notre Dame) and Ian Kuijt (University of Notre Dame)
[37]              International Intellectual Property Law and Traditional Crafts: A Case Study
This case study uses historic looms and weaving techniques from around the world to explore the complexities of protecting traditional craft technologies
used by modern groups. Descendant and indigenous communities worldwide, especially in developing nations, are using sale of their traditional crafts as a
way to benefit from the increasingly popular cultural tourism industry. Cultural heritage management initiatives and the ethical sourcing of cultural materials
call for more relevant and focused intellectual property laws around the world. By legally protecting the processes of production and the traditional colors,
motifs, and forms associated with traditional crafts, indigenous groups can gain legal control of their heritage, and in turn control any economic benefit that
may come from it by barring cultural appropriation through illegitimate copies. However, as this study illustrates, existing intellectual property laws cannot
be effectively applied to very old and complex traditional skills. A primary difficulty comes in the form of defining ownership of tangible and intangible
cultural heritage. With a focused analysis of this and related problems, solutions can begin to be explored which could aid in the economic growth of
indigenous communities, and therefore encourage the retention of innovative traditional knowledge.
Smallwood, Ashley [218] see Jennings, Thomas
Smit, Douglas (University of Illinois at Chicago) and Antonio Coello Rodríguez (Independent Investigator)
[281]             Mitayos and Markets in Colonial Huancavelica (A.D. 1564–1810)
Located in the Central Peruvian Andes, Huancavelica was the largest source of mercury in the Western Hemisphere and a critical source of wealth for
Spain’s colonial empire. The Spanish administration mobilized labor through the infamous mita, a rotational labor tax that required colonial provinces to
send one-seventh of their population to work in the mines. Forced labor in Huancavelica not only exposed these indigenous miners to the horrors of
colonial mercury mining, but also brought engagement with burgeoning colonial exchange systems, including access to a wide range of household
ceramics. Drawing from recent domestic excavations conducted within Santa Barbara, the central camp for indigenous labor at Huancavelica, this paper
analyzes the types of ceramics used by indigenous miners. Specifically, we argue that indigenous laborers, both forced and free, had access to a much
wider range of ceramics than suggested by Spanish records.
[281]             Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              417
Smith, Gerald [6] see Sherwood, Sarah
Smith, April (University of Georgia), Xiaofei Li (University of Georgia) and Laurie Reitsema (University of Georgia)
[8]               Vertebral Wedging: A Potential Tool for the Determination of Parity in Archaeological Samples?
During pregnancy, women experience lordotic posturing to compensate for the weight of the growing fetus. Biomechanical stress from lordotic posturing
causes bone remodeling of the lumbar spine during pregnancy resulting in lumbar wedging, which may persist after giving birth. Persistence of lumbar
wedging in skeletal samples has potential applications for estimating parity in the archaeological record. This research analyzes the possibility that lumbar
wedging is observable in the skeletal record by analyzing morphometrics of lumbar vertebrae from 131 individuals with known demographic data and
medical histories from the William M. Bass Skeletal Collection at the University of Tennessee. Using ANOVA analysis and mixed-effect models, we find no
association between parity and lumbar wedging, but we do observe an overall trend of increasing lumbar wedging with age, which may be due to
degeneration with age under bipedal loading. Though vertebral wedging during pregnancy is an observable phenomenon during pregnancy in living
populations, this study indicates that the human spine is highly plastic and adaptable, and temporary stressors do not permanently alter the shape of
vertebrae such that they could be used to estimate parity in archaeological populations.
Smith, Claire (Flinders University)
[10]             Socially Mediated Terrorism and Conflicting Heritage Values
The confluence of contemporary terrorism and radical changes in the media landscape constitutes a fresh—and currently under-rated—threat to cultural
heritage. Socially mediated terrorism in Syria and Iraq is underpinned by a clash in heritage values. As visual symbols of competing political, ideological
and religious values, iconic cultural heritage is an increasingly likely choice for extremists seeking visual ways to maximise their impact. Not everyone
ascribes to the notion of Outstanding Universal Value and the symbolic dimension of World Heritage sites can make these sites potent targets for terrorists
seeking to obtain global attention for a political cause. What is new is the opportunity that the media revolution provides for the increased impact of
destruction, both locally and globally.
Moreover, the ever-increasing gap between rich and poor, both within countries and between countries, exacerbates feelings of estrangement that can be
used by terrorists to retard the protection of World Heritage sites. The destruction of cultural heritage will remain a problem as long as cultural patrimony—
and indeed World Heritage—is shaped primarily by Anglo-European concepts of heritage, and consequently aligned with viewpoints and values that are
associated with the West.
[10]             Chair
Smith, Mara (Eastern New Mexico University)
[66]             A Descriptive Analysis of Animal Paleopathology from the Archaeological Site of Salmon Ruins
This thesis research is a small part of the greater potential study of the interactions between people in prehistory and the animals they relied upon for food
and ritual items. Analysis will compare the prevalence of osteological changes and abnormalities in the remains of wild animals and domestic turkeys at
Salmon Ruin, New Mexico. Domestic turkeys, being influenced by the hand of humans, are unique cases of paleopathology that could potentially provide
insight into the domestication and care of the animals that the local population came to rely on so heavily. This study also includes the creation of data
collection protocols that are unique to the study of animal paleopathology in an effort to aid future research in an underrepresented field.
Smith, Michael (Arizona State University)
[129]            Housing and Society at Teotihuacan
Housing at Teotihuacan took several forms, including apartment compounds, nonroyal palaces, residential quarters within civic structures, and perishable
houses. I describe several approaches and methods that have been, or could be, applied to the analysis Teotihuacan housing. These include quantitative
measures of wealth inequality using the Gini index; typological analysis of the forms of rooms, spaces, and compounds; measures of architectural
standardization; distributions of surface artifacts collected by the Teotihuacan Mapping Project; and a more productive use of empirical theory and
concepts of space, planning, and layout. As a unique form of urban housing in world history, the apartment compounds (and other residences of
Teotihuacan) have much to teach scholars about urban life and society in the ancient city.
[171]            Chair
Smith, Alexander (The College at Brockport, State University of New York) and Linda Gosner (Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and the
Ancien)
[147]            Site-Based Survey at S'Urachi: Deep History, Thick Shrubs and Historical Connections in West Central Sardinia
The nurage of S’Urachi is a Bronze Age stone monument that has served a central place in the landscape of west-Central Sardinia for millennia. Since
2013, the archaeological site has been the subject of an ongoing investigation into the daily lives of local inhabitants living around the nuraghe from the
Bronze Age through the Roman period. The project—a joint effort of an international team funded by Brown Universtiy and the Comune di San Vero Milis—
has investigated the immediate surroundings of S’Urachi through micro-topographical, soil, and geophysical survey as well as targeted excavation. In
complement to this research, we carried out intensive pedestrian survey in 2015 to investigate the long-term trends in occupation and use of the site. The
unplowed landscape with heavy vegetation required an innovative, more intrusive survey approach than is traditionally used in Mediterranean survey. The
results shed light on trends of occupation in the late Iron Age and Roman periods and patterns of garbage deposition from the Early Modern Period
onwards. This poster presents our preliminary results, highlighting the methodology developed for coping with the environmental challenges at S’Urachi
and the future plans for prospection in and around the site.
Smith, Benjamin (University of Florida)
[181]            Barbed Bone Points: Ethnoarchaeological and Archaeological Perspectives on Selective Fishing on the Shores of Lake Turkana.
As riverine and lacustrine environments expanded across north tropical Africa at various times in prehistory, humans developed special methods for fishing
or “aquatic hunting.” Barbed bone “harpoon” points, used across much of Africa north of the equator during early Holocene times, represent an especially
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             418
compelling innovation. Studying barbed bone points from Turkana Basin, NW Kenya can shed light on hunter-gatherer technology, tool use, and resource
acquisition in a context of environmental and social change. Ethnoarchaeological studies of modern local fishing practices reveal contexts of near-shore
fishing methods and tools analogous to those of early Holocene Turkana. For example, modern Turkana fishers have traditionally employed harpoon-like
tools to acquire the largest, often shallow water fish species, while using baited hooks and traps for smaller and deep-water species. Reproduction
experiments demonstrate the significant time required to produce these points and provide a foundation for reanalyzing collections from archaeological
sites west of Lake Turkana. An analysis of these collections demonstrates new ways of investigating variability in site use. The poster concludes with some
reflections on the implications of barbed bone point research for better understanding changing mobility strategies, resource intensification and
technological innovation during early Holocene times.
Smith, Ryan, Patrick Mullins (University of Pittsburgh), Steve Wernke (Vanderbilt University) and Brian Billman (University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill)
[205]              A Comparison of Various Technologies to Capture Low-Altitude Aerial Photography as Alternative Methods in Mapping Archaeological
                   Landscapes
Site-based archaeological projects often face a common challenge of producing detailed maps of large, complex areas. The use of traditional site-mapping
techniques (e.g. total station) can be expensive and labor-intensive. Alternatively, a variety of platforms provide archaeologists with practical and
inexpensive approaches to aerial photography and photogrammetric mapping. Here, the authors explore three different approaches to aerial photography
as alternatives to traditional methods of site mapping: unmanned aerial vehicles, large-framed kites, and meteorological balloons. All three of these
platforms have proven effective in terms of their ability to lift lightweight payloads that can produce high-resolution maps of extensive archaeological areas.
We focus on differences and advantages of each approach from the perspective of in-field use across diverse settings as well as the post-production of
high-resolution maps. Testimony of these separate technologies comes from three different sites in Peru, two within the southern highlands and one on the
northern coast. Using our experience mapping these sites, pros and cons as well as a detailed methodology for attaining aerial photography with each
approach are outlined.
Smith, Kevin (Haffenreffer Museum, Brown University)
[217]              Introducing "Envisioning and Re-envisioning Arctic Archaeology: The Enduring Legacies of J. Louis Giddings (1909–1964)"
J. Louis Giddings' (1909–1964) pioneering archaeological research in the Arctic integrated natural science perspectives with archaeological investigations,
ethnographic and folkloric research, collaboration with indigenous communities, and experimentation with cutting-edge methods. He introduced
dendrochronology and dendroclimatology to Arctic archaeology, developed the concept of "beach ridge archaeology"—using the sequential formation of
maritime beach ridges to date relatively archaeological sites upon them, discovered the Denbigh Flint complex—paving the way for understanding ASTt
connections from eastern Siberia to Greenland, established the western Arctic's Holocene archaeological sequence through research at Cape Krusenstern
and Onion Portage—the first deeply stratified interior archaeological site investigated in Alaska, and brought his findings to scientific and public attention
through scientific articles, popular books, and Brown University's Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology. Since Giddings' death in 1964, his perspectives,
students, and collections have guided or influenced northern research. This introduction contextualizes Giddings' research and life in his times, when
northern research was considerably different than we find it today, discusses the extent of the collections and archives he generated and asks what can
still be done with these, with the sites he investigated, and with the concepts on which his research was based as our field sets new priorities for northern
research.
[217]              Chair
Smith, Catherine (Indiana University) and Clifford T. Brown (Florida Atlantic University)
[246]              Rethinking Population Dynamics of the Belle Glade Prehistoric Culture
The Belle Glade prehistoric culture of central peninsular Florida is very poorly known. Through standard osteological analyses of 78 individuals from Belle
Glade Mound (8PB41), type site for the culture, estimates for age, sex, and stature were calculated and observations of dental and skeletal pathologies
were noted. Sex could be estimated for 26 males and 25 females. Age distributions varied stratigraphically but were dominated by young adults aged 20–
35 and middle adults aged 35–50. The age distribution, particularly the 5p15 ratio, suggested demographic growth for a nonagricultural population showing
little skeletal evidence of nutritional distress, perhaps made possible by the abundance of wetland resources in this region.
Smith, Larissa (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[252]              Making It Cool: Modern Lessons in Reinterpreting, Reappropriating and Understanding Hunter Gatherer Studies
Studies of hunter-gatherers have recently garnered less attention than ever before. This has occurred in large part due to a correlation between a reduced
number of forager societies and relevancy with such reduced numbers. In effect, there exists a dogma where studying hunter-gatherers is no longer
pertinent to today’s society, nor to the anthropological subfield. However, my paper begs to differ. Hunter-gatherer studies, specifically my own amongst
modern populations of the Ata of Negros Island of the Philippines, continues to provide fruitful and revitalizing information on hunter-gather studies,
complexities associated with dealing with modernity, and most significantly, deeper insights into ways that scientists can understand multi-varied levels of
resiliency amongst hunter gatherers diachronically and spatially. My ethnoarchaeological research acknowledges that forager societies still remain resilient
proposing that adaptations to modernity undertaken by forager societies described by researches for the past half-century, not only apply today, but can
also be used to elaborate on multi-varied ways that foragers have adapted to modernity in the past. Due to our auspicious ability to tap into these still
existing marginalized societies, lessons are still to be learned about foragers and these perspectives may be the keys to invigorating hunter- gatherer
studies for the future.
Smith, KC (Consultant)
[260]              Discussant
Smith, Lindsey (Pagosa District Archaeologist), Danyelle Leentjes (CRIA Administrative Director), Paul Blackman (Recreation Staff, Pagosa
Ranger District, San Juan), Nadia Werby (CRIA Marketing Director) and Sue Fischer (CRIA Board Member, Volunteer and Tour Guide )
[267]              An Evolving Partnership: the San Juan National Forest, the Chimney Rock Interpretive Association and a New National Monument.
Chimney Rock National Monument, designated by President Barack Obama on September 21, 2012, is located within the San Juan National Forest in
southwestern Colorado. The 4,726 acre monument preserves and protects hundreds of prehistoric sites (including a Chacoan outlier great house and kiva)
and resource gathering and use areas associated with the ancestors and families of numerous Native American groups with ties to the greater American
Southwest. The stewardship and sustainability of this significant landscape rest on the Forest Service and its partners, including its relationship with the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                419
Chimney Rock Interpretive Association (CRIA). CRIA, a 501(c)(3) non-profit volunteer organization, currently manages day-to-day operations at the
monument under a special use permit with the Forest Service. Following the designation of Chimney Rock as a National Monument, recreation, tourism,
educational outreach and research activities continue to increase. As the need for management support and oversight of the Monument grows, this unique
collaboration between the Forest Service and CRIA will morph and mature through opportunities and challenges in its evolution.
Smith, Karen (University of South Carolina) and Brandy Joy (University of South Carolina)
[293]             A Diachronic Perspective on Colonoware from the J. Joyner Smith Plantation
Recent work on SC DNR’s Fort Frederick Heritage Preserve, once part of the J. Joyner Smith Plantation in Beaufort County, South Carolina, offers an
opportunity to study changes in ceramic consumption through time. Utilizing archaeological samples from several distinct occupations on this Sea Island
cotton plantation, we chart changes in colonoware abundance, in particular, and relate them to larger socio-economic changes taking place across the
region during the early nineteenth c. In addition to using DAACS data in our comparative analyses, we draw on a constellation of thoughtful archaeological
research on slave settlements in Beaufort County.
Smith Marquez, Sean
[101]             Cultural Dynamics and Influences in Jalisco’s Central Plateau during the Late Classic-Epiclassic Period: The Case of El Palacio de Ocomo
The El Grillo Complex (A.D. 300–600) of Jalisco’s central plateau, as defined by Galvan in the Atemajac Valley, is recognized as a dynamic and changing
society that was integrated in the emergent Epiclassic cultural system of the Mesoamerican northwest. The excavations done in the last few years at El
Palacio de Ocomo by the Oconahua Archaeological Project reveal a close relationship between this site and the El Grillo Complex. At the same time,
ceramic analysis show elements that are considered diagnostic in assemblages from distinct northwestern Mesoamerican societies established at the site
in the same period. Samples dated via radiocarbon-14 allow us to establish the constructive chronology, which in turn helps explain the drastic changes in
the architectural patterns of the main structure at El Palacio de Ocomo. These results support current hypotheses regarding the site's origins and its
contacts with other regional actors.
Smyth, Michael (The Foundation for Americas Research, Inc.), Timothy Beach (University of Texas) and Eric Weaver (University of Cincinnati)
[130]             Climate Change and Chiefdom Ecodynamics in the Eastern Andean Cordillera of Colombia
Exploratory research into climate change and the formation of chiefdoms took place in the Valley of Leiva. Preliminary findings from cultural-environmental
contexts provide extraordinary interdisciplinary data. A stone-walled, oval-shaped elite building with compacted earthen floors, post-holes, and artifact-
ecofact assemblages (decorated pottery, spindle whorls, deer fauna, and stone monoliths) was revealed near El Infiernito. Soil survey along the Rio Leyva
produced evidence for major erosion and sedimentation events now being dated. Penetrating cores and deep horizontal trenches along the river floodplain
discovered a possible irrigation canal associated with Prehispanic ceramics and an upright wood post from a buried house structure. Exploration of the
Cueva de la Fábrica about 7 km to the north encountered active speleothems including stalagmites and water samples collected for paleoclimate
reconstruction. Research will continue into the role of drought, erosion and sedimentation, flooding, and glacier dynamics. Early results suggest that
atmospheric phenomena associated with the Southern Oscillation and its El Nino and La Nina episodes (ENSO) contributed to climatic variability in
precipitation and temperature that would have altered highland glaciers, effected river levels, caused major erosion, and reconfigured landscape hydrology.
Such environmental conditions would have greatly impacted the evolution of ranked societies dependent on irrigation.
Smyth, Heather (Arizona State University) and Christopher Carr (Arizona State University)
[286]             Scioto Hopewell Concepts of Soul-Like Essences in Humans: Mortuary Evidence in Light of Historic Woodland and Plains Native American
                  Concepts
Scioto Hopewell conceptions of soul-like essences in humans are evident in the systematic placements of grave goods of particular kinds at particular
bodily locations of inhumations, and with insights from comparative information on historic Woodland and Plains Native Americans. Analysis of 284 burials
from 11 Scioto Hopewell cemeteries indicates a recognition of one “free” journeying soul and multiple “body” souls; their bodily residences, locations of exit
upon death, and likely directions taken; differing functions of different souls; and different “medicines” placed with different souls. Whether souls of
individuals of different ages, sexes, and communities were thought to vary is explored.
Snitker, Grant (Arizona State University)
[72]              Fire, Humans, and Landscape Evolution: Modeling Anthropogenic Fire and Neolithic Landscapes in the Western Mediterranean
Archaeological and paleoecological analyses demonstrate that human-caused fires have long-term influences on global terrestrial and atmospheric
systems. For millennia, humans have intentionally burned landscapes to drive game, clear land, engage in warfare, and propagate beneficial plant and
animal species. Around the world, Neolithic transitions to agriculture often coincided with increases in fire frequency and changes in vegetation community
composition and distribution. Although this phenomenon is commonly identified in paleoecological studies, archaeological research has not fully
incorporated the spatial and temporal dimensions of anthropogenic fire into discussions of the development of agricultural landscapes. Coupled agent
based models (ABM) and geographic information systems (GIS) offer a new approach to anthropogenic fire that links social and biophysical processes in a
virtual “laboratory” where long-term scenarios and outcomes can be tested. This paper outlines new, integrated ABM and GIS models that draw from
ethnographic examples of agricultural burning in the Mediterranean, charcoal production and dispersion equations, and sedimentary charcoal records.
Long-term dynamics of anthropogenic fire regimes are explored through a case study in the Western Mediterranean (Eastern Spain).
[72]              Chair
Snoeck, Christophe [290] see Ostapkowicz, Joanna
Snortland, J. Signe [177] see Banks, Kimball
Snow, Meradeth [185] see Tifental, Emilia
Snow, Meradeth (University of Montana), Martha Gustafson (Eastern New Mexico University) and Kathy Gore (Eastern New Mexico University)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                420
[195]             Kiva B Internments at the Mine Canyon Site, New Mexico: A Bioarchaeology and Ancient DNA Approach
Excavations at the Mine Canyon site, a PIII Chaco outlier near Farmington, New Mexico, revealed a cluster of thirteen individuals interred within Kiva B.
Ancient DNA analysis of the individuals from the site demonstrated that six of the Kiva B internments belonged to the same derived form of Haplogroup A,
suggesting a matrilineal relationship. Recent analysis of their burial positions suggests the Kiva B individuals are distinct from others at the site, further
supported by a lack of grave goods. Additional analysis of pathology, dental calculus and decay, age distributions, and other morphological traits were also
evaluated to further test whether these individuals are distinct. Synthesizing the data from this group of individuals, comparisons are made to modern and
prehistoric populations in the desert Southwest. The results are discussed in terms of possible evidence of site abandonment, disease, and witchcraft.
Sobel, Elizabeth (Missouri State University) and Virginia Hutton Estabrook (Armstrong State University, Savannah, Georgia)
[39]              The Archaeological Utility of ACTUS: An Alternative Method of Contingency Table Analysis Using Simulation
Archaeologists rely heavily on contingency table analyses of count data to infer relationships between variables and proportional differences between
populations. For example, archaeologists often use contingency table analyses of sample data to make inferences about inter-site variation in lithic raw
material type proportions. The most common methods for making these inferences are the Chi-Square test and Fisher's Exact test. However, the former
cannot be applied to small samples and the latter cannot be applied to tables larger than 2x2. Consequently, many archaeological studies rely only on
sample proportions to draw conclusions about population proportions. We suggest an alternative approach using ACTUS (Analysis of Contingency Tables
Using Simulation), a computationally intense simulation program developed by George Estabrook and used mainly in biology. Compared to traditional
methods, ACTUS offers four advantages: it enables rigorous statistical inferences despite low counts; it generates probability values for each individual
cell, aiding interpretation of probability values generated for the entire table; even the least quantitatively oriented archaeologist can understand how the
program works; and the free software operates rapidly, producing results based on thousands of simulated tables in just seconds. Here we explain the
method and use several archaeological examples to demonstrate its utility.
Söderström, Mats (Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences) and Christian Isendahl (University of Gothenburg, Sweden)
[263]             Remote and Proximal Sensors for Field Mapping of Amazonian Dark Earths
Brazilian and Swedish archaeologists and soil scientists collaborated in the multidisciplinary research project Cultivated Wilderness (CW) to investigate
Amazonian Dark Earth (ADE) locations in the Santarém‐Belterra region of the Brazilian Amazon. One of the goals of the project was to investigate the
potential of rapid geophysical data collection to assess the properties and spatial distribution of ADE. About 300 reference soil samples were collected at
different ADE locations. A range of sensors (based on various principles: electromagnetic induction, gamma‐ray spectrometry, x‐ray fluorescence,
reflectance spectroscopy, and remote sensing) were used both in the field and in the laboratory. This presentation synthesizes the potential of these
sensors in ADE surveys.
Sol, Felipe [97] see Martin, Alexander
Solimano, Paul [114] see Gilmour, Danny
Solinis-Casparius, Rodrigo (University of Washington), Anna S. Cohen (University of Washington) and Kyle R. Urquhart (University of Arkansas)
[101]             Urbanism in the Purepecha Heartland at Angamuco, Michoacan
Despite over 70 years of research in the Lake Patzcuaro Basin of Michoacan, there has been limited work focusing on pre-Purepecha and Purepecha
urbanism in the region. In this paper, we discuss how recent survey and excavation data from the ancient city of Angamuco (c. 250–1530 C.E.) is helping
us to evaluate whether suggested urban models from different parts of Mesoamerica are applicable in western Mexico. Alternatively, is there evidence for a
distinct type of west Mexican or Purepecha city? What types of archaeological materials can help us to best address this question? Here we examine
several specific examples of urban life at Angamuco, including the configuration of household complexes, accessibility within the site, and evidence for
social difference. Our study contributes to a wider discussion about the organization of urban space and how we can compare spaces within and between
ancient cities.
Solis, Kristina (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[115]             South Texas Archaic Hunter-Gatherer Mobility Patterns: A Study using Strontium Isotope Analysis
Strontium isotope ratios from human enamel can be used to estimate the general origin of individuals and are becoming an important tool in archaeology
for studying human mobility. This presentation will illustrate the results of a pilot study looking at mobility patterns for south Texas Archaic period hunter-
gatherers using strontium isotope analysis. Six human teeth from the south Texas mortuary site of Loma Sandia, dating to about 2,850–2,550 years ago,
were used in this study. Three of the teeth are from remains sexed as female and three from males, all adults aged 25 and up. Enamel and bone from
faunal samples were analyzed to find the bioavailable strontium from two geological regions, one of which is the region where Loma Sandia is also located.
Strontium isotope analysis will show if the six individuals buried at this site had grown up in the region or if they migrated to the area later in life. If there are
different strontium isotope signatures between males and females, and the geologic regions, it may indicate exogamy related mobility patterns as well. In
addition to the results of this study, implications for hunter-gatherer archaeology and directions for future research will also be presented.
Somerville, Andrew D. [44] see Streuli, Samantha A.
Somerville, Andrew (University of California, San Diego) and Jose Luis Punzo Díaz (Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia, Cen)
[74]              Escaping Collapse in Northwest Mexico: Social and Environmental Factors of Resiliency at La Ferrería, Durango, Mexico
The end of the Mesoamerican Classic Period (ca. AD 900) was a time characterized by widespread social change, political upheaval, and broad regional
drought conditions. In Northwest Mexico, several large centers such as La Quemada and Alta Vista were abandoned and never reoccupied. The site of La
Ferrería in the Guadiana Valley of Durango, however, remained an important site for several centuries into the Postclassic Period. This presentation
explores the social and environmental factors that may have contributed to the resiliency of this center during a time of broader demographic
reorganization. We present survey data from the Guadiana Valley to explore variations in population between the Classic and Postclassic occupations of
the region and discuss La Ferreria’s trade connections with coastal communities over time. Finally, we present stable carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen isotope
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  421
results from cottontail and jackrabbit bones to explore environmental change through time. Preliminary results demonstrate that La Ferrería experienced
increases in long distance trade, population growth, and wetter conditions around A.D. 900, suggesting that the Valley enjoyed favorable environmental
conditions and may have served as a commercial center and refuge for populations displaced by political upheavals, violence, or drought in neighboring
regions.
Sonderman, Elanor (Texas A&M University) and Crystal Dozier (Texas A&M University)
[40]               Collections as a Teaching Resource: A Case Study
The Anthropology Department at Texas A&M University has an extensive but largely underutilized collection of unprovenienved artifacts, intended for use
as teaching collections. Many of these materials have diagnostic attributes but have not gone through the typing process and, therefore, cannot yet be fully
incorporated into the teaching collections. The authors have designed several projects for students in introductory archaeology and old world prehistory
courses that give these students the opportunity to have hands on experience with artifacts and learn what it takes to understand archaeological material.
These projects are pulling double, if not triple duty—students learn not only how to identify and handle artifacts, but also learn how collections and
curatorial facilities function and operate; the curator of the collections also benefits not only from the labor but also from ability to encourage young minds to
appreciate anthropological collections and collections research.
Sonnemann, Till [222] see Laffoon, Jason
Sonnenschein , Aaron [135] see Zborover, Danny
Soto Maguino, Jorge Luis [134] see Lofaro, Ellen
Soto-Centeno, Angel [222] see Steadman, David
South, Katherine (Southern Illinois University Carbondale)
[291]              The More Things Change: Similarities and Differences in Pastes from Preclassic and Postclassic Pottery in the Western Petén Lakes
Investigations in the western Petén lakes area have provided useful collections of pottery excavated from a variety of sites ranging from the Middle
Preclassic to the Contact periods. This abundance has enabled intensive study of pottery from both macroscopic and compositional perspectives. This
paper compares compositional results from Middle Preclassic and Postclassic pottery samples collected and analyzed by the authors. A comparison of
petrographic analysis from thin sections demonstrates similarities between Middle Preclassic angular calcite pastes and pastes from the Postclassic Kulut
Modeled type. Chemical analysis of the same sherds produces largely dissimilar results with the exception of two Middle Preclassic sherds from Zacpetén.
These similarities and differences raise questions about the longevity of manufacturing techniques such as raw material acquisition areas and paste recipe
use. Answering these questions draws on topics such as identity and technological decision-making by inhabitants separated by several thousand years.
[109]              Discussant
Soza, Danielle [67] see Lea, Trevor
Sparks, Lisa
[67]               Construction of a Mule Deer General Utility Index
Optimal foraging models and faunal analysis to interpret diet require quantitative data to negate variables of results. With the collection and processing of
eleven mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) in the Sierra Blanca Region, New Mexico, a statistically significant database for analysis is constructed. Previous
researchers collected a wide range of data with different methods. By synthesizing it into a solid and replicable method an index can be developed for
subsequent species to enable accurate comparisons. The three criteria that provided for a broad sample are an even distribution of males and females,
their collection through the seasons and ages that range from birth to natural death. Data collected are weights for meat, marrow and grease, processing
times to determine the return rate and kcal/g yield for the energy content. There is an observed difference between mule deer GUI values of adults and
juveniles, the sexes and seasons. The indices are compared to those constructed by Binford (1978) for caribou and Jacobson (2002) for the white-tailed
deer. The mule deer GUI is applied to the faunal data of the Bonnell and Phillips sites in the Sierra Blanca region to determine differential transport of limb
bones.
Sparrow, Tom [269] see Evans, Adrian
Spaulding, Britta (University at Buffalo)
[145]              Revolutionizing Rural Industries: Issues of Access and Scale
In recent years, industrial archaeology has come to be more associated with historical archaeology when it comes to creating perspectives from which to
analyze the evidence of economic industries of all sorts. Farm sites and others that make up rural economic activities—mills, mines, etc.—are all sites of
industry, and they should be studied together for a larger view of these industries from different economic and social scales, particularly in the regional
sense. In southern Sweden from the 18th-early 20th centuries, inhabitants of farms of different types and sizes often had to combine many of these
activities in order to make a living, due to rising populations, marginal environmental conditions, and other social problems. I look at several rural industrial
sites in Småland and comparative sites and use a combination of historical and industrial perspectives to see if they were able to take up new
advancements in technologies, and compare the results of that adoption on success and continuity. Mechanization and industrialization tended to allow
larger players a better stake in their ownership, whereas those who had to cobble different industries together tended to have lower access to the
technological adoption that could have made their futures more secure.
Speakman, Robert [39] see Loftis, Kathy
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               422
Speakman, Robert, Sergey Slobodin (North-East Interdisciplinary Scientific Research I) and Jeffrey Rasic (National Park Service)
[185]             Obsidian Sourcing in Western Beringia
Chemical sourcing of obsidian artifacts serves an important role in understanding prehistoric patterns of mobility, trade, exchange, resource exploitation,
and cultural interaction. In Alaska and adjacent areas of Canada, more than 8,000 obsidian artifacts and geologic source samples have been analyzed by
various analytical techniques resulting in the identification of more than 50 chemically discrete obsidian groups throughout this vast area. In contrast to
Alaska, comparatively little chemistry-based sourcing has occurred in adjacent regions of Russia (Chuktoka, Kolyma, and northern Kamchatka Peninsula).
In 2015, we analyzed, using pXRF, approximately 1000 artifacts from 60+ sites housed in the archaeological collections of the North-East Interdisciplinary
Scientific Research Institute in Magadan, Russia. The results of this large-scale study indicate that the majority of obsidian from Chukotka and Kolyma
originate from a few sources within the Anadyr River system/Krasnoye Lake area of Chukotka. Additionally we identified several examples of long-distance
movement of obsidian from Hokkaido to the northern coast of the Okhost Sea as well examples of obsidian movement from the central range of
Kamchatka to Aion Island on the northern coast of the Chukotka Peninsula. Additionally, we documented the use of tektites from the El’gygytgyn impact
crater for use as stone tools.
Spears, Michael (University of Arizona and Parametrix Inc.) and Berenika Byszewski (University of New Mexico and Parametrix Inc.)
[226]             Reconciling Responsibilities: A Case Study from the Galisteo Basin, New Mexico
What responsibility do archaeologists have in presenting Indigenous perspectives through their interpretations? What would this presentation look like, and
what bridges must be built to accommodate differing knowledge sets and perspectives? Using Thornton Ranch Open Space as a case study, we consider
the constraints and possibilities of working with/for the interests of descendant communities within the context of contemporary cultural resource
management in order to respect various connections and claims to significant cultural landscapes.
Thornton Ranch was purchased from private landowners by Santa Fe County to become a planned recreational area. It is located on the northern rim of
the Galisteo Basin and contains an abundance of unique archaeological remains, including large petroglyph sites. Research suggests that this area may
be central to the cosmos of late Coalition and Classic Period Ancestral Puebloan communities within the Galisteo Basin and beyond. Initial tribal
consultation indicates that the large petroglyph sites and the surrounding landscape are spiritually significant places, and that access to them may have
been restricted during prehistory. Tribal governments object to recreational use of the area, especially petroglyph sites suggesting a need for alternative
management strategies.
Speller, Camilla [134] see Thornton, Erin
Spenard, Jon (University of California, Riverside)
[294]             Building Nature: An Analysis of Landscape Modifications in the Classic Period Maya Polity of Pacbitun, Cayo District, Belize.
This presentation offers an analysis of the architectural modifications made to the limestone karst landscape in the Classic period Maya polity of Pacbitun
in the Cayo District, Belize. The Maya concepts ch’een (hole in the ground for communication with the supernatural world), and k’aax (wilderness) provide
the overall framework for this paper. Through two case studies, I explore the range of karst features the Pacbitun Maya used as ch’een, the variety of ways
the landmarks were modified for creating specific types of spaces within the landscape, and lastly, I discuss the social implications of these practices. The
first case study is Actun Lak cave, an unrestricted ceremonial space open to all community members throughout the Late Preclassic through Early Classic
periods, repurposed for a royal rain ritual just prior to the abandonment of the region at the end of the Late Classic. The second case study details the
modified components of the Nohoch Tunich bedrock outcrop complex. I propose that the creation of these spaces was an aspect of Maya land
management practices, but that the unmodified condition of the building materials was chosen specifically to maintain the wilderness aspect of the place
while transformed into a built environment.
Spence-Morrow, Giles (University of Toronto), Edward Swenson (University of Toronto) and Aleksa Alaica (University of Toronto)
[99]              Putting the Body in its Place: The Intersection of Spatial and Corporal Ontologies at the Late Moche Site of Huaca Colorada, Peru
The Late Moche ceremonial center of Huaca Colorada (A.D. 650–850) was distinguished by cycles of ritualized architectural renovation that coincided with
human and animal foundation sacrifices. Detailed architectonic analysis of the construction sequence of the ceremonial core in relation to the sacrificial
burials incorporated into the structure itself provides interesting insights on Moche ontologies of embodiment, space, and social change. The data strongly
suggest that Moche perceived architecture as an animate, changing, and metabolizing body, the life history of which paralleled the trajectory of different
biological entities (human, divine, and environmental). The joint sacrifice of architectural and living beings sheds light on Moche worldview and
constructions of identity in Middle Horizon Jequetepeque. Ultimately, an investigation of the maintenance, renovation, and ritual treatment of architecture at
Huaca Colorada and other Moche sites offers a means to interpret Moche ideologies of life, death, and vitality.
Spence-Morrow, Giles [105] see Jennings, Justin
Spencer, Kaylee (University of Wisconsin - River Falls) and Maline Werness-Rude (Eastern Connecticut State University)
[27]              Spatial Arrangements at Chichen Itza
Site mapping has been a mainstay in the study of archaeological cultures. Following upon the heels of mapping efforts, which have grown increasingly
precise as our own technology develops, scholars have studied site, building, and monument orientations to great effect. In the Maya region such
investigations have shown how the Maya positioned themselves relative to the cardinal and inter-cardinal directions, natural aspects of the landscape,
and/or other parts of the built environment at inter- and intra-site levels. We will build upon such work in looking at Chichen Itza in relation to some of its
neighbors. In doing so, we will concentrate on specific plaza and building arrangements that at first glance seem to have skewed orientations or to not be
positioned relative to any surrounding areas or constructs. Upon further analysis, however, many of these spaces begin to slowly snap into place. It is only
through experiential analysis as well as approaches grounded in behavioral archaeology, combined with an overarching understanding of regional aspects
of site layout, that such careful placing is revealed, demonstrating the hitherto under-recognized degree to which the northern builders and master planners
created nuanced signals that directed viewers through the charged socio-political spaces they created.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               423
Spiess, Arthur [157] see Betts, Matthew
Spigelman, Matthew [90] see Roberts, Theodore
Spinapolice, Enza (LCHES, Dept. of Archaeology & Anthropology University of Cambridge)
[22]               East African MSA: Regionalisation and Variability
The Late Pleistocene is a central period in the story of human origin, being associated with the spread of modern humans within and Out of Africa. While
fossils and genetics provide the evolutionary setting for the origin of our species, stone tools are often the only archaeological remain attesting of Early
Modern Human behavior, and constitute the bulk of the evidence on hominin behavioural variability. East Africa encompasses ∼3.6 million km² including a
large variety of biomes. Sites are irregularly distributed, largely concentrated within the East African Rift Valley system. The overall site density is low, with
a complete lack of coverage for many areas; radiometric dates are few, and caves or other deeply stratified sequences that allow ready observation of
change through time are rare. Here we present results of the lithic analysis of MSA sites from Ethiopia (Garba III, Melka Kunture) and West Turkana,
Kenya (Kalakoel3; Lomanimania), showing analogies and differences at various scales of analysis, evidencing both the coherence in the East African MSA
and specific adaptations to the paleoenvironments. The understanding of intra-regional variability is the mandatory step before attempting comparisons at a
larger scale, allowing to test models about the different Out of Africa Routes.
Spivey, S. (Washington University in St. Louis)
[290]              Fort Center's Iconographic Bestiary: A Fresh Look at Fort Center's Zoomorphic Wood Carvings
The zoomorphic wood carvings excavated by William Sears from the mortuary pond at the Fort Center (8GL13) site in South Florida are a chronically
understudied assemblage. These artifacts are generally interpreted as totems carved into a single contemporaneous dock structure built above the
mortuary pond, later excavated in various states of degradation. I propose a preliminary typology through which to interpret their function. Beyond that, I
discuss the form the carvings individually take and the figural referents used as guides to shape the carvings, through which I develop a new iconographic
interpretation of the bestiary of animals represented in this assemblage.
Splitstoser, Jeffrey (George Washington University)
[172]              Color, Structure, and Meaning in Middle Horizon Khipus
Inka khipus used cord color, knots, cord attachment, final twist, and sometimes material (e.g., colored camelid hair) to encode information. Middle Horizon
(Wari) khipus used all these conventions and more. For instance, the thick, white, cotton pendant cords of MH khipus were routinely wrapped with brightly
colored (usually camelid hair) yarns that most likely conveyed meaning. The thickness and structure of pendant-cords themselves likely held significance.
Further, while Wari khipu makers tied knots in pendant cords, they sometimes also wrapped these knots with multicolored camelid hair yarns. These
practices and others make Middle Horizon khipus far more complex than their Inka counterparts.
Based on a detailed study of four Middle Horizon khipu in the collections of the American Museum of Natural History in New York and two khipu that were
recently excavated by Milosz Giersz from the site of El Castillo de Huarmey, this talk will discuss how MH khipus differ from Inka khipus, and it will present
patterns found in their color, structure, cord attachment, and twist. The talk will consider the way these patterns and attributes might have been used to
encode information.
Spyrou, Maria A. [223] see Krause, Johannes
Squires, Kirsty (Staffordshire University)
[25]               Changing with the Times: An Exploration of Shifting Attitudes and Funerary Treatment of Children from the Roman to Early Medieval
                   Period in Britain
Throughout Britain, archaeological cemeteries and settlements are being increasingly subjected to in-depth site analyses. Large scale excavations and
subsequent post-excavation work result in large bodies of osteological and artefactual data which, in turn, allow archaeologists to glean an insight into the
social identity of past populations. Biocultural studies that specifically focus on the treatment and attitudes towards children living in Romano-Britain (first–
fifth century A.D.) and early Anglo-Saxon England (fifth–seventh century A.D.) are no exception. However, this type of research tends to focus on sites that
date to the same period, meaning that changes to the treatment and attitudes towards children from the Roman to early Anglo-Saxon period are largely
unexplored. Through an examination of the burial record and documentary sources, this paper will consider how attitudes towards children changed from
the first to early seventh century A.D. This will be achieved through an exploration of three key areas, namely the demographic nature of sites, artefactual
assemblages interred with the dead, and placement of children in the funerary landscape. It is hoped that this research will highlight the value of
conducting multi-period studies as a means of understanding how attitudes and treatment of children changed over time.
St. Amand, Ani (University of Maine Climate Change Institute), Dan Sandweiss (University of Maine Department of Anthropology) and Alice
Kelley (University of Maine School of Earth & Climate Stud)
[90]               Impacts of Population Resettlement Due to Sea Level Rise on Archaeological Resources: A Case Study
Coastal communities in the United States, as well as other portions of the world, are contending with challenges posed by sea level rise. As coastal areas
are inundated and subjected to coastal processes, action is generally limited to mitigation of sites with great local significance experiencing immediate
threat, while the destruction of archaeological sites by the resettlement of affected communities has been given little attention. This secondary impact of
climate change threatens cultural resources outside of the immediate zone of flooding and erosion. It is imperative for archaeologists to work with climate
scientists, urban planners, communities, and government officials alike to identify and protect these sites and to increase stewardship of our archaeological
heritage. Here, we report a pilot study in Casco Bay, Maine, using archaeological survey data, accurate digital elevation models, local sea level rise
projections, current settlement patterns, and settlement logistics data to predict potential impact to archaeological resources above the immediate impact
zone through landward relocation of infrastructure. This project lays the groundwork for communities to mitigate secondary threats by identifying where
populations are likely to expand based on existing infrastructure and resettlement patterns, and by articulating which archaeological sites will likely be
negatively impacted.
Stack, Adam (Harvard University) and Matt Liebmann (Harvard University)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                424
[18]              Religious Conversion and Social Networks in Seventeenth-Century New Mexico: A Case Study from Pecos Pueblo
The religious conversion of Native North Americans was a fundamental goal of European colonizers in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Native
experiences of missionization have often been framed within a concept of religious conversion as ontological transformation that descends from Christian
doctrine. Many Native ‘converts’ doubtless eluded encounters with the transcendent leading to fundamental inner change, and archaeologists have often
been frustrated in the search for convincing evidence of such a phenomenon. What utility does the notion of conversion have for understanding Native
experiences of evangelization? Should it be discarded, as some anthropologists have claimed? Or do more recent perspectives on conversion give new
insights into religious and social transformations in Native individuals and communities? We examine how shifting away from psychological models towards
an emphasis on social explanations offers useful ways to consider past religious change in the Native New World. Using new data from northern New
Mexico, we investigate the relationship between conversion and social networks in the early historic U.S. southwest.
Stahl, Ann (University of Victoria) and Amanda Logan (Northwestern University)
[177]             Scaling Food Practices: Contextual Comparison of Animal and Plant Remains from Banda, Ghana, during the Early Atlantic Era
In this paper, we examine food practices in Banda, Ghana, during the tumultuous fifteenth to seventeenth centuries A.D., as global scale political economic
shifts collided with local economies. In Banda, significant involvement in northward-looking Niger trade began to erode as attention shifted towards
emerging Atlantic networks. At the same time, paleoenvironmental records indicate a severe, multi-century drought. How did people negotiate these
pressures in their everyday food practices? To address this question, we compare faunal and floral remains from four structures and two midden
sequences across two major sites in the region—Ngre Kataa and Kuulo Kataa. We turn special attention to patterning at multiple scales—between sites,
structures, and middens—to coax out the localized strategies people used to deal with major economic and environmental change.
Stal, Cornelis [121] see Verlee, Jotka
Staller, John (The Field Museum)
[255]             Andean Foodways: Interdisciplinary Approaches to Precolumbian and Colonial Food and Culture
Precolumbian Andean cultures have strong cultural and religious ties to plants and animals in their surrounding landscape. The preparation of food crops
and cultigens that sustained life had strong cultural associations to ethnic identity, ritual, and religious practices in the annual cycle. Archaeologists have
documented the biological complexity of the Andes and the social importance of feasting, rituals and rites in ancient and colonial societies. Indigenous
perceptions and beliefs regarding the natural world were modified by the Spanish conquest and introduction of foreign plants and animals. Contributors
explore the roles of food and their cultivation to the political economy and modification of the landscapes and how certain cuisines played a role in ethnic
identity, and how specific foods and cuisines were culturally perceived as well as their role in trade networks and social complexity. Archaeological
research underscores and emphasizes the importance of foodways and why, how, and when certain plants and animals were consumed in the annual
cycle. Contributions to the present session explore and analyze these topics in the context of precolumbian and historic Andean culture, with examples of
how domesticates, cuisines, their preparations and basic ingredients influence precolumbian foodways and regional tastes after the conquest throughout
the world.
Stamps, Lucas [285] see Wilson, Jeremy
Stanchly, Norbert [235] see Powis, Terry
Stanish, Charles (Cotsen Institute, UCLA)
[12]              Discussant
Stanko, Tara (East Carolina University) and Megan Perry (East Carolina University)
[199]             Entheseal Changes as a Reflection of Activity Patterns at 1st Century B.C./A.D. Petra
The residents of the Nabataean capital city of Petra (Jordan) remain an enigmatic element of Near Eastern history. Most research has focused on the site’s
architecture rather than the inhabitants living amongst the city’s spectacular structures. Excavations of first century B.C./A.D. tombs from Petra’s North
Ridge in 2012 and 2014 recovered a sizeable sample (N=113) of Petra’s non-elite inhabitants. This project explores entheses to understand physical
activity levels and patterns within this sample. Entheses are insertion sites where tendons and ligaments anchor to bone, providing stability and support for
musculoskeletal movement. New methods for scoring entheseal changes have served to advance the application of this technique to understand ancient
activity. The Coimbra method, which is largely based on clinical evidence of entheses, was used to document entheseal changes in this segment of Petra’s
population. Samples from a Nabataean-Roman community in Syria, a 9th century Great Moravia village, 19th century non-industrialized Holland, and a
twentieth and twenty-first century U.S. sample served as comparisons for physical activity levels. Results found the Petra sample to have similar activity
patterns as non-industrialized settled populations. These physical activity patterns offer a new perspective on the socioeconomic aspects of the non-elite
Nabataeans of Petra.
Stanley, Andrea [66] see Swarts, Kelly
Starbard, Robert [266] see Hollinger, Eric
Stark, Miriam, David Brotherson (University of Sydney), Damian Evans (École française d'Extrême-Orient ) and Martin Polkinghorne (Flinders
University)
[74]              Angkorian Collapse and Aftermath: A View from the Center
                                                                                                          2
The ninth–fifteenth century Angkorian state was southeast Asia’s largest ancient polity; its 1000 km core was among the world’s largest preindustrial urban
centers. The Angkorian state’s mid-fifteenth century C.E. “collapse” moved the polity’s rulers and their populations south to a series of new capitals that
were closely linked to the Early Modern Southeast Asian economy. Angkor as a capital collapsed, but the Angkorian civilization continued. We use field
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                           425
excavations, surface survey, and remote sensing research through the Greater Angkor Project to examine the archaeology of collapse at Angkor, and to
offer local perspectives on state collapse for comparative research.
[178]             Discussant
Stark, Barbara (Arizona State Univ)
[216]             Gulf Lowland Collapse
In south-central and southern Veracruz settlement pattern data document a collapse of previous settlement systems and many cultural traditions. Some
regions reorganized and some likely were re-populated in part by migrants from highland regions. The timings of collapse in these lowland regions are
poorly defined, but variation seems likely. Causes have received little attention because the extent of changes has not been recognized. Likewise, possible
consequences are still to be investigated. Both causes and consequences are preliminarily identified as well as future courses of action that will help
understand these developments.
Stauffer, Sara (Manti-La Sal National Forest) and Lindsay Johansson (University of Colorado Boulder)
[104]             Where's the Party? An Investigation of Communal Feasting among the Fremont
The Fremont people were socially complex and lived within various sized communities. As with any community there are mechanisms used to either
differentiate among members of the community or to integrate members of the community and beyond. One of these mechanisms is feasting. In this
paper we present evidence from several large village sites across the Fremont region that suggests that the practice of feasting was utilized. In many
cases, evidence for feasting is associated with structures that may have been ritually important.
Stauffer, John
[164]             Elucidating Fort Walton in Florida: Chronology and Mound Construction at the Lake Jackson Site
Along the periphery of the Mississippian Art and Ceremonial Complex, the Lake Jackson site existed as a multi-mound ceremonial center whose material
contents included objects bearing widespread symbols connected with complex traditions in the long-lived history of Native American iconography and
ceremonialism. This paper investigates the occupation chronology of the site through an analysis of its ceramic assemblage and artifact proveniences with
a particular focus on Mound 5, a stratigraphically complex platform mound feature. Through the application of Accelerated Mass Spectrometry dating,
stratigraphic analysis, and ceramic analysis, this presentation offers tentative explanations for the onset of Mississippian ceremonial behavior at the site
and its temporal placement within the late prehistoric duration of the Fort Walton archaeological culture.
Stavast, Paul [39] see Lambert, Stephanie
Steadman, David, Janet Franklin, Jim Mead, Angel Soto-Centeno and Nancy Albury
[222]             Natural vs. Human-caused Extinctions of Terrestrial Vertebrates in the Bahamas
We report 83 taxa of vertebrates (11 reptiles, 63 birds, 9 mammals) from late Pleistocene bone deposits in Sawmill Sink, Abaco, The Bahamas. These
bones were recovered by scuba divers in non-cultural contexts at water depths of 27–35 m. Among the 83 species, 40 (48 percent) no longer occur on
Abaco (4 reptiles, 31 birds, 5 mammals). We estimate that 17 of the 40 losses (all of them birds) are linked to changes during the Pleistocene-Holocene
Transition (~15 to 9 ka) in climate (becoming more warm and moist), habitat (expansion of broadleaf forest at the expense of pine woodland), sea level
                                                                                       2            2
(rising from -80 m to nearly modern levels), and island area (going from ~10,000 km to 1214 km ). The remaining 23 losses took place in the late
Holocene, and are related to the human presence on Abaco for the past 1,000 years. Based on the evidence in hand, the arrival of people on a Bahamian
island leads to more faunal depletion than the dramatic physical and biological changes associated with the last glacial-interglacial transition.
Steele, Laura (Eastern New Mexico University)
[67]              The Role of Rare Animals During the Pueblo IV Period: Evidence of Ritual at Sapa’owingeh (LA 306)
Examining the relationships between humans and animals during the Classic period contributes to our understanding of life in the Northern Rio Grande
region and the larger Pueblo world. Utilizing ethno-historic and archaeological evidence for the use of mammalian and avian fauna, this poster
demonstrates the significance of rare animals from midden, room, and kiva contexts from the ancestral Tewa site Sapa’owingeh (LA 306). Ritual fauna in
the Southwest were often carnivores and birds. Species at Sapa’owingeh documented as ritually important in the ethno-historic record of the Southwest
included: bear, wolf, beaver, golden and bald eagles, a semi-articulated red-tailed hawk skeleton, a semi-articulated badger skeleton, as well as several
articulated and semi-articulated turkey skeletons. By studying faunal remains and comparing the data to the ethno-historic record, archaeologists have the
ability to elucidate both complex and subtle ritual behaviors not readily seen through the analysis of other materials alone.
Steele, Teresa [80] see Goldfield, Anna
Steele, Teresa (UC Davis), Esteban Álvarez-Fernández (Universidad de Salamanca), Emily Hallett-Desguez (Arizona State University),
Mohamed El-Hajraoui (Institut National des Sciences de l’Archéologie et) and Harold Dibble (University of Pennsylvania)
[177]             Coastal Marine Resource Exploitation during the Late Pleistocene at Contrebandiers Cave (Temara, Morocco)
Increasingly, researchers have considered the role of coastal marine resource exploitation in influencing the trajectory of human behavioral and biological
evolution, specifically relating to modern human origins. However, these models have focused almost exclusively on the relatively rich and well-
documented record from the Middle Stone Age (MSA) of coastal South Africa. Here, we present data on coastal marine resource exploitation during the
Late Pleistocene at Contrebandiers Cave [La Grotte des Contrebandiers, Smugglers’ Cave] (Temara, Morocco). Contrebandiers’ sequence includes the
MSA, which spans ~126,000–95,000 years ago at the site, and the Iberomaurusian, which elsewhere is ~18,000–11,000 years ago. Today the site is only
270 m from the Atlantic shore; during the MSA and Iberomaurusian, inhabitants appeared to have had consistent access to a nearby rocky coast, where
they gathered mainly limpets, mussels, and marine snails for subsistence. However, the relative proportions and sizes vary meaningfully through the
sequence. The Contrebandiers occupants also collected shells for non-dietary reasons, including triton and tick (mostly Nassarius) shells. Some marine
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            426
birds, fish, crabs, goose barnacles, and sea urchins are also preserved; no seal bones are present. In sum, when at the coast, marine resource exploitation
was a typical component of MSA adaptations.
Steelman, Karen (University of Central Arkansas) and Carolyn Boyd (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center)
[131]             Two Independent Methods for Dating Rock Art: Age Determination of Paint and Oxalate Layers at Eagle Cave, TX
Using two independent methods, we provide reliable age estimates for three Pecos River Style figures at Eagle Cave in Langtry, TX. To obtain direct dates
for the paintings, we employed plasma oxidation of the organic binders in the paint layer followed by accelerator mass spectrometry. For minimum and
maximum ages, we acid treated the overlying and underneath accretion layers to isolate calcium oxalate for combustion and 14C measurement. The
radiocarbon dates for the three paint samples are statistically indistinguishable, with a weighted average of 3280±70 years B.P. calibrated to 1740–1420
cal B.C. at 2 sigma (95.4 percent probability). Overlying accretion layers are younger and underlying accretion layers are older. This correctly ordered,
chronological stratigraphy of the accretion and paint layers supports the validity of both dating methods. As new high-resolution excavations are underway
at Eagle Cave, the rock paintings can now be studied alongside excavated cultural deposits to provide a more complete understanding of this hunter-
gather society.
Steelman, Karen [230] see Russ, Jon
Steere, Benjamin (Western Carolina University)
[137]             Mississippian Communities and Households from a Bird’s-Eye View
In the twenty years since the publication of Mississippian Communities and Households, improvements in GIS and database software have enabled
archaeologists to analyze and compare the material remains of past communities and households at spatial scales that were once infeasible. In this paper I
use a database of over 1,200 Native American structures from 65 sites across the Southeast to compare changes in the architecture of Mississippian
houses and settlements at a broader temporal and spatial scale than might have been possible in the mid-1990s. This bird’s-eye view provides useful
insights about the relationship between changes in architecture and changes in communities. Using a theoretical framework developed from classic studies
in household archaeology and anthropology, I argue that certain aspects of architectural variation in Mississippian communities made visible at a broad
spatial scale can be explained by changes in household economics and household composition, symbolic behavior, status differentiation, and settlement
patterning.
Steffen, Anastasia [66] see Worman, F. Scott
Steffen, Martina (University of Arizona, School of Anthropology)
[148]             Faunal Assemblages from Archaeological Levels at the Croxton Site in Alaska
Caribou (Rangifer tarandus) are often abundant in faunal assemblages from archaeological sites in arctic, sub-arctic, and alpine tundra areas of the
Northern Hemisphere. Archaeological faunal assemblages from interior Alaska include prime examples. This poster focuses on the interpretation of a new
sample of vertebrate faunal remains from the Croxton site located along the shore of Tukuto Lake on the north slope of the Brooks Range in which caribou
dominate. Analyses compare faunal assemblages from archaeological levels that may link with the previously established culture historical sequence at the
site that includes Ipiutak and Denbigh components. Caribou selection and processing are assessed and faunal part frequencies are analyzed with utility
indices for this species developed at Anaktuvuk Pass among the Nunamiut.
Stein, Gil (University of Chicago)
[12]              The Origins of Social Complexity in Chalcolithic Northern Mesopotamia: Excavations at Surezha
Although much scholarship has focused on the emergence of towns and cities in southern Mesopotamia, archaeologists still know very little about
comparable developments in northern Mesopotamia and especially Iraqi Kurdistan, due to the rarity of archaeological fieldwork in those regions until
recently. The excavation project based at Surezha on the Erbil plain aims to contribute to our understanding of Chalcolithic northern Mesopotamia and
illuminate the development of social complexity in the region, as well as study its relationship with Ubaid and Late Chalcolithic southern Mesopotamia.
Excavation results from Surezha thus far have included the documentation of a sequence of Late Chalcolithic levels, furnishing new information on 5/4th
millennium developments on the Erbil plain
Steinbrenner, Larry (Red Deer College)
[163]             “Nicoya Polychromes” Beyond Greater Nicoya
In the mid-20th century, Doris Stone described Las Vegas Polychrome, a brightly coloured ceramic ware found at sites in Honduras’ eastern highlands and
the Comayagua Valley, as being “strongly reminiscent of western Nicaragua and the Nicoya Peninsula in Costa Rica.” Meanwhile, contemporary
archaeologists were happily classifying near-identical ceramics from eastern El Salvador as “Nicoya Polychromes”. More than a half century later, Las
Vegas Polychrome remains only nominally defined, examples from El Salvador continue to be mistakenly viewed as imports from Nicaragua or Costa Rica,
and the potential connections of both groups of ceramics to the comparatively better-known pottery of Greater Nicoya remain almost completely
unexplored. This presentation will focus on some of the remarkable similarities between Las Vegas Polychrome and analogous ceramic types from
Nicaragua and outline some of the most pressing unanswered questions concerning the ware, such as the potential significance of its presence along trade
routes connecting Mesoamerica and Lower Central America and the mechanisms that might have contributed to the Early Postclassic production of
roughly analogous ceramic types across a region that now spans four different modern countries in Central America.
Steinwachs, Erin [112] see Nolan, Kevin
Stelle, Lenville (Illinois State Archaeological Survey)
[131]             Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              427
Stelten, Ruud [220] see Haviser, Jay
Stemp, W. James (Keene State College)
[214]             Blind-Testing, Post-Depositional Damage, and Lithic Microwear: Results of Qualitative and Quantitative Analyses Using Optical Microscopy
                  and Laser Scanning Confocal Microscopy
The increasing adoption of approaches to lithic microwear analysis based on metrology and tribology by archaeologists has provided opportunities to revisit
unresolved issues associated with microwear method, such as wear formation processes, the exclusivity of polishes derived from different worked
materials, and, as presented in this paper, post-depositional damage and the accuracy and reliability of microwear analysis. In this paper, we discuss the
results of blind-tests performed on chipped stone flakes made from obsidian, chert, and flint using traditional optical microscopy and laser scanning
confocal microscopy (LSCM). The stone tools were produced and used by one researcher, deposited in a soil matrix for six months to replicate post-
depositional conditions, and then independently analyzed by the other using a metallurgical microscope and the LSCM. Recommendations are made with
regard to: 1) the design and execution of blind tests for lithic microwear analysis, 2) the distinction of use-related wear from other surface damage, and 3)
the potential benefits of applying a dual method approach that relies on traditional visual analysis and the quantification of surface wear.
[214]             Chair
Stenborg, Per
[263]             Predicting the Past: Remote Sensing Data as a Tool for Locating Archaeological Settlements in the Amazon
The potentials of using analysis of remote sensing data (particularly Lidar data) as a method of predicting the presence of archaeological sites in densely
forested areas are discussed in this paper. The case study deals with an inland area—the Belterra Plateau—situated south of Santarém in the State of
Pará, Brazil. Recent fieldwork has suggested that late pre-Columbian settlements generally are found in the surroundings particular geological features and
in this region. Drawing on the results of this archaeological fieldwork a tentative interpretation of remote sensing data from an area further south; originally
collected for environmental preservation purposes, is attempted.
Stephen, Jesse (University of Hawaii at Manoa)
[227]             Sensory Exploitation, Monumentality, and Social Stratification: A Multisensory Survey of Puʻukoholā Heiau, Hawaiʻi
Monumental architecture is often theorized as a costly signal in prehistoric complex societies, including Oceania in general and Hawaiʻi in specific. In this
paper I explore sensory exploitation theory, which suggests that the costliness of monumentality may have contributed to social stratification and the
multifaceted function of religion through specific sensory sensitivities. Puʻukoholā heiau, a large temple on the Big Island of Hawaiʻi with notable
archaeological, historic, and contemporary circumstances, is presented as a case study for a multisensory investigation of how the senses, monumentality,
and social stratification may be more intertwined than previously described.
[227]             Chair
Stephens, Douglas (US Forest Service)
[165]             Research, Relevance and Resources; Academic Partners on National Forests
Since the establishment of the US Forest Service in 1905 academic partnerships have been essential to the management and understanding of the cultural
resources the agency oversees. After the National Historic Preservation Act was passed in 1966 the Forest Service gradually began developing its own
program to manage cultural resources changing the relationship between the agency and researchers. This paper explores the changing ways academic
research has influenced the Forest Service and how public lands research has perhaps influenced academia.
[165]             Discussant
Stephenson, Keith (USC Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology) and Karen Smith (USC Insitute of Archaeology and Anthropology)
[98]              Regional Analysis of the Middle Woodland Deptford Period on the South Atlantic Slope
Middle Woodland sites of the Deptford Period on the Atlantic Coastal Plain first received archaeological attention during the Great Depression. Aspects of
Deptford settlement organization and its socio-political economies have been debated ever since. Models developed for interior-riverine sites in the Coastal
Plain indicate that occupation differed between floodplain sites and those of the upland, inter-fluvial areas. Two extensive blocks with Deptford components
were excavated at the Savannah River Site: the G.S. Lewis West site on the floodplain and 38AK155 in the uplands. Comparative analysis indicates
differences in large-scale storage, mortuary behavior, complex pottery designs, craft specialization, and long-distance exchange.
[98]              Chair
Steponaitis, Vincas (UNC-Chapel Hill), Lynne Goldstein (Michigan State University), Keith Kintigh (Arizona State University) and William Lovis
(Michigan State University)
[30]              A Brief and True History of SAA's Involvement with NAGPRA
SAA was heavily involved in NAGPRA's passage, and played a key role in shaping the compromises embodied in this law. The Society's positions with
respect to the many repatriation bills considered by Congress were conditioned by SAA's "Statement Concerning the Treatment of Human Remains," a
policy adopted in 1986. SAA strongly and actively supported the final bill precisely because it conformed closely, albeit not perfectly, to the principles
articulated in this statement. The policy was also consistently applied in determining SAA's responses to the many regulatory and legislative issues that
arose during the first two decades after the law was passed.
[261]             Discussant
Sterling, Kathleen (Binghamton University)
[5]               Discussant
Sterling, Stephanie (University of Nebraska-Lincoln), Heather Richards-Rissetto (University of Nebraska-Lincoln) and Rene Viel (Asociacion
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                428
Copan)
[237]              Past Meets Future: Combining GIS, 3D Technologies, and Legacy Data to Reanalyze Ceramics at Copan, Honduras
The archaeological site of Copán—a UNESCO World Heritage Site in Honduras—was a primary center for cultural and economic exchange in the Maya
world from the fifth to ninth centuries. Our research investigates the sociopolitical climate of the city immediately preceding this collapse. This poster
presents the results of a pilot study intended to evaluate the potential of using a combination of digital technologies and legacy data to reanalyze a subset
of diagnostic ceramics from select sites outside of Copan’s urban core. Our methods involved:
(1) Applying photogrammetry to generate 3D models for approximately 30 potentially temporally-diagnostic ceramic types
(2) Digitizing, collating, and analyzing legacy data on ceramics from archived field reports at the Centro Regional de Investigaciones Arqueológicas (CRIA)
in Copan Ruinas, Honduras
(3) Linking the legacy data to a Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to identify a subset of sites with greater likelihood to contain diagnostic sherds
outside of the main ceremonial complex
(4) Reanalyzing a subset of sherds from 1980s test excavations
Initial results indicate that integrating digital technologies and legacy data is conducive to our research efforts. Our results are presented in a multi-media
format that encourages viewer interaction with 3D models and Augmented Reality.
Sternberg, Evan (Office of Contract Archeology, UNM), Justin Lowry (Department of Sociology and Anthropology, George M) and Jason Paling
(Social Science Department, Plymouth State Universi)
[234]              Trade and Inter-Community Networks Around Managua, Nicaragua
Trade and inter-community connections are keys to understanding how the ancient region around the modern city of Managua, Nicaragua, interacted and
participated in the larger Central American and Mesoamerican trade corridor. This poster will present potential interpretations of long distance and local
connections through a cost and pathway analysis using ArcGIS. This study will incorporate recent research on obsidian sources from the site of
Chiquilistagua into the model of interactions, as well as an analysis of ceramic spheres. Adapting site catchment areas, using trade and pathway data, and
incorporating sourcing analyses we can help to identify potential connections between sites and regions. These models may then be tested in future
excavations around Managua, Nicaragua, to evaluate their utility.
Sterner-Miller, Katherine (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee) and Robert Jeske (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee)
[232]              A Scraper is Sometimes Just a Scraper: A Multi-Method Approach to Inferring Tool Use at an Oneota Site in Southeastern Wisconsin
A sample of lithic artifacts from the Crescent Bay Hunt Club site, a twelfth–fourteenth century Oneota village at Lake Koshkonong in southeastern
Wisconsin, were subjected to a multiple-method analysis to determine individual tool use. In this example, an assemblage based analysis of raw material
type and quality, heat alteration and energy input into manufacturing combined with debitage analysis provides an overall understanding of the lithic
economy. Triangular bifaces and unifacial tools from Crescent Bay were then subjected to a combination of micro- and macroscopic identification of edge
damage and surface polishes, followed by protein residue analysis to provide four independent lines of evidence that yield strong inferences about tool
use. This multi-pronged approach to raw material acquisition, tool manufacturing, tool use, and tool discard provides more comprehensive insights into the
role of lithic economy in the daily lives of people than are often derived from Late Prehistoric sites in the Midcontinent.
[232]              Chair
Stevens, Karen
[8]                Auditory Exostoses as Indicators of Mobility and Sexual Divisions of Labor in the Green River Valley, Kentucky
Auditory Exostoses (AEs), commonly called “surfer’s ear,” are benign bony swellings in the external auditory canal and most often occur due to regular
exposure of the ear to cold water and wind. Some of the highest frequencies of AEs encountered are found in Archaic Period populations of the Green
River Valley, Kentucky. Previous measurements of sample populations have shown a range of 12.6 to 34.9 percent of adults with one or more AE, with
even higher percentages existing among the male sub-population (e.g., up to 54.3 percent at Indian Knoll; Mensforth 2005). Taking a clinical approach to
the measurement of AEs, several Archaic skeletal populations from the Green River Valley were analyzed for the presence and severity of these bony
growths. Results are discussed with respect to assumptions about mobility and flux among sites located on the Green River and its tributaries, sexual
divisions of labor, and water-related subsistence practices.
Stevens, Chris [177] see Winchell, Frank
Stevens, Michelle
[267]              Circling the Wagons for the Santa Fe National Historic Trail - Partnering for Preservation
Since its designation as a National Historic Trail in 1987, partnerships between government agencies, preservation organizations, contractors, local
communities, and individuals have been essential for identifying, marking, preserving, protecting physical traces and historical landscapes as well as,
recognizing, interpreting, and promoting research and recreation along the Santa Fe National Historic Trail. In southwest Kansas and southeast Colorado,
these diverse partnerships have been instrumental in listing many trail segments on the National Register, conducting landscape scale viewshed analyses,
identifying protective corridors, connecting landowners and the public to this nationally significant resource, and encouraging them to become active
stewards. While these efforts help ensure future trail preservation, they have not been without controversy. Collaborating and engaging partners and
responding to concerns of non-partners often required cultural awareness and political savvy to address controversial issues and increase the
effectiveness of Santa Fe Trail management throughout the region.
Stevenson, Christopher [36] see Gunter, Madeleine
Steves, Laurie M. [78] see Nichols, Kristi Miller
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              429
Stewart, Haeden (University of Chicago) and Jason De Leon (University of Michigan)
[128]              “Clean Up Your Mess, Chino”: Contested Space, Boredom, and Vulnerability among Central American Migrants Crossing Southern Mexico.
The growing subdiscipline of archaeology of the contemporary has stressed the importance of studying detritus to access silenced or abject aspects of the
recent past. This paper takes a different approach, focusing on the ways that an archaeology of the present is not about uncovering “truths” that correct
ethnographic research, but is rather a constant agitation and addition to ethnographic engagement. Following recent American pressure on the government
of Mexico and changes in Mexican immigration enforcement strategies, the experience of undocumented Central Americans migrating through Mexico has
transformed drastically over the past year. The social process of undocumented migration is now defined by long periods of waiting in vulnerable and
marginalized spaces. Drawing on recent fieldwork with Honduran migrants in Southern Mexico, this paper argues for the necessity of a combination of
ethnographic and archaeological techniques and sensibilities to study how boredom, uncertainty and vulnerability are experienced and dealt with by
migrants staying in these marginal spaces. Combining day-to-day ethnography with a systematic mapping of material culture and migrant activity in Pakal-
Na, Chiapas, we show how the use and reuse of ‘trash’, as well as the use and re-appropriation of ‘trash-filled’ spaces, defines how migrants wait and deal
with boredom.
Stewart, Marissa (Ohio State University), Francesco Coschino (Division of Paleopathology, University of Pisa), Antonio Fornaciari (Division of
Paleopathology, University of Pisa) and Giuseppe Vercellotti (Ohio State University)
[147]              Advanced GIS Applications for Bioarchaeology: Methods and Case Studies
New computer technologies have become indispensable components in Human Sciences. Archaeology has a long history of adopting and using these
technologies to document the site and the excavation process, to record the location of excavated artifacts and materials, and to assist in interpretations
and analysis of the excavation and recovered finds. However, despite the constant and ever-developing applications in archaeology, the specialization of
bioarchaeology has not yet developed unique standards to fully benefit from these new technologies. This poster is intended to demonstrate the benefits of
these digital protocols with bioarchaeological case studies. In particular, it will show the experimental results of an extensive GIS (Geographic Information
Systems) survey obtained within two diachronous cemeteries in Tuscany (Italy): the monastery of Badia Pozzeveri (X–XIX centuries) and the castle of
Benabbio (XIII–XIX centuries). Additionally, this research proposes new protocols for surveying, managing and processing data produced during an
archaeo-anthropological excavation and how that can be beneficial in the initial recovery and study of osteological material. It will present the potential
applications of open source GIS, three-dimensional photogrammetric processing and the fusion of these two techniques for the creation of 4D analysis
platforms.
Stewart, R. Michael [153] see Rankin, Jennifer
Stewart, Christina (Petrified Forest National Park)
[268]              Understanding the Relationship Between Sample Size and Variation in Ceramic Relative Chronologies at the Petrified Forest National Park
Petrified Forest National Park contains an extensive prehistoric ceramic variability, exhibiting ceramics from multiple regions at later prehistoric sites. Like
much of the Southwest, most of the research at the park is survey oriented, recording only a sample of ceramics on site. The high diversity of ceramics and
small sample sizes has the potential to create a recording bias when using ceramics to relatively date sites. This project investigates the relationship
between site diversity and sample. To analyze this a large ceramic sample will be recorded from three well dated Pueblo III sites within the park. From
these three larger samples smaller random data subsets will be dated to see the range of ceramic relative dating within each sample size. This
understanding will help the park to better relatively date newly recorded sites and thus shed light on the larger issue of how relative chronologies are
impacted by sample size.
Stitt, Rebecca
[246]              Defining Boundaries: An Investigation of Boynton Mounds (8PB100)
In fall of 2013 preparations began for a limited study of the Boynton Mounds (8PB100) archaeological site. This group of earthwork lies nestled between
the Okeechobee basin and East Okeechobee areas in central Palm Beach County Florida. Investigations aim to reveal similarities and dissimilarities
between the two areas, which, in turn, may lead to a better understanding of regional variation in South Florida. The primary objective of this study is to
identify which culture region Boynton Mounds is most similar to across time, the East Okeechobee or the Okeechobee basin culture areas.
Stoellner, Thomas [223] see Warinner, Christina
Stokely, Sarah [210] see Adler, Rachel
Stoll, Marijke (University of Arizona)
[27]               Playing for Power: Ballcourts, Political Negotiation and Community Organization in Postclassic Nejapa, Oaxaca, Mexico
In the politically dynamic Postclassic period (AD 1000-1521), multiple ballcourts were built in different communities throughout the Nejapa region of Oaxaca
during a time of significant settlement shifts and pressure from expanding Zapotec and Aztec empires. As a specially marked category of public
architecture, ballcourts would have distinguished communities from each other while also serving as socially-integrative locations through hosting games
and other important ritual activities. Given the dramatic changes in the sociopolitical landscape in Nejapa, and its position as both an important stop on an
interregional trade route and a multiethnic boundary zone, successfully negotiating conflict and social integration among and between communities would
have been especially important. How ballcourts are distributed within the social landscape is therefore significant—where a ballcourt was emplaced within
public space would have expressed not only particular underlying social, political, and symbolic meanings, but also the centrality of the ballgame to political
and daily life. This presentation examines where ballcourts are placed within sites and their distribution on the landscape in order to evaluate the role of
the ballgame in adjusting to and negotiating a shifting sociopolitical landscape for both local elites and different communities in Nejapa.
Stone, Peter (Virginia Commonwealth University)
[51]               Lagging, Uneven Hellenism in the Hellenistic East
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                430
Alexander the Great’s conquest of the Persian Empire ushered in the Hellenistic period, so called because of the ostensible spread of Greek culture across
a vast landscape. Such a characterization is supported by the presence of Greek inscriptions and Greek style art and architecture at cities founded by
Alexander and his successors. But this picture becomes complicated the further one moves from the centers of power. I Maccabees, an account of a
Jewish revolt against the Seleucid dynasty written in the late 2nd century BCE, bemoans a rash of Hellenism in Jerusalem that manifested not in the
immediate wake of Alexander’s conquest when we might expect culture shock to be most severe, but in the 170s BCE. The archaeological record from the
southern Levant provides some context for this unexpected framing of the era. Many of the “Hellenic” hallmarks of the Hellenistic world: including Greek
inscriptions, iconography, and elaborate table settings and décor only became popular in the southern Levant in the 2nd century BCE. This paper draws
upon the material record to show how this newly available cultural currency had different purchase among groups whose histories had been shaped by
centuries of imperialism in the region: Phoenicians and Jews.
Stone, Anne C [160] see Nieves Colón, Maria
Stone, Jessica (University of Oregon)
[160]            Ghost of the Navigator: Tracking Initial Human Population Dispersal to the Palauan Archipelago
While Micronesia was one of the last geographical areas to be colonized by humans prehistorically, the timing, direction, and origins of initial settlement in
many ways still remains unclear. The Chelechol ra Orrak site in Palau, which contains the oldest known human remains in Micronesia, (dating back to at
least 2800 B.P.)—and that is one of only two burial sites in the Pacific Islands to pre-date 2500 B.P.—provides an excellent opportunity for direct study of
population dispersals into the region via ancient DNA (aDNA). Initial results from pilot studies using material from Chelechol ra Orrak have yielded results
that appear consistent with an origin in Island Southeast Asia. This paper investigates the feasibility of aDNA analysis using newly collected data from
three additional burial locations in Palau (Ucheliungs, the Koror Quarry site, and Omedokel), which were added to a new suite of samples collected in situ
from Chelechol ra Orrak last field season. Our results are provideing a better understanding of early population relationships and genetic diversity
throughout the archipelago and helping to refine population origins for both Palau and western Micronesia.
[160]            Chair
Stone, Rebecca (Emory University)
[172]            "Color and Q'iwa: Expecting the Unexpected in Andean Textile Design"
Color is one of many key expressive modes for textiles in particular. Intense, communicative, and not always predictable, Andean textile coloration is a
complex issue. Rather than submitting to a "cookbook" delineation of color symbolism (red means blood, etc.), the abstract mindset of ancient and modern
Andean societies means that color has many more complex, even philosophical, roles to play in the fiber arts of this area.
For instance, purposeful rupturing of regular color patterning occurs in various styles, from Paracas embroideries to Wari, Chimú, and Inka imperial
tapestries. A characteristic late Andean pattern is to break the pattern via color deviations and outright anomalies. The Quechua word applicable to this
phenomenon, q'iwa, comes from music, meaning the intentional off-note. Why the Andean state styles embraced the idea of a wildcard element is the
subject of this paper. Political, spiritual, and purely technical considerations enter into accounting for the Andean predilection for irregularity as a
component of orderliness. A relationship between chaos theory and Wari color q'iwas will be suggested, proposing that possibly divination was used to
introduce irregularity into otherwise predictable design.
Stoner, Wesley [57] see Lazzari, Marisa
Storey, Rebecca (University of Houston)
[129]            Chair
Storey, Rebecca [129] see Buckley, Gina
Storozum, Michael (Washington University in Saint Louis), Tristram Kidder (Washington University in Saint Louis), Zhen Qin (Washington
University in Saint Louis) and Haiwang Liu (Henan Provincial Institute of Cultural Relics)
[120]            The Central Plains Archaeological Survey: A Preliminary Report
Over the past five years, the authors have conducted a geoarchaeological survey in Northern Henan Province, China, to test three hypotheses of regional
and global significance. First, many Chinese archaeologists consider this area void of archaeological remains. Based on our data, most archaeological
material is far below the surface - approximately 5 to 8 meters. Second, the location of the Yellow River during the Bronze Age year is argued to flow to the
south, entering the ocean near Shanghai. Thick flood deposits and channel fill dating to the Bronze Age suggest that the Yellow River most likely flowed
North. Third, some archaeologists argue that buried soils are a marker bed for the Anthropocene. The stratigraphic sequence contains buried soils from as
early as the Pleistocene and as late as the Song dynasty, making this an ideal area to test if buried soils do reflect changes in land use. Our preliminary
                                            2
results suggest that an area over 50km was buried by Yellow River flood deposits, preserving a great variety of archaeological and geological features,
including roads, towns, fields, lakes, and buried soils, capable of answering many questions concerning the subsurface archaeological record of the region.
Strack, George [287] see Parsell, Veronica
Stratton, Susan (US Forest Service - Region 5)
[165]            Innovation Equals Great Partners
As Heritage Program Leader for the Pacific Southwest Region which includes California, Hawaii, Guam, and American Samoa, I have had to come up with
innovative approaches to increase capacity for the Heritage Program on each of the 18 National Forests within Region 5. This has been particularly
challenging over the past couple of years as most of California seems to be burning up and Heritage staff are stretched thinly across the state responding
to fire emergencies and other Agency priorities. This presentation is about how Forest Service Heritage Staff have joined forces with some amazing
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              431
partners and volunteers to preserve the past and celebrate the future!
[165]             Chair
Straus, Lawrence (University of New Mexico)
[211]             The Pleistocene-Holocene Transition in Cantabrian Spain: Current State of the Question
Decades of research involving new excavations, chronometric dating, artifact and faunal analyses, site distribution studies and isotopic analyses have
refined our understanding of the transitions from Upper Magdalenian to Azilian and then to a variety of Mesolithic cultural traditions in the period between
the Allerod and Boreal climatic phases in the classic region of Cantabrian Spain. There are indicators of both continuity in some aspects of settlement,
subsistence and technology at some points along this transition, as well a clear breaks either across the board (notably in expressive behavior, a.k.a. "art")
or in terms of just certain aspects of culture at different times and places. The possible relative roles of changes in environment and resources versus
human demography (regional population density) are evaluated in this overview in light of the currently available record. The balance between continuity
and major reorganization is explored, including the recent interest in the idea of subsistence intensification leading to over-exploitation (as summarized by
F.I.Gugtierrez-Zugasti and A.B.Marin-Arroyo) in the early Holocene context of closed forest vegetation, sea level transgression and densely packed forager
populations.
[170]             Discussant
Strauss, Stephanie (The University of Texas at Austin)
[241]             Craft, Literacy, and Ephemera: Maya Textiles in the Gendered Scribal Tradition
Although art historians, archaeologists, and epigraphers often decry the poor preservation of certain ephemeral categories of Maya hieroglyphic remains—
wooden lintels, codex-style books and plaster facades—the missing corpus of ancient hieroglyphic textiles is rarely discussed. Yet unlike the handful of
maddeningly flat, angular, or profile-view representations of codices in Maya art, the "extant" inscribed textiles seen in murals, painted on narrative vessels,
incised into stone and molded onto figurines, are dynamic, complex, and in rare instances, fully legible. On certain occasions, the Maya elite literally
wrapped themselves in hieroglyphic script; embodying written speech in a manner quite distinct from the monumental, and even small-scale and portable,
scribal traditions. While many of these inscribed textiles featured painted techniques, others were likely produced by woven techniques still practiced in
Maya communities today. This study of the "extant" corpus of hieroglyphic textiles problematizes a typology of textile-as-craft, and illuminates the literate,
and perhaps female, artisans who created these artworks, as well as the Maya elite who performed them in lived space.
[241]             Chair
Strawhacker, Colleen (National Snow and Ice Data Center, University of Colorado), Thomas McGovern (CUNY Human Ecodynamics Research
Center (HERC)), Emily Lethbridge (Centre for Medieval Studies, University of Iceland), Gisli Palsson (Environmental Archaeology Lab
and HUMLab, Umea Uni) and Adam Brin (Digital Antiquity, Arizona State University)
[261]             Linking Transdisciplinary Data to Study the Long-Term Human Ecodynamics of the North Atlantic: The cyberNABO Project
The cyberNABO Project is designed to solidify a developing multidisciplinary community (centered on the North Atlantic Biocultural Organization, NABO)
through the development of cyberinfrastructure (CI) to study the long-term human ecodynamics of North Atlantic, a region that is especially vulnerable to
ongoing climate and environmental change. It builds build upon prior sustained field and laboratory research, rich and diverse datasets, and a strong
involvement by local communities and institutions. CyberNABO is currently hosting a series of workshops aimed at taking these collaborators and
stakeholder communities to a new level of integration and to develop capacity for building CI and visualizations in subsequent funding cycles. Investing in a
comprehensive CI system provides the opportunity to integrate collaborators and data from the natural sciences, social sciences, and the humanities, thus
providing the opportunity for a holistic approach to long-term human ecodynamics in the context of rapid social and environmental change, and for the
creation of digital tools for expanded northern community involvement in global change research. This paper will present the ongoing efforts of the
cyberNABO project, including initial data discovery and aggregation prototypes, as well as conceptual frameworks for how to best integrate diverse
datasets.
Strecker, Amy (Leiden University)
[141]             The Legal Status of Caribbean Collections Abroad
While the restitution debate has developed substantially since the Second World War—some even herald the age of ‘post-restitution’—this is not
necessarily the case for the Caribbean. Although archaeological and ethnographic objects of Caribbean origin have long been expropriated, the restitution
debate has not played as essential a role in post-colonial discourse in the islands as in other former colonies. This is due to a number of reasons: first,
most of the cultural objects outside the Caribbean and in European and U.S. collections pre-date 1492 and are perceived to be culturally linked to pre-
columbian rather than the present day multi-ethnic Caribbean societies. Second, these collections have not been studied to any great extent, thus
precluding the basic knowledge required for restitution claims. Meanwhile, objects continue to be taken out of the region. This paper analyses the legal
issues surrounding Caribbean objects located in museums in Europe and the U.S. It assesses the legal status of such objects, analyses the current
international framework applying to the return of cultural objects illegally removed; and discusses the symbolism of restitution in the context of the
CARICOM reparations claim, which includes cultural rehabilitation as one of the aims of reparation.
Streuli, Samantha A. (UC San Diego), Margaret J. Schoeninger (UC San Diego) and Andrew D. Somerville (UC San Diego)
[44]              Application of Stable Isotope Analysis to Questions of Status Formation and Dietary Disparities at Chalcatzingo, Morelos, Mexico
The Formative period site of Chalcatzingo in Morelos, Mexico (1150–450 B.C.E.) represents a socially complex society and contains the only Olmec-style
monumental architecture in the region. Evidence for social stratification at Chalcatzingo includes differences in burial location and unequal distribution of
rare artifacts. Significant debate surrounds the potential Olmec cultural influence on status formation and social stratification throughout Formative period
Mesoamerica. Some scholars hypothesize that Gulf Coast elites migrated inland bringing Olmec culture and social stratification with them. Because
oxygen stable isotope values have been usefully applied to migration studies, oxygen stable isotope values of the human remains at Chalcatzingo will be
used assess whether individuals were local to Chalcatzingo or emigrated from the Gulf Coast region. Archaeological and isotopic evidence from ancient
Mesoamerica supports the idea that differential access to preferred food resources—particularly animal protein and maize—is characteristic of social
inequality. Because there is evidence for social stratification at Chalcatzingo, unequal distribution of animal protein and maize is expected. Carbon and
Nitrogen isotope analyses were performed on the human remains and subsequently compared to status indicators in the archaeological record.
Preliminary data suggests that elites were consuming slightly more animal protein and maize than non-elites.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              432
Strickland, Erin (Eastern Connecticut State University)
[90]              Preliminary Results from Two Late Woodland Trash Pits from Block Island, Rhode Island
In the summer of 2015 an archaeological dig was conducted, as part of a salvage project due to new construction, at RI-2451 on Block Island, Rhode
Island. A precolumbian Native American habitation area was identified near the shoreline of the Great Salt Pond, a large and almost enclosed body of
water separating the north and south regions of Block Island. The pond has a small channel, artificially dug in the late 1800s, on its northwest shore to
connect it with the Block Island Sound. The shores of the pond have a long history of human use and occupation evidenced by Native American habitation
sites prior to and after contact with European settlers. RI-2451 adds to this occupation, dating to the Late Woodland Period. This poster presents data
recovered from two middens excavated at this habitation site. Marine shells, clam and oyster, were collected and analyzed to determine species, diet
based on seasonal availability, chronological affiliation, as well as to determine midden depositional practice. Through an examination of food trash, I will
discuss food consumption practices of Late Woodland Native American communities on Block Island, Rhode Island.
Strickland, Amanda [127] see Parker, Evan
Strien, Hans-Christoph [95] see Gronenborn, Detlef
Striker, Sarah (Arizona State University) and Linda Howie (HD Analytical Solutions/University of Western Onta)
[90]              Probing Provenance: Investigating the Geographic Origins of Pottery from the Mantle Site (ca. 1525 C.E.), Ontario, using Petrographic and
                  microprobe Analyses
Petrographic studies of variability in the geographic origins of ancient pottery rely on discrimination of vessels based on their raw material ingredients,
which can be traced to natural sources on the geological landscape. In the Great Lakes region, the glacial landscape is dominated by sediments
comprising heterogeneous mixtures of eroded and transported materials, making such distinctions challenging. In this study we investigate variation in the
geographic origins of pottery from the Mantle site, a late prehistoric Iroquoian village near Toronto, Ontario. Here, provenance determination is significant
to site interpretations as the village developed through aggregation of diverse groups that previously lived elsewhere. To aid provenance distinctions, we
have combined petrographic and microprobe analyses to generate detailed information about rock and mineral content, soil genesis and depositional
environment and mineral chemistry. The microprobe analysis targeted typologically equivalent pottery differentiated as “local” (Ontario) and possibly from
upper New York State based on petrographic data. Glacial sediments in each region derive from different parent rock - the Canadian Shield (Ontario) and
the Appalachian Mountains (New York State). We demonstrate that despite the presence of typologically similar rock and mineral fragments, pottery from
these two areas can be distinguished based on mineral chemistry.
Stringer, Lisa
[50]              Chair
Stringer, Lisa [50] see Curet, L.
Strong, Meghan (University of Cambridge)
[107]             Illuminating the Path of Darkness: Transformative Aspects of Artificial Light in Dynastic Egypt
When discussing light in Ancient Egypt, the vast majority of scholarly attention is placed on the sun, a physical constant of the landscape and the primary
source of illumination. The development of ideas on the significance of natural light in Ancient Egyptian culture is abundant, particularly in religious
sources. Studies on artificial light, however, stand in stark contrast to the number of academic publications on natural light. This emphasis forms a uni-
dimensional view of lighting in Ancient Egypt, but creates the opportunity for a comprehensive study on the significance of artificial light within the Egyptian
cultural tradition. Oil lamps, torches, and braziers were certainly employed in Ancient Egyptian domestic spaces to provide warmth and light in the
evenings. Over time, however, these mundane tools were adopted and adapted into the sacred realm. In order to ensure the safe passage of their relatives
to and from the land of the living, the Egyptians developed a series of rituals to provide light for the deceased along their way. This presentation will employ
archaeological and art historical sources to discuss the type of light sources used, the rites with which light was associated, and the significance of
providing illumination in the afterlife.
Stroth, Luke
[111]             Rocks that Roll: Potential Spatial Applications for X-Ray Fluorescence Data
This poster explores the potential applications of using x-ray fluorescence data to assess site integrity and site formation processes. The subject of the
analysis was the fire-modified rock assemblage from the University of Iowa Field School at Woodpecker Cave (13JH202), a Late-Woodland rock shelter.
The assemblage was selected because of their ubiquity throughout the site, their likely sourcing from the adjacent limestone cliff face, and association with
known cultural horizons. The assemblage was subjected to an XR-F analysis. A principle component analysis was performed on the XR-F data, creating
distinct groups based on chemical composition. Using the piece-plotted information, the XR-F data was projected into three-dimensional space. Discrete
horizons based on chemical composition were identified. To determine if chemical variability was due to chemical changes through heat treatment or
through source material, samples from the different strata of the cliff face were analyzed with the XR-F before and after being subjected to a controlled
burn. Through this method, the chemical changes during thermal alteration and the taphonomic history of Woodpecker Cave were better understood.
Stuart, David (The University of Texas at Austin), Marcello Canuto (Tulane University) and Tomas Barrientos (Universidad del Valle de
Guatemala)
[256]             Archaeology, Epigraphy and the Development of Long-term Alliance at La Corona, Guatemala
The integrated program of epigraphic and archaeological research at La Corona, Guatemala aims to document, analyze and understand the development
of this highly unusual Maya center during of the Classic period. Known as Saknikte’ in ancient texts, La Corona served as the locus of a small court with its
own dynastic history and exhibiting close and long-lasting familial and political ties with the far larger Kaanul or “Snake” kingdom centered at Dzibanche
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               433
and Calakmul. Architectural excavations at Saknikte’ have documented its evolution over this same time period, often revealing close correlations with the
site’s written historical record. This integrated evidence shows that Saknikte' was neither an independent player nor a fully subservient vassal, but unique
player on the Maya geopolitical landscape.
Sturm, Jennie (University of New Mexico)
[194]             Using Ground-Penetrating Radar to Re-evaluate the Chetro Ketl Field Complex in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico
Recent geophysical remote sensing investigations conducted in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, have included studies at the “Chetro Ketl field” complex. This
area is widely interpreted as gridded agricultural fields, though a lack of other gridded fields in the canyon have led some to question whether the Chetro
Ketl "field" served an agricultural function. Ground-penetrating radar (GPR) surveys conducted here resulted in the unexpected identification of a
complicated series of buried features at different depths within this field area. The integration of the GPR images with historic aerial photos reveals that
many of these buried features have an overall structure and orientation that is distinct from the grid patterns visible on the surface. It is not possible to
determine whether the collective features in this area were actually agricultural fields, but these results indicate that the Chetro Ketl “field” may be more
accurately interpreted as a palimpsest of prehistoric activity rather than a single instance of land modification.
Styles, Bonnie (Director Emeritus, Illinois State Museum), Mona Colburn (Research Association, Illinois State Museum) and Sarah Neusius
(Professor, Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[9]               Exploring Taphonomic and Contextual Comparability in Eastern Archaic Faunal Datasets
The Eastern Archaic Faunal Working Group (EAFWG), established with funding from NSF, is preserving Archaic period faunal databases from interior
portions of the Eastern Woodlands in tDAR (the Digital Archaeological Record) in order to undertake data integration at multiple scales that examines the
use of aquatic resources across time and space during the Archaic. A major initial question about our existing datasets is how comparable they are
taphonomically and contextually. Protocols for evaluating comparability before integrating faunal databases have been suggested by Southwestern
zooarchaeologists. These protocols rely on a variety of variables related to bone condition, modification, and attrition and assess differences between
intramural and extramural excavation contexts. However, modification is required to address the greater variety of animal resources and the different site
contexts relevant in Eastern Woodlands archaeology. We have piloted a modified protocol, and in this poster, we report the variables selected and the
results of our pilot study. We think that our approach will facilitate comparisons at multiple scales and will also be useful to other zooarchaeologists working
in the Eastern Woodlands.
[48]              Discussant
Styles, Bonnie [176] see Neusius, Sarah
Styring, Amy [171] see Bogaard, Amy
Suárez, Rafael (Depto. Archaeology. Universidad de la República (Uruguay))
[139]             The Early Peopling and Use of Space during the Colonization of Southeast of South America
Research on the early occupation in the Southern Cone has turned its attention to a particular type of diagnostic artifact: the Fishtail points. Archaeological
excavations conducted in Uruguay over the last 15 years have allowed indicating the presence of a cultural tradition of bifacial stemmed points,
represented by at least three distinct cultural groups defined on the basis of different projectile points types: Fishtail (12,800–12,200 calibrated yr B.P.),
Tigre (12,000–11,200 calibrated yr B.P.) and Pay Paso (11,080 to 10,200 calibrated yr B.P.). Recent data indicate that the Uruguay plains were occupied
for at least 1000 years before the emergence of Fishtail groups. The new chronological evidence indicates human presence in the north and south of
Uruguay between 14,000 to 13,300 calibrated yr B.P. This presentation discusses the early projectile point distribution, the use of space and specific locale
occupational redundancy by early groups during the colonization of Southeastern South America.
[139]             Chair
Sugiyama, Nawa (Smithsonian Instiution), Saburo Sugiyama (Arizona State University and Aichi Prefectural Uni), Verónica Ortega Cabrera
(Insituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia) and William L. Fash (Harvard University)
[129]             Plaza of the Columns at Teotihuacan: Scope, Goals and Expectations of a New International Project
Summer 2015, the Plaza of the Columns Project began a multi-year collaborative investigation of two large residential/ceremonial complexes that remained
unexplored at Teotihuacan’s ceremonial core: Plaza of the Columns and its symmetric counterpart called Plaza North of the Sun Pyramid. The former
                                                                                                          2
comprises the largest three-temple complex with the fourth highest pyramid, a main plaza (11,408 m ) larger than the Sun Pyramid plaza, and deep
occupational layers that could provide information about Teotihuacan’s urban foundation. These qualities make this set of complexes a primary candidate
to directly addresses some of the unresolved questions about Teotihuacan: how was the Teotihuacan state governance organized, and how did this vary
over time? The project aims to define the Plaza of the Columns complex as a palace through closely delimiting the architectural complexes, what activities
                                                                                                           2
took place in these distinct areas, and who resided in this exclusive compounds. Based on a 120 Km LiDAR map our team recently created, the project’s
first season focused on elaborating a three dimensional detailed map of the area under investigation, defining the architectural features and extent of the
complex through establishing a dynamic collaborative team integrating students and researchers from Mexico, United States and Japan.
Sugiyama, Saburo [129] see Sugiyama, Nawa
Sugrañes, Nuria, María José Ots (INCIHUSA-CONICET/IayE-FfyL-UNCu) and Michael D. Glascock (Archaeometry Laboratory, University of
Missouri)
[91]              Neutron Activation Analysis in Archaeological Pottery from Mendoza, Central Western Argentina
In Mendoza, the first record of pottery has been dated ca. 2000 years B.P. The technology used varies in terms of manufacture and decoration. Differences
in cultural, social and economic organization were also present in the area. The Atuel and Diamante river basins are in a transition zone, where different
kinds of social organization, farmers and pastoralists in the north and hunter-gatherers in the south were present. This variability enhances a debate about
analytical ways to approach ceramic technology. Actually, archaeometric techniques have been used to study ceramics. These analyses allow us to adjust
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   434
typologies and improve our knowledge of topics related with production, mobility and interaction within populations from Mendoza. Neutron Activation
Analyses (NAA) is a fundamental tool for the development of archeological ceramic research. In this poster, we show the capabilities of this technique
applied to ceramics from archaeological sites in the Atuel river basin and Tupungato valley. The preliminary results show well-defined chemical groups that
cluster according to chemical variables. Some groups have a strong relationship with regional types and particular environments. We also observed, that
one chemical group shows a great variety of types that we assume to be associated with different and distant origins.
Sullivan, Timothy (University of Pittsburgh)
[46]              Sierra Red Ceramics, Identity, and Foodways in the Middle and Late Formative Chiapa de Corzo Polity, Chiapas, Mexico.
Data from a surface survey of 105 sq km in and around the site of Chiapa de Corzo indicate that over the course of the Late Formative, serving vessels of
Sierra Red, a style that originated in the Maya Lowlands, were widely adopted across the Chiapa de Corzo polity. At the capital early Sierra Red serving
vessels largely conformed to the size of serving vessels from the Maya Lowlands. In the hinterland, however, the Sierra Red vessels people were using
had dimensions that conformed more tightly with earlier local, Middle Formative, styles of serving vessels, which were larger. These data provide
preliminary support for the notion that while commoners in the hinterland emulated the ceramic styles of the ruling elite at the center, their foodways were
much slower to change.
Sullivan, Lauren (University of Massachusetts)
[288]             The Early Ceramic History of Cahal Pech: Implications for Local Identity and for the Rise of Regionalism in the Maya Lowlands
Ongoing ceramic analysis at Cahal Pech have allowed for a more complete understanding of the Cunil Ceramic Complex that was originally defined by
Awe in 1992. These data provide important information on the early inhabitants of the site and reflect the formation of new political strategies and identities.
The innovation of ceramic manufacture and the display of specific symbols suggest that a rising elite was firmly in place by around 1000 B.C. in the Belize
Valley. Recent finds suggest that similar but diverse and independent groups were scattered throughout the Maya lowlands and provide information on an
emerging lowland Maya tradition. As these populations grew, a more uniform ceramic style reflects greater interregional interaction and increased political
networks by the end of the Middle Preclassic.
[109]             Discussant
Sullivan, Kelsey (University of Oregon) and Jaime J. Awe (Northern Arizona University)
[179]             Ancient Maya Craft Specialization in the Belize Valley
Archaeological investigations during the last 20 years in Western Belize has recorded considerable evidence of craft specialization in this lowland Maya
sub-region. Much of this information, however, has never been synthesized, thus providing us with a foggy lens through which to view the complexity of
craft production, distribution and interaction at the intra- and inter-regional level. In an effort to address this situation, this paper examines different types of
craft specialization in the Belize Valley, the control of production areas by major political and economic centers, as well as implications of distribution within
and outside of the Western Belize.
Sullivan, Vanessa (IVI Telecom Services, a CBRE Company)
[227]             Frontier Conflict Along the Central-Murray River in South Australia: A Spatial Reconstruction Approach to the Archaeology Of Conflict
The visibility of conflict in the archaeological record is often limited, especially when associated with the Australian frontier. As such, a holistic approach is
proposed as a means to identify conflict and address the question: to what degree is the nature of conflict between Aboriginal groups and European
settlers between 1830 and 1900 visible in the historical and archaeological record of the Central River Murray, South Australia? This approach applies
methods from multiple disciplines and incorporates archival, archaeological and geographical methods. Archival data and primary sources are used to
identify areas of interaction amongst European and Aboriginal groups. These locations are analyzed spatially to identify and interpret patterns and trends;
thus transforming the study area into a dynamic landscape rather than sites independent of each other. The spatial analysis, paired with an assessment of
ground disturbance, enables an evaluation of archaeological sensitivity—specifically, identifying areas associated with conflict. It is theorized that these
locations may have a visible archaeological signature that can be investigated in future research. Ultimately, the identified potential will enhance the
understanding of cultural ‘contact,’ especially within South Australia. Furthermore, the holistic approach has global applications; therefore, it provides a
template for other conflict archaeology studies.
Sumano, Kimberly (El Colegio de Michoacán) and Joshua Englehardt (El Colegio de Michoacán)
[101]             Architectural Discourse and Sociocultural Structure at Los Guachimontones, Jalisco
The site of Los Guachimontones, in central Jalisco state, Mexico, has long been the subject of intensive archaeological research, beginning in the 1970s
with Weigand’s investigations of the site’s unique circular architectonic configurations. Nonetheless, a detailed understanding of intra–site architectonic
variability eludes adequate explanation and obscures our comprehension of the internal sociopolitical dynamics of the site. To address these lacunae, this
paper compares two distinct areas of the site—Loma Alta and the nuclear core—that are thought to have been socially differentiated habitational and
ceremonial zones, based on variability in the spatial organization of their respective architectural complexes. Departing from a dual–processual framework,
the authors analyze differences in the spatial syntax, formal characteristics, and distribution of architectural groups in these zones. Synchronic and
diachronic variability in these aspects may indicate distinct functions of discrete areas within the site, and demonstrate how the socio–structural
organization of the groups that occupied Los Guachimontones was negotiated, reflected, and reified in the architectural configurations of the built
environment. This analysis thus contributes to a more nuanced understanding of the sociocultural dynamics of a site recognized as key to understanding
the development of social complexity in western Mesoamerica.
Sumano, Kimberly [101] see Muñiz, David
Sun, Zhuo [173] see Chen, Xiao
Supernant, Kisha [132] see Ames, Kenneth
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            435
Supernant, Kisha (University of Alberta, Deaprtment of Anthropology)
[190]              Mobility, Material Culture, and Metis Identity: A Comparison of 19th Century Wintering Camps in the Canadian West
Relationships between artifact assemblages and cultural identities are complex and difficult to disentangle. The Canadian west during the 1800s provides
an interesting historical and archaeological case study that has potential to shed light on the dynamics of settlement, material culture, and the mobile
nature of Métis peoples. Based originally in the Red River Settlement, some of the Métis began to expand west after 1845, forming interconnected
wintering communities to participate in winter bison hunting. These wintering communities were almost entirely inhabited by Métis families, so the
assemblages from wintering sites present a test case to examine the day to day material culture of the Métis hunting brigades during the mid- to late-
1800s. In this paper, I examine patterns from previous and new excavations of Métis wintering sites in Alberta and Saskatchewan to explore how Metis
communities balanced the mobility of buffalo hunting with the need for a protected home base during the difficult prairie winters. I compare assemblages
across sites and make inferences about the complex nature of Métis identities during the nineteenth century, including the relationship between mobility,
family, and the economics of buffalo hunting.
Surette, Flannery
[45]               The Night is Dark and Full of Terrors on the North Coast of Peru—Moon Animals in the Virú Imagination
In the iconography of the north coast of Peru, Moon Animals are otherworldly quadrupedal predators which consistently have prominent eyes, teeth,
tongues and claws, long curling tails and large head crests. They can resemble felines or foxes while other depictions appear more reptilian or amphibian.
The name originates from the association with lunar and astral motifs in Moche art during the Early Intermediate Period (200 B.C.–A.D. 800). These Moche
examples have come to define in the literature what is, in fact, an older and widespread motif, one which had been folded into the Moche pantheon and
associated with a new set of symbols. This paper explores the appearance of Moon Animals in the pantheon of the Virú polity, contemporaries of the
Moche, as they appear in a variety of media including stone, cloth and ceramic, and in both the public and private spheres where they often lack the lunar
association. Rather, Virú examples highlight the motif’s origin in the northern Andean highlands, emphasizing the Virú polity’s tendency to look east to the
Andes for iconographic inspiration alongside trade in physical goods.
[45]               Chair
Surface-Evans, Sarah (Central Michigan University)
[221]              Discourses of the Haunted: Community-Based Archaeology at the Mount Pleasant Indian Industrial Boarding School
Haunting is a way to conceptualize and recognize traumatic events of the past. In some cases, past trauma becomes so well hidden that it produces
specters whose origin and source may not be readily identified or acknowledged, yet still have the power to do harm. This metaphor of haunting is
especially apt when considering the United States Federal Indian Boarding School era. The cultural genocide attempted by Federal Indian boarding
schools is still felt in American Indian communities as generational trauma. Perhaps one of the greatest strengths of community-based archaeology is its
potential for drawing out ghosts, acknowledging their presence, and giving them a voice. This research is part of a grass-roots effort to decolonize the
historic narrative of the Mount Pleasant Indian Industrial Boarding School by the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan. Drawing on archaeological
data, documentary evidence, and oral histories, I will share a series of stories that expose specters of the past and reveal narratives of empowerment,
particularly for the women in the community.
Surmely, Frederic [145] see Ernenwein, Eileen
Surovell, Todd [115] see Grund, Brigid
Susak Pitzer, Angela (University of California, Los Angeles)
[224]              Glass Reflecting Value: A Multi-Disciplinary Study of Roman Glass from Karanis, Egypt
This multi-disciplinary study of glass from Karanis, Egypt combines archaeological, chemical compositional data, ethnoarchaeology, and historical insights
to assess how objects were valued in the ancient world. The the selection of raw materials is investigated through onsite portable X-ray fluorescence
(pXRF) spectrometry analysis of recently excavated Karanis glass dating primarily to the late Roman period (fourth–sixth centuries C.E.). Quantitative
analysis of these data informed by pXRF and electron probe micro-analysis (EPMA) of museum specimens from Karanis, helps discern compositional
groups. At least two groups most likely represent recycled glass due to the presence of both manganese and antimony above trace levels. This research
contributes to the debate regarding the location, organization, and scale of glass manufacturing during the Roman period. Closer examination of three
morphological types found at Karanis—unguentaria, rectangular bottles, and oil flasks—reveals relationships among compositional types, archaeological
context, and social functions of objects. In the late Roman period, an age when blown glass was commoditized and available to a broader demographic,
Karanidians used high-quality colorless oil flasks as a means of conspicuous consumption. Glass objects valued for the materials they contained were
often made from lower quality recycled glass.
Sussman, Emily (East Carolina University) and Megan Perry (East Carolina University)
[189]              Comparing Methodologies for Documenting Commingled and Fragmentary Human Remains
Commingled and fragmentary human remains are a common occurrence in archaeological and forensic contexts, but only a few methods have been
developed to record these complex assemblages. Conventional inventory methods, such as the Standards for Data Collection from Human Skeletal
Remains, document the presence and completeness of specific portions of skeletal elements and the minimum number of individuals (MNI) represented by
each bone portion. This rather subjective method for MNI calculation does not provide much transparency for future researchers using these data.
However, new techniques for recording, analyzing, and MNI calculation have been developed using zooarchaeological zonation methods which document
specific features present rather than more general measures of completeness.
This study identifies any significant differences in MNI calculation results using Standards versus Osterholtz’s methods, through reanalysis of the
assemblage of fragmented, commingled remains recovered during the 2012 season of the Petra North Ridge Project (preliminary MNI = 30).The MNI
based on Osterholtz’s visual-based system was not significantly different from that using Standards. Therefore, the precision of the two methods combined
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                436
with the better metadata in Osterholtz’s system suggests that this one should be the choice for individuals working with commingled and fragmentary
remains.
Sutherland, Adam (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign) and Montana Martin (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign)
[197]             What Remains: Using LiDAR to Examine the Effects of Plowing on Memories and Mounds in Illinois
Constructing monuments is, in essence, a construction of memory. Conversely, destruction of monuments can be the erosion of memory. Pre-Columbian
peoples in the Americas built and maintained monuments as a form of memory-making and place-making. Digital Elevation Models (DEM) provide us an
opportunity to re-discover the monuments and re-animate the memories that have been obscured since European arrival. Using LiDAR data, geo-
referenced with historic maps, we look at the present state of precolumbian mounds in Illinois. In this paper we discuss how the continued destruction of
Native American mounds is not only the deterioration of archaeological potential but, also the further erasure of Native American memory and connection
to the landscape.
[197]             Chair
Sutter, Richard (Indiana University-Purdue University Fort Wayne)
[118]             The Incorporation of the Chicama Valley into the Southern Moche Polity (A.D. 200–900): A Preliminary Biodistance Assessment
Nascent state formation is often purported involved the incorporation of nonlocal peoples, this question still remains unresolved for the southern Moche
(A.D. 200–900) polity thought to be centered at the Pyramids at Moche site. Some archaeologists (Castillo and Uceda 2010) that the southern Moche
state's expansion began following the incorporation of the Cao Viejo polity within the Chicama Valley to the north. Further, a recently published
reevaluation of radiocarbon dates for Moche ceramics associated with the traditional five phase Moche ceramic sequence suggests that Moche III phase
ceramics originated in the Moche Valley and later appear in the Chicama Valley to the north, concomitant with the proposed expansion of the southern
Moche polity. This study reports biodistance analyses for recently collected genetically influenced tooth trait data from both the Pyramids at Moche and
Cao Viejo sites to put this hypothesis to the test. The broader implications of the results are discussed.
Sutton, Wendy (USDA Forest Service, Gila NF)
[267]             Celebrating Native Interpretations of “Rock Art” on the Gila National Forest
Commonly known as “rock art,” pictographs (pigment on rock) and petroglyphs (images pecked or incised into rock) are much more than art. They reflect
the history and values of peoples who once lived here and are a tangible reminder of their connection to the landscape. The Gila National Forest is
installing interpretive signage at or near multiple well-known “rock art” sites in celebration of the 50th anniversary of the National Historic Preservation Act
(NHPA). These signs, and additional web-based materials, celebrate Native interpretations and provide valuable guidance on how to treat “rock art” so
that it survives into the future. As expressed by Curtis Quam (of the Zuni CRAT), “(projects) like these and experiencing these places is really
important…particularly sharing it with the kids.” Multiple tribes and pueblos have been invited to participate in the project. Representatives from Zuni, the
Mescalero Apache, and the White Mountain Apache have generously shared their interpretations of panels. Working together with the tribes on this project
has provided an opportunity for tribes to reconnect with these special places, has been a rewarding experience for Forest personnel, and will enhance
visitor experience for years to come.
[267]             Chair
Suyuc, Edgar [59] see Hansen, Richard
Swantek, Laura (Arizona State University)
[257]             A Complex Systems and Network Science Approach to the Emergence of Social Complexity on Cyprus during the Prehistoric Bronze Age
People who seek wealth and power structure and restructure the social networks that underlie society. From these networks that bind people together and
facilitate the movement of goods, services and information, emerges the phenomenon we call social complexity. To better understand this phenomenon in
past societies, this project uses data from the Prehistoric Bronze Age on Cyprus (2400–1700 Cal B.C.E.) and novel methods derived from complex
systems and small world network science, and modern economics, namely Gini Coefficients for quantifying wealth inequality. Using data from previously
excavated settlements and cemeteries, this project focuses on building the networks that structure society at the community, region and island-wide scales
during each sub-period of the Prehistoric Bronze Age (Philia Phase, PreBA 1, PreBA 2) through archaeological proxies for the control of labor, participation
in inter- and intra-regional and international trade, and access to technological, material and ideological resources. This paper will present the results of
this study, highlighting social instability over time in a non-linear trajectory toward increasing social complexity and regional differences. Further, it will
illustrate how shifts in underlying social networks are linked to reaching certain thresholds of inequality within societies.
Swarts, Kelly (Cornell University), Lewis Borck (University of Arizona), Lynda Prim (Native Seeds/SEARCH), Andrea Stanley (Borderlands
Restoration) and Edward Buckler (Cornell University)
[66]              Partitioning Variance in Maize Landrace Flowering Time by Cultural Affiliation, Geography, and Genetic Relatedness
Domesticates are uniquely both biological organisms but also cultural artifacts. As organisms, domesticates are shaped by the natural history of the
progenitor and adaptation to diverse environments. As artifacts, domesticates record the cultivation practices, migration histories, cultural interactions and
values of associated human groups. Using a population of maize landrace hybrids from the Greater Southwest (U.S. and Mexico) that have been
phenotyped for flowering time, we test how much of the variance in flowering time can be explained using relationship matrices developed from genomic
sequence data, spatial and environmental parameters, and strength of social interaction between associated cultural groups.
Swedlund, Alan C. [168] see Warren, Amy
Sweeney, Alex (Brockington & Associates) and Kara Bridgman Sweeney (Georgia Southern University)
[243]             Chibariyo! Navigating Cultural Resources Compliance on U.S. Military Installations in Japan
Following World War II, the U.S. established military bases throughout Japan. Multiple cultural resources investigations have since been conducted at
many of these facilities in compliance with applicable U.S. federal laws and regulations, the Government of Japan’s laws, and guidelines outlined by U.S.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                437
Forces Japan. Success in these projects required meetings with various stakeholders, including the Prefectural and local municipal Boards of Education in
Honshu and Okinawa, Japan. These investigations have contributed to ongoing processes of inventory and evaluation of historic architectural properties,
archaeological sites, and traditional cultural properties, as well as the development of detailed management procedures for addressing effects of proposed
projects on significant cultural resources at U.S military facilities. These international investigations have allowed us to reflect on the Section 106 process
followed stateside, and compare it to the Section 402 process of the NHPA and other cultural resources guidelines that are applicable to U.S. military
installations in Japan. This paper considers the complexities of cultural resources compliance in Japan, where regulations can extend beyond federal land
and undertakings. Additionally, we will discuss the higher incidence of government-funded archaeologists in Japan and the roles of those stakeholders at
the local scale of archaeological practice.
Swenson, Edward [99] see Spence-Morrow, Giles
Swenson, Edward (University of Toronto)
[105]             Sacrificial Landscapes and the Anatomy of Moche Biopolitics
Power in Moche society was fundamentally biopolitical, expressed through the violent deconstruction and reconstruction of bodies, including animate
places. An examination of Moche architecture reveals that North Coast populations envisioned built environments as living organisms that were biologically
dependent on human communities. The erection and renovation of Moche ceremonial architecture played an instrumental role in the generation of life and
the harnessing of vital forces. Therefore, Moche religious structures cannot be interpreted simply as the “house of gods” or as arenas for ritual
performance, for they seem to have served as powerful media for the cycling of biological energy underwriting Moche political ecologies. Archaeological
evidence will be mobilized that Moche monumental architecture were perceived as metabolizing bodies that sympathetically channelled the life-giving
powers of mountain peaks. The data suggest that temple mounds were literally fed, sacrificed, and renewed to maintain covenants with natural landforms
and related ecological forces. The concept of biopolitics has been applied by Agamben, Foucault, and others to describe the insidious working of power in
our postmodernist world. However, an investigation of Moche religious ideology reveals that violence as arbiter of life has long played a central if variable
role in the reification of social difference.
Swindles, Graeme [95] see Armit, Ian
Swogger, John (Archaeological Illustrator)
[182]             Thinking Outside The Panel: Using Comics to Engage with Multiple Audiences during Archaeological Field Schools
Comics are an effective medium for promoting engagement with archaeology, as they are able to communicate complex and detailed archaeological
information to audiences unfamiliar with its concepts and practice. This communication is facilitated both through the comic itself and the process of
creating it.
During the University of Oregon's Palau Archaeology 2015 field school on the island of Palau, Micronesia, comics were used to present the ongoing results
of excavations to multiple audiences. These audiences included “the public" in its broadest sense (tourists, local residents, schools and colleges, etc.), but
also more specialist audiences: the Palau Bureau of Arts and Culture, state and national government executive officers, the community of Palauan
Heritage Protection Officers, the National Museum, other science and field researchers on the islands, as well as students participating in the five-week
field school.
Making comics introduced different kinds of discourse with each of these audiences. The end result was comics (as documents) which presented the
results of the archaeological research, but also comics (as process) which built outreach relationships with fieldwork stakeholders. This use of comics on
Palau demonstrates how the medium can create effective and innovative communication at multiple levels within archaeological field practice.
Sykes, Naomi [100] see Perdikaris, Sophia
Sykes, Naomi (University of Nottingham), Holly Miller (University of Nottingham) and Karis Baker (University of Durham)
[223]             Bio-cultural Exchange and Human Health—Past and Present
There is growing concern about the impact of biological exchange on human health, the WHO correlating shifts in biodiversity with the decline of medicinal
biota and the emergence and spread of infectious diseases. Paradoxically, human desire to improve health and well-being has been the very motivation
behind the worldwide translocation of many species. This is, in part, because ethnomedicine tends to target preferentially species that are exotic, the belief
being that geographical distance is equated with supernatural distance and that the healing power of organisms increases with their cultural remoteness.
Medicine is seldom considered in archaeological studies of biogeography but this paper will highlight the role that medico-religious beliefs have played in
biological exchange. As a case-study, we present the evidence relating to the fallow deer (Dama dama dama), a species native to the eastern
Mediterranean but now the most widely dispersed cervid on the planet. By contextualising the data from an international programme of genetic analyses
we will argue that the ancient pan-European translocation of the fallow deer was prompted by medico-religious knowledge travelling down the Silk Road.
The legacy of this exchange continues to have implications for modern human (and environmental) health.
Szigeti, Anna (University of Szeged), Virág Varga (University of Cincinnati) and Viktória Kiss (Hungarian Academy of Sciences)
[149]             A Preliminary Analysis of the Metal Finds from Békés 103
Bronze is a central economic and symbolic focus in the European Bronze Age, and the distribution of metals found in Bronze Age burial contexts can
suggest differences in wealth. This poster analyzes the bronze artifacts from the site of Békés 103, a Bronze Age site in Eastern Hungary. Previous work at
settlements in this area indicates little social inequality and suggests that metal production was not centralized at larger settlements (fortified tell-sites).
Study of the distribution of metals and other exotic goods in funerary contexts provides an additional avenue for understanding the circulation of exotic
goods. So far, excavation at this cemetery produced mostly pins and arm rings, common body ornamentation of the time. In this paper, we consider the
distribution, spatial arrangement, and sex and age of the recipients of these finds. We attempt to understand whether the funerary display of bronze
differed in this region compared to neighboring areas, suggesting more equal access to resources.
Szpak, Paul (University of British Columbia)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              438
[134]             Large Changes Environmental Changes Following Commercial Whaling in the Eastern Canadian Arctic
Stable isotope records from dovekie (Alle alle), ringed seal (Pusa hispida) and bowhead whale (Balaena mysticetus) bones recovered from archaeological
sites in eastern North American High Arctic (northwestern Greenland and eastern Canadian Arctic) reveal little auks declined an entire trophic level in the
20th century, following stability between the twelfth and early twentieth centuries. Conversely, bowhead whale trophic level remained stable and ringed
seal trophic level slightly increased across the same period. These data are consistent with little auks relying to a much greater extent on relatively high
trophic level prey (predatory amphipods and small fish) when bowheads were abundant. After the depletion of bowhead whales in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, however, a large-scale change in the diet of little auks occurred, with increased specialization on herbivorous copepods (Calanus
sp.), driven by ecological release from competition with bowheads. The isotopic data suggest that the modern trophic ecology of the little auk is an artifact
of ecosystem changes precipitated by historic and recent fisheries.
Szremski, Kasia (Vanderbilt University)
[118]             The Chaupiyunga as an Eco-cultural Frontier: Inter-zonal exchange and negotiation in the Huanangue Valley during the Late Intermediate
                  Period (1100–1470 C.E.)
As a region of high ethnic and ecological diversity, the ancient Andes can be viewed as a collection of ecological, cultural, and political frontiers. Studying
the processes that occurred along these frontiers is vital to understanding the indigenous political and economic systems that developed throughout the
region prior to Spanish contact. As a transitional zone between the coast and the highlands, as well as a geographic bottleneck through which people and
goods had to pass, the chaupiyunga was a key ecological and cultural frontier where inter-group and inter-regional relationships were negotiated. Here, I
use the Huanangue Valley as a case study in ancient chaupiyunga frontier processes. Specifically, I focus on the Chancay site of Cerro Blanco and its role
as a gateway settlement during the Late Intermediate Period (1100-1470 C.E.). I argue that Cerro Blanco acted as a node through which inter-zonal trade
passed as well as a locus where Chancay, Atavillos, and chaupiyungino (a local Huanangue Valley group) relationships were negotiated and that these
relationships had the potential to profoundly impact the socio-political organization of said communities. By doing so, this paper demonstrates the impact
that frontier processes had on the socio-political development in the ancient Andes.
Szumilewicz, Amy (Southern Illinois University, Carbondale)
[92]              Sicán Painted Textiles: Producer's and Multi-Craft Perspectives
Two types of painted textiles exist within controlled funerary contexts from the Middle Sicán culture (900–1100 C.E.) on the North coast of Peru. The first
represents the genre of painted cloth in a traditional sense: woven textiles with decorative elements added to the final product. The other is a more
complex, multi-crafted and multi-stepped object that combines the labor intensive production of sheet-metal, cotton textile, gesso-like clay, and the final
application of painted designs. These two classes of painted textiles served different functions within their shared contexts. The first as malleable linings for
the interior of the deceased’s funerary bundle, and the latter as rigid “wrappings” for the tomb itself. This poster compares the technologies of these objects
through material, production, and their ultimate uses. Discussion focuses on producers’ roles in not only the manufacture of textile media alone, but the
likelihood of a production process not limited to single material-single crafter models. These objects provide a site for understanding plural identities of
crafters involved in interactive, multi-crafting settings.
Szymanski, Ryan (Washington State University)
[181]             Landcover Change and Economic Change During the Iron Age in Western Kenya
Archaeological evidence from numerous sites throughout Western Kenya show that the Iron Age was a time of considerable environmental and cultural
change in this region. A short sediment core derived from lower Kingwal Swamp was collected and analyzed for its microbotanical, fungal, and charcoal
content with the goal of clarifying the duration, context, and extent of these changes as visible through landscape modification. These sediments capture
approximately the last 1800 years of ecological history in this area, and indicate that significant clearance for cultivation has taken place through this
period, and particularly in recent centuries associated with maize agriculture. Additionally, microbial evidence suggests that considerable fluctuation in the
local presence of large herbivores has occurred through time. A more nuanced picture of the ecology of a region with relatively poorly known archaeology
is further made available.
Tabarev, Andrei [21] see Gillam, Christopher
Taboada, Constanza [259] see Angiorama, Carlos
Tabor, Neil [22] see Kappelman, John
Tackney, Justin (University of Utah), Dennis H O'Rourke (University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT) and Anne M Jensen (UIC Science LLC, Barrow,
AK)
[160]             Sweet aDNA O'Mine: The Rise and Fall of Ice Sheets and the Arctic Peopling from Beringia
The peopling of the North American Arctic was made possible after the full retreat of the Laurentide ice sheet. The archaeological record supports multiple
migrations beginning approximately 6,000 years B.P., thousands of years after the initial colonization of the Americas. Modern Iñupiat/Inuit peoples are the
descendants of a recent (~800 ybp) and rapid (<200 years) migration by the Neo-Eskimo Thule. The Thule brought with them specialized technological
developments adapted for the exploitation of terrestrial and marine resources in the warming climate, particularly whaling. The Iñupiat/Inuit people of today,
while sharing common ancestry with all Native Americans, represent a distinct genetic contribution from later Beringians.
We investigated two pre-contact archaeological sites with human burials. Nuvuk at Pt. Barrow, AK, with radiocarbon dates spanning Early Thule to modern
Iñupiat Eskimo and Igliqtiqsiugvigruaq, a more recent (turn of the nineteenth century) and interior Alaskan site located inside the boundary of Kobuk Valley
National Park, adjacent to the Kobuk River. Three individuals from each site were chosen for targeted mitochondrial capture and next-generation
sequencing. Our ancient DNA results allow refinement of phylogeny and coalescence dates for Arctic-specific mitochondrial clades, and demonstrate
continuity between prehistoric and extant Arctic populations.
Tackney, Justin [160] see Stone, Jessica
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               439
Tafani, Aurelien (University of South Florida), Robert H. Tykot (University of South Florida) and Kewin Peche-Quilichini (University of
Montpellier)
[257]              A Provenance Study of Ceramics from Final Bronze Age Sites in Corsica using Non-Destructive Pxrf Analysis
This paper presents the results of a study of Final Bronze Age ceramics in Corsica, which took place during summer 2015. More than three hundred
sherds from six different sites were analyzed using a non-destructive technology, XRF (X-ray fluorescence), to identify trace elements. The use of a hand-
held device allowed the archaeometric study in situ of collections preserved in the Sartene museum, which could not have been removed and sent for
analysis otherwise, and their comparison with artifacts found during recent excavations, for which a more comprehensive context is available. The aim of
the study is to explore, at a regional scale, the exteant of the exchanges taking place between sites located in different ecological environments, and
having therefore access to different kinds of resources. In particular, it focuses on the distribution pattern of the fine ware appearing at the beginning of the
period: its manufacturing process, markedly distinct from the traditional coarse ware, suggests it could have been a specialized production, obeying to a
differential distribution pattern.
Taivalkoski, Ariel (University at Buffalo), Caroline Funk (University at Buffalo), Debra Corbett (Nanutset Heritage) and Brian Hoffman (Hamline
University)
[124]              Avian Skeletal Part Representation at 49-KIS-050
Zooarchaeological avifauna analyses demonstrate that wing elements tend to be overrepresented in archaeological assemblages from diverse temporal
and cultural contexts. There have been several explanations for this phenomenon including bone density, differential transport and more recently, Bovy’s
social zooarchaeological interpretations for the overall overabundance of wing elements, as well as specifically of distal wing elements in the Watmough
Bay assemblage. The avifaunal assemblage (n=5,360) from 49-KIS-050, a 2,500-year-old Aleut village midden site on Alaska’s Kiska Island, western
Aleutian Islands, also is dominated by wing elements, in this case by proximal wing elements. A comparison of the 49-KIS-050 assemblage with the
Watmough Bay site materials yields insight into cross-cultural practices in the treatment and disposal of avifauna. Analyses sensitive to Aleut traditional
practices provide a culturally specific context for the avifaunal patterns present in the 49-KIS-050 assemblage.
Takamiya, Hiroto (Kagoshima university), Hitoshi Yonenobu (Natuto University of Education), Taiji Kurozumi (Natural History Museum and
Institute, Chiba) and Takeji Toizumi (Waseda University)
[173]              Prehistoric Human Impacts to Isands of Amami and Okinawa, Japan
 Islands colonization by Homo sapiens is relatively recent phenomenon in the history of Homo sapiens (modern human or human afterwords). While
modern human successfully colonized five continents by 10,000 years ago, only handful islands were colonized by 10,000 years ago. Most islands were
successfully colonized after 10,000 years ago. Islands seem to be one of the most difficult environments for modern humans to successfully colonize.
However, once Homo sapiens successfully colonized island environments, they greatly affected pristine island environment. They introduced new animal
and plant species, over hunted animals, over harvested plants, modified natural forests, and so on. In many islands, such as islands in the Mediterranean,
Caribbean, and Oceania, environmental changes have been recognized after human colonization. In the case of island archaeology, human impacts to
island environments after successful colonization appears to be the "rule." We have attempted to trace human impacts to the islands of Amami and
Okinawa, Japan for many years. However, our studies indicate that human impacts to these islands by humans after their successful colonization is not as
obvious as other island cases. This might be very rare case in terms of island archaeology.
Talbot, Richard [104] see Richens, Lane
Tankersley, Kenneth (University of Cincinnati) and Jessica Thress (University of Cincinnati)
[138]              Salt Pollution and Climate Change at Chaco Canyon, New Mexico
In order to determine if the water management systems of ancestral Puebloans caused salt pollution during periods of climatic change and increased
aridity, sediment samples were collected from ancient irrigation features and reservoirs in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico. Today, these features are filled
with sediments. Periods of climate change were determined with AMS radiocarbon and OSL dating. Soil salinity was measured using a conductivity cell
and plotted against age in order to illustrate changes in salt content through time. Salinity levels were measured at 10 cm intervals and ranged between
11.3 ppm and more than 3,000 ppm clearly illustrating changes in the quantity of salt through time. Rather than elevating soil salinity levels to the point that
agricultural fields could no longer be farmed, water management systems constructed during periods of climate change greatly diluted natural salinity
levels. This research expands our knowledge and understanding of the cost, in terms of water management and salt pollution, of developing an urban
center in an arid region during periods of climate change. This suite of archaeological and climatic data fills an important gap in our knowledge of ancestral
Puebloans as it relates to water management and climate change.
Tantaleán, Henry (Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, UCLA)
[99]               Andean Ontologies: An Introduction to the Substance
In the last decade a number of studies have been published focusing on the way Andean peoples both in the past and present, describe and define their
world and its relational elements. These ontologies are derived from anthropology, ethnohistory and ethnography. Most of them intend to reconstruct the
worldview of these social groups with different results. In this paper, I summarize the main trends related to ontologies developed for Andean societies,
especially those used to explain prehispanic societies. I draw a cautionary note with such interpretations as there is the danger to correlate them directly
with ontologies from the historical period. In addition, I outline future directions that research regarding Andean ontologies may follow in an effort to
understand Andean peoples in their own historical milieu.
[99]               Chair
Tappen, Martha [87] see Coil, Reed
Tavera Medina, Ana Carito (Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos) and SARAH MARTINI (HARVARD UNIVERSITY)
[118]              Revisiting the Pre Moche–Moche Transition on the El Brujo Geological Terrace: A Spatially Significant Ceramic Analysis
Understanding the social relationships represented by Salinar, Gallinazo, and early Moche ceramics remains one of the important, disputed issues in
archaeology on the north coast of Peru. All three ceramic styles are present in material collected during excavations of architectural nuclei around the El
Brujo geologic terrace in the Chicama valley over the last 25 years. Here we present an analysis of these ceramics which relate to the transition between
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                   440
the Formative and Early Intermediate Periods with the objective of characterizing the vertical and horizontal distributions of the different styles. A
comparison of the macro-features of the PACEB material with those mentioned in previous studies allows us to identify both charachteristics specific to the
El Brujo terrace and those that seem to remain constant between sites. By combining these findings with an analysis of the sherds’ spatial distribution
using ArcGIS, we examine the accuracy of the major pre-Moche models proposed in the roundtable on Gallinazo in 2009. Our results contribute to the
discussions started at this first meeting by investigating the role of El Brujo in this pre-Moche time period.
Tayles, Nancy [25] see Halcrow, Sian
Taylor, Sarah [6] see Locascio, William
Taylor, Sarah (University of South Florida) and Carl Halbirt (City of St. Augustine)
[8]              Mitigating Hurricane Risk in Colonial St. Augustine, Florida
This poster explores hurricane risk mitigation in colonial St. Augustine, Florida, from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries. The city was primarily under
Spanish rule during these centuries, although brief British and American periods are also represented. While St. Augustine is not a hurricane hot spot it
does suffer occasional blows. Its waterfront location and the importance of shipping and fishing to the local economy made the town vulnerable to
hurricane-associated wind and flooding. By considering a combination of historical and archaeological data we piece together a picture of how the town
attempted to reduce its vulnerability to these hazards through modifying the built environment, and how effective their efforts might have been.
Taylor, Jay (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[36]             Tools of the Trade: An Analysis of Tools at Historic Hanna's Town
The purpose of this poster is to discuss the analysis of tools found at Hanna’s Town, and to determine the nature of the various tasks performed by its
residents, as well as the town’s economic conditions. This study aims to answer the following research questions: (1.) What kinds of tools are present at
Hanna’s Town and what tasks are they associated with? (2.) Does the spatial arrangement of these artifacts reveal any information about where these
tasks took place? (3.) Are there any relationships between these tools that may indicate the presence of a specific profession in Hanna’s Town? (4.) What
can the quantity of artifacts and their condition (modifications, evidence of repair, and stylistic variation) tell us about the availability of these goods through
trade at Hanna’s Town? Because little information survives about Hanna’s Town, these results will provide valuable information about the day to day life of
Hanna’s Town residents.
Teeter, Wendy (Fowler Museum at UCLA)
[202]            Discussant
ten Bruggencate, Rachel [214] see Fayek, Mostafa
Tenorio, Dolores [183] see Velasquez, Veronica
Terrenato, Nic (University of Michigan)
[33]             Moderator
Terry, Richard (Brigham Young University), Bryce M. Brown (Brigham Young University), Aline Magnoni (Tulane University) and Tanya Carino
(Universidad de las Américas Puebla)
[125]            Extraction of Soil Biomarkers from the Sacred Cacao Groves of the Maya
In Post Classic and Colonial times, cacao was an important crop to the Maya. Landa and others reported sacred groves of trees in the Yucatan region, and
among these groves they saw cacao growing. When the Spanish arrived in Mexico, cacao seeds were even used as a form of currency near Chichen Itza.
Cacao typically grows in hot, humid climates. The Yucatan region is too dry and humidity is too low during the winter months to sustain cacao, but it has
been found to grow in the humid microclimates of rejolladas. Here, we explore methods for extracting cacao biomarkers from soils in the region to better
understand which types of rejolladas can be used to grow cacao. Cacao is the only known plant in the region to produce theobromine and caffeine so we
used those chemical markers to determine whether or not cacao had previously been grown in the rejolladas sampled. We proceeded to extract soils from
various rejolladas in the region. We found significant amounts of theobromine and caffeine in six of the thirteen rejolladas tested.
Terry, Karisa [150] see Buvit, Ian
TESTÉ, Marc (Laboratory of Physical Geography, UMR CNRS 8591, University Paris I,), Cyril CASTANET (University Paris 8, Vincennes - Saint
Denis), Aline GARNIER (University Paris-Est-Créteil), Nicole LIMONDIN-LOZOUET (Laboratory of Physical Geography, UMR CNRS 8591, U) and
Eva LEMONNIER (University Paris I, Panthéon-Sorbonne)
[237]            Proposed Reconstruction of Palaeoenvironmental Dynamics in the Region of Naachtun (Péten, Guatemala) during the Late Holocene:
                 Contribution of Several Bioindicators in a Multi‐Proxy Study
The city of Naachtun was an important maya Center in Southern Lowland (Guatemala). It was occupied from the early Classic (250 A.D.) to the end of Late
Classic period (950 A.D.). Its inhabitants developed agriculture and a water management, as attested by geo‐archaeological evidences (palaeo‐soils,
terraces, water reservoirs and canal). Our study focuses on the palaeoenvironments in and around Naachtun during the last 3,500 years. We develop a
multi‐proxy approach based on bioindicators study to reconstruct past environments and socio‐environmental dynamics. The sedimentary framework is
established for the periphery of Naachtun in the north wetlands. Sediments cover the period of human occupation from the Preclassic period and yield a
wide range of fossil groups. Several of these microfossils will be used to conduct our multi‐proxy palaeoenvironmental study: Phytoliths, Pollens,
Microcoals and Molluscs. Particularly, the phytoliths (siliceous particles produced by plants) have a significant potential for the reconstructions of past
vegetation assemblages. These fossils, differentiating Poaceae subfamilies and charred phytoliths, also provide information on the use of plant
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                441
resources by human societies and their impact on landscapes. Finally, the use of several bioindicators with a different mineralization (calcareous shells,
sporopollenin) will allow to improve the accuracy of the palaeoenvironmental reconstructions.
Thacker, Paul (Wake Forest University)
[211]             Raw Material Provisioning and Tool Rejuvenation Practices: Environmental Change and Technological Tensions in the Middle Archaic of
                  the North Carolina Piedmont
Flaked stone artifact assemblages from stratified contexts in central North Carolina reveal a significant shift in lithic technological organization during the
Middle Archaic period. Important changes in raw material provisioning, biface production strategies, resharpening techniques, and stone tool discard
behaviors broadly correlate with regional environmental shifts attributed to the mid-Holocene Optimum. Technological and site organizational changes may
arise out of an emerging strategy of provisioning longer duration campsite locations with stone raw material as Middle Archaic populations intensified use
of patchy subsistence resources in the foothills and piedmont east of the Appalachian Mountains. In contrast to the tool transportability and raw material
conservation strategies evident from earlier assemblages, Late Middle Archaic and Late Archaic bifaces exhibit a decrease in lithic economizing and reuse
behavior. This paper illustrates the potential error of assuming analytical equivalency of biface technology throughout the Archaic and questions the utility
of direct metric index comparison. Controlling chronological variation in stone tool use-lives and raw material reduction strategies is a necessary
prerequisite to linking patterns in stone tool assemblages with broader prehistoric subsistence and settlement organization caused by climate change.
Thakar, Heather (Temple University)
[245]             Foraging Ancient Landscapes: Seasonal and Spatial Variation in Prehistoric Exploitation of Plant and Animal Food Resources on Santa
                  Cruz Island, California
In recent years, burgeoning paleoethnobotanical research on the Northern Channel Islands of California has challenged long held assumptions regarding
the nature of aboriginal patterns of plant exploitation and helped refine our understanding of prehistoric Chumash subsistence economies. Yet, little effort
has been made to systematically integrate paleoethnobotanical analysis and datasets with normative subsistence studies, which tend to focus on the
abundant (and highly visible) shellfish remains that dominate archaeological assemblages on the Northern Channel Islands. I contend that understanding
how the Island Chumash moved about and exploited prehistoric landscapes requires analysis of all subsistence remains—marine and terrestrial, faunal
and floral—from multiple sites, site types, and stratigraphic contexts. In this article, I integrate chronological control on century and seasonal timescales
with the analysis of well-preserved macrobotanical and faunal assemblages from multiple locations on Santa Cruz Island. These data reveal that variation
over relatively short temporal and spatial scales structured foraging decisions and produced persistent and identifiable patterns in the archaeological
record. In this analysis, reconstruction of seasonal and spatial variation in quantity and array of primary plant and animal food resources exploited
contributes to effective assessment of many facets of land use and mobility.
[202]             Discussant
Tharalson, Kirsten (University of Oklahoma)
[115]             Butchering Patterns & Seasonality of the Certain Site, Western Oklahoma
The Certain Site is a Late Archaic site in Western Oklahoma that contains at least five arroyo bison trap kills totaling over 200 animals. Numerous bison
bones from these kills exhibit evidence of butchering—cut marks, green bone breaks, embedded tools. The butchering sequences associated with each kill
was identified through thorough examination of these butchering marks from the site’s various arroyo kill localities. Combined with previously identified
seasonality estimates for each kill, I determine whether the seasonality of kill correlates with a distinct butchering pattern. This data is also compared with
the butchering patterns used at various other bison kill sites from the region to identify any possible correlations between seasonality of kill and butchering
pattern used throughout Southern Plains bison kill sites.
Ther, Richard [146] see Kvetina, Petr
Thies, Meagan (Illinois State University)
[186]             Moderator
Thomas, David (American Museum of Nat History)
[28]              Discussant
Thomas, Jayne-Leigh (Indiana University), April Sievert (Indiana University), Teresa Nichols (Indiana University) and Anne Pyburn (Indiana
University)
[30]              Learning NAGPRA and Teaching Archaeology
In 2014 and 2015, researchers from Indiana University received National Science Foundation funding through their Cultivating Cultures of Ethical STEM
initiative to study how repatriation is taught and learned, and to work toward interventions to improve the resources available. The “Learning NAGPRA”
project prioritizes a more thorough understanding of the challenges and bottlenecks in preparing professionals for work related to NAGPRA and
repatriation. It also seeks better ways to assist learners at different points throughout their education on issues relating to professional ethics, working with
human subjects, building cultural competency and relationships with Native American communities, and NAGPRA consultation and compliance. The
project hopes, in collaboration with tribal colleges and participants, to look beyond traditional Euroamerican pedagogy, to find methods that speak to both
indigenous and non-indigenous students. The first year focused on background research and project planning and aimed to understand the perspectives
and priorities of students and educators in learning and teaching about ethics and more specifically NAGPRA in anthropology and museum studies-related
programs.
Thomas, Jayne-Leigh [112] see Nichols, Teresa
Thomas, Jonathan and Tyler Perkins (University of Iowa)
[112]             Shell Bead Production at Cahokia
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            442
Cahokia (c. 1050–1400 A.D.) was the largest precolumbian city in North America and had far-reaching influence across the Mississippian world. Initially
considered a chiefdom, recent reappraisals have cast doubt on the applicability of traditional social evolutionary models to Cahokia, suggesting it is best
understood on its own terms as a historical phenomenon. One significant facet of the Cahokian prestige goods economy involved the production,
distribution, and circulation of large numbers of shell beads, an important component of mortuary practices. This analysis examined 10,000 of the
estimated 60,000 shell beads recovered from the Mound 72 (“birdman”) burial at Cahokia. Beads were measured for diameter and thickness, and coded
for a number of traits including shape, perforation type, and use-wear. Low standard deviations in bead dimensions are indicative of standardization and
batch production, resulting in thousands of disc-shaped shell beads that are nearly identical in size. This suggests that the production of beads at Cahokia
and surrounding sites was an ongoing, highly-organized, labor-intensive industry. We conclude by exploring the implications of this process for labor
organization, including potentially gendered and age-related aspects of bead production, and more generally for our understanding of cultural complexity at
Cahokia and surrounding areas in the American Bottom.
Thomin, Mike
[260]             The Best Days at FPAN are Out of Sight: Public Archaeology Airwaves of Unearthing Florida and the DARC Geotrail
The Florida Public Archaeology Network has created a variety of unique projects throughout the past decade of its existence. Two of these projects called
Unearthing Florida and DARC Geotrail used “airwaves” through the medium of radio and the technology of GPS satellites as a way to educate the public
about Florida’s archaeological heritage and to promote archaeotourism. Unearthing Florida is a radio program broadcast Florida public radio NPR member
stations designed to enhance the public’s understanding and appreciation of Florida’s archaeological heritage. DARC Geotrail is a project that uses the
worldwide GPS based scavenger hunt game of geocaching as a way to promote responsible site visitation and tourism to historic and archaeological sites
in Northwest Florida. This paper reflects on some of the successes and challenges of creating and maintaining both these projects using “airwaves” over
the past four years.
Thompson, Katlynn (CSUN), Jessica Levy, Diane Newburry, Sheena Owens and Ann Peters
[63]              Fifty-Year-Old Boxes Illuminate the Middle Horizon in Ica, Peru: Textile Conservation and New Research Opportunities
As part of a Practicum in Analysis and Conservation of Organic and Textile Artifacts, class participants worked with materials recovered in salvage
excavations between 1955 and 1975, which form part of the collections at the Museo Regional de Ica “Adolfo Bermudez Jenkins.” We carried out
documentation and preliminary interventions to improve preservation of textiles from a mortuary context, as well as miscellaneous artifacts with unknown
provenience, diverse in materials and techniques. Here, we present the problems and opportunities of “excavating the museum” and discuss our
conservation decisions and the information recovered.
Each box contained far more material than expected, and a variety of artifacts and conditions provided the class with experience in a range of conservation
strategies. Many artifacts combined diverse organic materials with some textile components; a set of hairpieces, apparently similar, provided several
surprises. Although the mortuary assemblage had been separated from the human remains, the process of separating and rehousing wadded and folded
textiles provided information on gender and social status. Our conservation work generated an expanded list of cataloged artifacts and new storage
requirements, leading to a collection management issue as well as opportunities for further research.
Thompson, Amy [64] see Kirk, Scott
Thompson, Victor (University of Georgia) and John Turck (Geoarcheology Research Associates)
[157]             Human-Environmental Dynamics of the Georgia Coast
This paper synthesizes and evaluates settlement and subsistence patterns in relation to landscape change for the entire prehistoric period on the Georgia
coast. The dynamic coastal processes of the region have altered the topography and distribution of resources, including those important to humans. These
processes were neither uniform in space nor time, with variations leading to the creation of micro-habitats. We assess these habitats individually and as
part of a complex whole, to better elucidate the nature of human-environmental interactions. Understanding these complex relationships aids in our
understanding of the social trajectories of the coastal groups, and people's environmental impact and legacies on the ecosystem. In addition to our
synthesis, we include new research such as locational data and a comprehensive radiocarbon date database. We also use our research as a departure
point to discuss the future of humans along changing coastlines. We argue that past peoples dealt with similar coastally-related issues as today, such as
sea level fluctuations or changes to once productive resources. We need to convey our knowledge on these human-environmental interactions to the
public, including policy-makers, not just to exhibit the usefulness of archaeology, but also to transform society for the better.
Thompson, Jessica (Emory University), Alex Mackay (University of Wollongong), Sheila Nightingale (City University of New York), Flora Schilt
(University of Tuebingen) and David Wright (Seoul National University)
[211]             The Central African Middle Stone Age in Context: Comparisons of Technological Adaptations
The Late Pleistocene Middle Stone Age (MSA) records of southern and northern Africa increasingly provide evidence for diversity in technological systems,
with both exhibiting early examples of standardized stone tool production achieved through complex manufacturing sequences. This superficially implies a
long-term trend toward greater complexity in MSA technology at a continental scale. However, within both regions, various lithic elements received different
emphases over time and space—potentially in response to dramatic shifts in climate. New data from the central African record add perspective to how
regional expressions of the Late Pleistocene MSA can be understood. Stone artifact assemblages from Karonga, Malawi, persistently lack the variety and
complexity demonstrated to occur elsewhere in Africa at the same times, in spite of similar lithic raw material availability. Because the region experienced
considerable variability in Late Pleistocene precipitation and vegetation regimes, climate change was not a universal determinant of technological change
in the MSA. These data from the central African record provide an essential avenue for exploring new hypotheses about the roles of environmental risk and
demography in shaping the expression of MSA technology across the continent, not just at a local scale.
Thompson, Amy (University of New Mexico) and Keith M. Prufer (University of New Mexico)
[236]             Analyzing Ancient Maya Settlement Patterns through the Geochemical Analysis of Obsidian Artifacts in Southern Belize.
This poster examines the distribution of obsidian across space and time among two Classic Period Maya centers, Uxbenká and Ix Kuku’il, located in the
southern foothills of the Maya Mountains, Belize, Central America. Data from portable x-ray florescence analyses at Uxbenká suggests that neither the
period of occupation, distance of a settlement group to the site core, nor the social status of group residents impacted the availability of obsidian source-
group material, suggesting Uxbenká residents all had access to the same obsidian materials throughout the history of the polity. This study expands on the
initial research to examine if differential access to obsidian sources varies between the sites Uxbenká, and its neighbor, Ix Kuku’il. Furthermore, it focuses
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                443
on how the geospatial location of social groups and temporally controlled occupation periods impact access to obsidian. Discussions of social groupings
include scales of households, neighborhoods, and districts defined by geospatial analyses. All obsidian artifacts from both Uxbenká and IxKuku’il were
geochemically analyzed using a portable x-ray florescence to determine the source of each individual artifact. Time depth is added to this study through
high-resolution radiocarbon dating associated with the obsidian materials among the various household groups at both ancient centers.
Thornton, Erin (Washington State University), Kitty Emery (Florida Museum of Natural History), John Krigbaum (University of Florida) and
Camilla Speller (York University)
[134]             Biomolecular Approaches to Documenting Ancient Maya Turkey Husbandry and Use
The turkey (Meleagris gallopavo) is the only domesticated vertebrate to originate from North America. Accurate reconstructions of turkey husbandry and
use are thus critical for understanding the domestication process in the ancient Americas. Isotopic and genetic (aDNA) research has yielded substantial
insights into the history of turkey use and domestication in the American Southwest, but such methods have not been widely used in Mesoamerica to date,
despite the fact that all modern domestic turkeys descend from birds originally domesticated in Mexico during pre-Colonial times. To address this disparity,
we have conducted isotopic and genetic analyses on turkey remains from ancient Maya archaeological sites to evaluate: 1) when and where non-local
domestic turkeys (Meleagris gallopavo) were first introduced to and adopted by the ancient Maya, 2) whether the ancient Maya also reared captive or tame
populations of the local ocellated turkey (Meleagris ocellata), and 3) the utility of stable isotope ratios to distinguish between wild and managed turkey
populations. Our results suggest isolated early (pre-A.D. 1000) introductions of turkeys to the Maya region. We further conclude that wild and
managed/domesticated turkeys maintained distinct diets that may be determined through light stable isotope analysis.
Thornton, Erin [235] see Phillips, Lori
Thress, Jessica [138] see Tankersley, Kenneth
Throgmorton, Kellam (Binghamton University)
[65]              Estimating the Scale of Social Groups in the Ancient Southwest, A.D. 650–900
The scale of social groups (such as households, lineages, moieties, factions, and clans) can have a profound effect on the development of political
hierarchies. The household is an important building block of larger sociopolitical formations. Similarly, the village is theorized as an important political entity
that is sometimes characterized by unequal power relations among individuals and groups. In this poster, I explore the scale of households, the
architectural spaces they inhabited, and how these spaces were organized into different kinds of villages in the ancient U.S. southwest. My evidence is
drawn from rock art depicting social groups, (the Procession Panel at Comb Ridge, UT) and architecture (villages built between A.D. 750–900 in the
Central Mesa Verde region). I argue that a focus on average sizes and social integration has overlooked the importance of disparities in scale and social
difference in early village societies, which are important factors in the development of inequalities and differential access to power.
Thrower, Alexandra [216] see Follensbee, Billie
Thunen, Robert
[213]             Fort Caroline’s Legacy: Surveying for a Missing Fort
This paper summarizes the history and archaeology of Fort Caroline, a French outpost established in North Florida in 1564, then captured and occupied by
the Spanish who renamed it Fort San Mateo. To date only one French artifact has been identifed for the 16th century time period and it was recovered from
a dredge spoil pile along the river. Several archaeological surveys have been undertaken both within National Park property and on adjacent private
property along the south bank of the St. Johns River. Survey results have identified a number of prehistoric and historic sites but no evidence for the fort,
leading some to suggest that the fort was located on a river system to the north of the St. Johns. Currently, we are examining new locations on the St.
Johns River based on environmental data and Spanish documents.
[213]             Chair
Thurber, Hali (University of Maryland) and Steven Wernke (Vanderbilt)
[281]             A Network Analysis of Embedded Pathways at Mawchu Llacta, Perú (1591–1617 C.E.)
This paper investigates the occupation of a planned 16th century Spanish colonial resettlement named Santa Cruz de Tute, hereafter referred to as
Mawchu Llacta. My analysis incorporates data compiled for the Proyecto Arqueológico Tuti Antiguo (PATA), with a particular focus on colonial census
records from 1591, 1604, and 1617, which detail land tenure and livestock holdings. I argue that the construction of a computer-based representation of
pathways in ArcGIS platform contributes to the delimiting of an historical and ecological context in which cultural activity is dialectically engaged in the
transformation of an environment over time. Drawing on historical ecology, I demonstrate that the physical pathways embedded in the landscape are a
product of human-environment relations, and that they reveal tangible evidence of a sustained use of land over time from a space of habitation to a space
of subsistence.
Thurston, T. L. (SUNY Buffalo)
[75]              A Question of Place: Economies and Intimacies in Early Sweden’s Smallest Upland Communities
Can we understand the connections between the state, farming economies, and the lived experience of smallholders in past societies? Using
archaeological examples from the smallest smallholdings—crofts on marginal lands in northern Europe—the view of land as a rare, precious, and highly
managed resource is examined. Despite the still-pervasive materialist notion that smallholders are passive mechanisms with shortsighted, self-defeating
land management strategies, anthropologists have repeatedly demonstrated that many similar pastoral commons are carefully managed for the long term,
providing high consumable yields and high income for the state. Furthermore, can we ‘populate’ the past of smallholder communities to understand their
real role in the civic and social life of the state? Curing the materialist notion of the machinelike peasant requires examination of the real-life impacts of hard
work, marginality, and government demands through archaeological and documentary data. This can unite the fact that the crofts, as an aggregate whole,
were vital to a healthy state economy with the understanding that they also hold traces of a community life that was rich with organizational skills but also
personal joy and crisis.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               444
Tica, Cristina (University of Nevada Las Vegas)
[24]             Across the River: Romanized Barbarians and Barbarized Romans on the edge of the Empire. Bioarchaeology of Romania in Late Antiquity
                 (300–600 C.E.)
The goal of this research project is to examine differences in overall health between two groups that have been characterized in the literature as Romans
and “barbarians.” The research questions addressed using skeletal remains are about how the daily life of people under Roman-Byzantine control
compared to that of their neighbors, the “barbarians” to the north. Comparing two contemporaneous populations from the territory of modern Romania—
and dating to the 4th-6th centuries CE, the study will examine health status and physical activity levels. One collection comes from the territory under
Roman-Byzantine control, the site of Ibida (Slava Rusă) from the Roman province of Scythia Minor, and the other originates from the Târgşor site, located
to the north of the Danube frontier, in what was considered the “barbaricum.” This study seeks to explore whether these labels given to groups of people
affected them differentially. Separated by a definite frontier, the Danube River, meant to (at least ideologically) segregate them to their divided worlds,
these populations might have been more interconnected than the carefully promulgated imperial doctrine would have us believe. Their bones, as first-hand
witnesses to their lifestyles, will help elucidate the degree of similarity or difference their existence actually entailed.
[24]             Chair
Tierney, Aisling (University of Bristol)
[280]            Discoveries in Hatteras: Embedding Sustainability Thinking into Community Engagement
In 2015, University of Bristol students elected to join a sustainability education pilot project run in conjunction with the Croatoan Archaeology Society. The
project was embedded into existing excavations at the early contact Native American site on Hatteras Island, Outer Banks, North Carolina. It focused on
the larger environment, culture and ecosystems of the region and how they were affected by cultural exchange and the introduction of new technologies
from the seventeenth century. Students designed and delivered a number of short interactive learning sessions for the local community and school
children. The former was delivered within community engagement events co-organized by the students. The latter shaped University research learning for
a younger audience, all within an archaeological context involving hands-on learning. Through learning, reflection and action, students became co-creators
of their own learning. This project serves as an example of engaged research as it works with the potential users of the research, where local knowledge is
valued and incorporated into academic research. By valuing local expertise and inviting participation, public engagement opportunities are enhanced. This
paper will explain the three complimentary elements employed successfully within the sustainability education project: framing learning and reflection;
sharing and engaging; and inviting knowledge.
[280]            Chair
Tifental, Emilia (University of Montana), Anna Marie Prentiss (University of Montana) and Meradeth Snow (University of Montana)
[185]            The Bridge River Dogs: A Comprehensive Interpretation of aDNA and Stable Isotopes Analysis Obtained from Dog Remains
Excavations at the Bridge River site have been on-going since 2003, increasing our understanding of the communities that inhabited the Middle Fraser
Canyon, British Columbia, over 1,000 years ago. The most recent excavation at Housepit 54 in the summer of 2014 supplied further data regarding
relationships between people and their dogs. Dogs are well documented in the Middle Fraser Canyon through both archaeological excavations and
traditional knowledge. A household's possession of a dog has been linked to other prestigious materials, and therefore been interpreted as an indicator of
inter-household wealth and status. The present study was aimed at further investigation of the dog remains and the lives of the individuals that kept them.
Ancient DNA analysis was conducted on a variety of dog remains from different occupations from Housepits 11, 16, 20, 24, and 54. Comprehensive stable
isotopes analysis of the same samples, with the addition of corresponding faunal remains for dietary comparison, was also completed. The study revealed
further evidence on the complex nature of the socieo-economic system and how it evolved in response to a changing environment at Bridge River.
Timpany, Scott [210] see Mainland, Ingrid
Todd, Lawrence [22] see Kappelman, John
Todd, Carrie and Gabrielle Vail
[92]             Weaving Technologies and Textile Production: A Case Study from the Northern Maya Lowlands
Ethnohistoric sources point to the importance of textile production in the northern Maya lowlands in the years immediately preceding and following the
Spanish conquest. Archaeological evidence of textiles and their creation comes from a variety of sources, including fragments of cloth recovered from the
Sacred Cenote at Chichén Itzá; spindle whorls found in domestic and ceremonial contexts at Chichén Itzá, the nearby cave site of Balankanche’, and other
archaeological sites in the vicinity; and almanacs concerning the making of cloth recorded in the Maya screenfold codices. This poster examines these
interrelated lines of evidence to develop a picture of prehispanic Maya textile manufacture in the northern region, focusing on questions such as gendered
facets of production, quotidian versus ritual aspects of the production process, and what weaving and associated tasks tell us about state-level versus
agrarian ideologies.
Todd, Brenda (National Park Service)
[186]            Discussant
Todd, Lawrence (GRSLE) and Kyle Wright (Shoshone National Forest)
[267]            A CLG in the Wilderness: Cooperative Local Preservation in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem
The Shoshone National Forest (Northwestern Wyoming) encompasses some of the most remote, inaccessible landscapes in the continental United States
with 56% (1.4 million acres) designated Wilderness. Documenting, researching, and managing heritage resources in these Wilderness areas provides
special challenges. A fundamental issue is that little basic archaeological inventory has been conducted and working in the area is logistically difficult. Over
the last several years, a partnership between the Park County Historic Preservation Commission (PCHPC), a local certified local government (CLG) entity
and the Forest has focused on developing cooperative approaches for addressing the impacts of wild land fire, limited law enforcement presence, and a
wide spread public perception that artifact theft in the back country will go un-noticed. By accessing a number of funding sources and extensive volunteer
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              445
commitment, the PCHPC completed 30-40 days of Wilderness fieldwork a year for the last five years. Of fundamental importance has been the
unambiguous documentation that these remote landscapes contain a very rich and complex archaeological record in both the montane and alpine zones.
While management of contemporary Wilderness settings focuses on humans as temporary visitors, the prehistoric archaeological record demonstrates that
in the past, human land use was much less transient.
Toizumi, Takeji [173] see Takamiya, Hiroto
Tokovinine, Alexandre (Peabody Museum, Harvard University)
[59]             “Bundling the Sticks”: Tallies in Classic Maya Inscriptions
This presentation addresses a set of references to “sticks” in Classic Maya inscriptions, which have been traditionally interpreted as weapons. The
available contexts, however, indicate that “sticks” were involved in tribute payment transactions. Although there is no archaeological evidence of these
presumably perishable wooden items, the author highlights some visual and material data that support the use of tallies by the Maya. The discussion then
centers on less straightforward textual contexts of “sticks” and the implications of the tally hypothesis for our understanding of Classic Maya accounting
practices.
[158]            Discussant
Tokovinine, Alexandre [212] see McNeil, Cameron
Tomas, Helena
[257]            Following the Early Maritime Routes from the Adriatic to Greece
During Late Bronze Age it was not unusual to find objects of Mycenaean origin at any part of eastern and central Mediterranean. The only area that seems
to have been omitted from Mycenaean naval routes was the eastern Adriatic coast and its hinterland. However, during earlier times that coast was not as
marginal to the Aegean world. The period in question was Early Bronze Age when Cetina Culture saw its birth in the valley of the eponymous river in the
hinterland of the eastern Adriatic coast. The pottery typical of the Cetina Culture subsequently spread to the Italian and northern Adriatic coasts, central
Balkan Peninsula, Albania, and the Aegean. It is fairly safe to suggest that such a wide radius of pottery dissemination was a product of an economic
exchange. Bronze objects discovered in the Cetina tumuli leads us to conclude that metal was obtained through trade, and that the Cetina people
obviously traded their pottery (or its contents) for metal. The distribution of the Aegean sites with imported Cetina pottery suggests that they lay along a
route by which the Cetina people travelled towards Aegean sources of raw materials, perhaps even towards the Laurion mine itself.
Tomaskova, Silvia (UNC Chapel Hill)
[248]            Discussant
Tomasto Cagigao, Elsa [99] see Muro, Luis
Tomczyk, Weronika (University of Warsaw)
[205]            Animal Exploitation at Castillo de Huarmey Site, Northern Coast of Peru: The Case of South American Camelids
 The Castillo de Huarmey archaeological expedition has been working since 2010 and so far, faunal remains from 3 different contexts were analyzed.
Although the zooarchaeological analysis is still not completed, the importance of South American Camelids seems to be significant. In all of the contexts,
remains of these species predominated. Formative settlement delivered small assemblage, but with high numbers of consumption patterns. Dated for Early
Intermediate Period and Middle Horizon palatial complex contained few complete skeletons of camelids' sacrifices, however they were very poorly
preserved. The upper layers of main Wari elite mausoleum were filled with a plethora of animal sacrifices. Other species remains such as sea lion (Otaria
flavescens), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) or condor (Vultur gryphus) were encountered, but they represented mostly single offerings, not as
abundant as camelids. This ratio could suggest the increasing of camelids importance among the time and prevalence of their exploitation at this part of
North Peruvian Coast.
Tomka, Marybeth (TARL, University of Texas at Austin) and Jonathan Jarvis (TARL, University of Texas at Austin)
[265]            Texas Archeological Research Laboratory: Everything in Texas is Bigger
The Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) was formally established at the University of Texas in 1963 to preserve an ever growing
accumulation of records and collections documenting the unique history and prehistory of Texas for research, teaching and public interest. Acquisition of
the collections and archive began ca. 1918. University excavations under the Works Projects Administration, and later the federal River Basins Survey
salvage program for sites impacted by dams and reservoir construction greatly expanded the records and collections. Today, work done by Cultural
Resource Management archeologists continues to add to the collections and refine our understanding of Texas archeology.
Interconnected with TARL’s long history is the specter of our legacy collections. In order to draw more researchers to our collections we have embarked
on a multi-year plan of prioritization and rehabilitation of our most highly regarded holdings. TARL’s holdings document the history of archeological
research in Texas and the archeologists that founded Texas archeology; revitalization of these collections can ultimately create a better and more complete
picture of the cultural landscape. The process has begun to attract volunteer labor to rehabilitate collections, update our collections care, and digitize the
massive amount of paper data.
Tomkins, Peter [79] see Vandam, Ralf
Toney, Joshua (Garcia and Associates)
[23]             Traces of Carib Ancestors: The Incised and Punctate Horizon Style in Eastern Amazonia
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                446
The Incised and Punctate Horizon style is a widespread late prehistoric ceramic series known throughout Eastern Amazonia. A variety of subseries are
known from coastal and highland Columbia, coastal Venezuela, the Orinoco, the Antilles, the Guianas, the Southern Amazon, and the Lower Amazon,
including Santarém. The Incised and Punctate horizon style may represent a second wave of Carib-speaking chiefdoms spreading throughout the tropical
lowlands between A.D. 1000–1500. This paper presents evidence from the Southern Amazon, where Incised and Punctate ceramics are present at several
late prehistoric sites along southern portions of the Xingu River, known locally as the Upper Xingu. Various styles are found among Upper Xingu ceramics
similar in decoration to those from areas as close as Santarém and as far as Lake Valencia. Similar technological attributes associated with the spread of
the Incised and Punctate horizon are also present in Upper Xingu ceramics including the use of sponge-spicule temper. Finally, the presence of Carib-
speakers in the Upper Xingu, possibly associated with specific late prehistoric settlements and Incised and Punctate ceramics, provides some evidence for
late Carib movement into the region and their possible association with the Incised and Punctate Horizon style.
Toney, Elizabeth (Gila National Forest, Silver City Ranger District) and Marilyn Markel (Aldo Leopold High School)
[267]             The Dragonfly Petroglyph Site: A Teaching Place for Us All
The dragonfly is a subject of intrigue around the world and many different cultures have ascribed unique meanings to its behaviors. The Dragonfly
petroglyph site located on the Gila National Forest represents an interesting teaching place for cultural preservation and traditional values and beliefs. It
also demonstrates the collaborative opportunities for the interpretation of this special place. Collaborative efforts between the Gila National Forest, Aldo
Leopold High School, New Mexico SiteWatch, and representatives from the Zuni Cultural Resource Advisory Team have begun to develop interpretive
signage at the Dragonfly Petroglyph site in celebration of the 50th anniversary of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA).
Toohey, Jason (University of Wyoming)
[102]             Initial Investigations at the Multicomponent Cajamarca Site of Callacpuma
Here I present the results of an initial season of fieldwork at the multicomponent Cajamarca site of Callacpuma (Qayaqpuma). Cerro Callacpuma is a large
site located along the northeastern edge of the Cajamarca basin. The multicomponent site encompasses a number of architectural and other spatial zones,
arrayed along the 2.5 km spine of the ridge and on its north and south slopes. Initial fieldwork focused on survey and mapping of the architectural core of
the site, located along the Inca trunk road, test excavation within the site’s cave complex and architectural zones, and systematic survey and recording of a
sample of the site’s extensive corpus of rock art. Results indicate the presence of a large site area that was occupied and utilized at least periodically from
Late Huacaloma (~500 B.C.E.) through to the Colonial Period (~AD 1550) with a possible earlier archaic component associated with the rock art.
[102]             Chair
Topic, John (Trent University)
[56]              Discussant
Tormey, Blair [187] see Martin, Paul
Torres, Paola [26] see Demarest, Arthur
Torres, Josh (National Park Service) and Johshua Torres (National Park Service)
[50]              Contextualizing Tibes and the Local Landscape
This paper provides archaeological evidence for the local landscape surrounding the Ceremonial Center of Tibes (ca. 500 and 1300 A.D.) on the south-
central coast of Puerto Rico. Settlements identified during recent archaeological survey of the micro-region surrounding the site, in conjunction with
archaeological data from well excavated sites in the area, is presented to spatially and temporally contextualize recent findings at Tibes. Settlement
variability is characterized and local temporal associations established through an examination of vessel assemblages from adjacent settlements.
Ultimately, this paper presents a dynamic picture of the ceramic age community that supported Tibes and offers insight and context for forthcoming
research.
Torres Orjuela, Saul [50] see Archila Montanez, Sonia
Torres-Estévez, M. Fabiola [169] see Pérez-Roldán, Gilberto
Torvinen, Andrea (Arizona State University)
[41]              Petrographic Analysis of Decorated Ceramics from La Quemada, Zacatecas, Mexico
The hilltop center of La Quemada in the Malpaso Valley of Zacatecas, Mexico, was the focal point of one of several polities that developed along the
northern frontier of Mesoamerica during the Epiclassic Period (A.D. 500–900). Northern frontier polities are known to have interacted due to their shared
material culture (i.e., patio-banquette complexes, colonnaded halls, and the exchange of obsidian and shell products), but the mechanism(s) of this
interaction are not fully understood. Ceramic wares, such as red-on-buff, incised-engraved, and resist, are widely distributed across the northern frontier
and provide a means of analyzing past social networks. Were decorated ceramics recovered from La Quemada local variations of a shared regional
ideology or were some or all produced in other polities and consumed by La Quemada residents? This poster begins to answer this question by reporting
on a petrographic analysis of decorated ceramics recovered from La Quemada. The results of the analysis include the description of a series of paste
groups of likely local or, in the case of the rare decorated types, possibly nonlocal origin. Ultimately, the proportion and distribution of nonlocal ceramics
within La Quemada will help to establish one component of the northern frontier social network.
[41]              Chair
Toussaint, Mark (University of Nevada Las Vegas) and Piotr Wlodarczak (Polish Academy of Sciences, Institute of Archaeolo)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              447
[24]              Temporal and Spatial Liminality in Early Bronze Age Central Europe: A Bioarchaeological Analysis of a Mierzanowice Culture Cemetery
The cemetery at Szarbia in southeastern Poland is a Mierzanowice culture cemetery, from which 45 individuals have been excavated. The skeletal remains
from this site had yet to be examined or published prior to this study. The Mierzanowice culture conforms to the “Borderlands” theme well in terms of its
many modes of liminality. It is temporally liminal in that it is an Early Bronze Age culture, transitional between Late Neolithic and Bronze Age paradigms. It
is culturally liminal in that modes of subsistence typically associated with the Late Neolithic and, later, the Bronze Age are both practiced by this culture at
different points in time; furthermore, the increased social stratification typically associated with the Bronze Age does not seem to appear in the
Mierzanowice culture to the same degree as its contemporaries. It is also spatially liminal, existing between and on the periphery of several dominant
Bronze Age paradigms—e.g., Únětice to the west and Otomani-Füzesabony to the south. This bioarchaeological study examined the biological realities of
Mierzanowice liminality; preliminary analyses find overall rates of disease and stress indicators to be consistent with Late Neolithic cultures in the region,
but rates of trauma caused by interpersonal violence to be lower.
Tox, Carlos Efrain [4] see Rivas, Alexander
Toya, Christopher [266] see Edgar, Heather
Toyne, Jennifer Marla (University of Central Florida) and Nathan Esplin (University of Central Florida)
[207]             Analyzing Skeletal Manifestations of Pre-Columbian Tuberculosis in the Northeastern highlands of Peru
The current understanding of Pre-Columbian tuberculosis is unclear, and in several geographic areas very little is known. To date most knowledge of
ancient tuberculosis comes from isolated case studies. These studies are informative as they consider the individual in question but they offer little insight
into the demographic or social impact of tuberculosis. This population-based study describes osteological lesions consistent with possible tuberculosis in
15 individual skeletons excavated from the Chachapoya site of Kuelap, Amazonas, in the northeastern highlands of Peru. Evidence of advanced spinal
tuberculosis is present in several individuals, and lytic lesions of the lower lumbar vertebra and sacroiliac and sternomanubrial joints are evident in nearly
every case. Both adult males (9.7 percent) and females (13.8 percent) presented skeletal lesions but there was only one juvenile identified. With growing
scholarship in the Chachapoyas region it is significant to record so many cases at Kuelap interred in different burial contexts, but this sample also clearly
indicates tuberculosis was present both before and after Inca occupation. Given that skeletal tuberculosis is only involved in a few percent of tuberculosis
cases, the number and pronounced degree of skeletal pathology present suggest that tuberculosis likely had a significant impact on Chachapoya health.
Trabert, Sarah (University of Oklahoma), Sunday Eiselt (Southern Methodist University), David Hill (Metropolitan State University of Denver),
Jeffrey Ferguson (University of Missouri Research Reactor) and Margaret Beck (University of Iowa)
[123]             Characterizing Micaceous Vessels on the Central High Plains
Ceramic vessels made from micaceous materials appear at many Protohistoric Dismal River (Ancestral Apache; A.D. 1600–1750) sites in Kansas,
Nebraska, Colorado, and Wyoming. Dismal River groups were participants in large social and economic exchange networks linking them to other peoples
on the Plains and U.S. southwest. Previous scholars considered the micaceous pottery recovered from these Central High Plains sites as evidence of
interaction with northern Rio Grande pueblos and assumed that all micaceous ceramics originated in northern New Mexico. Our recent analyses, including
macroscopic evaluation combined with petrography and neutron activation analyses, indicate that only a small number of Dismal River micaceous
ceramics are derived from New Mexico clays. The remaining ceramics were likely manufactured using materials available on the High Plains, specifically in
Colorado and Wyoming. These new data provide potential insights into Dismal River social networks and seasonal mobility patterns as people traveled
between the Western and Central Plains to acquire resources.
Trachman, Rissa (Elon University)
[93]              Investigations at the Site of Dos Hombres and its Hinterlands: A Multiscale Perspective of Ongoing Investigations
Ongoing investigations at the site of Dos Hombres are being conducted towards a multiscale perspective. Investigations in the hinterlands of Dos
Hombres have revealed much about household and community organization there based on architectural, material culture, and water management feature
remains. Evidence in the civic ceremonial center of Dos Hombres is being gathered towards a greater understanding of its role economically in the region,
its occupation history, and socio-political organization. The goal is to articulate these data in order to have a holistic understanding of the ancient Maya at
Dos Hombres and northwestern Belize. The current investigations at Dos Hombres are focused in the northern plaza, a very public space that could be
assumed to have been a place of commerce, public ritual and sacred space.
Traslaviña, Teddy Abel [174] see Wernke, Steven
Tratebas, Alice (Bureau of Land Management)
[175]             Landscape, Rock Art, and Ceremonial Game Drives
Early Hunting petroglyphs in a Black Hills canyon depict hunting situations and ceremonies. A loop-line motif, that is unique to this rock art tradition,
signifies drive lines and trap structures. Loop-lines occur only at canyon locations that are appropriate settings for trap structures. The canyon starts on
the margin of a basin that provides good grazing. Entry to the canyon is funnel-shaped like the V-shaped wings of hunting traps. Recent discovery of a
cairn drive line that utilizes another bedrock gap leading out of the grassy basin reinforces the interpretation of the rock art canyon as a trap location.
Travaly, Sarah E [197] see Matney, Timothy
Travassos , Daiana [263] see Iriarte, Jose
Traxler, Loa (University of New Mexico)
[58]              A New Bak’tun—Maya Archaeology, Stewardship and Exhibitions Beyond 2012
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               448
Mindful stewardship of cultural heritage is a collaborative and holistic effort, often carried out in changing social contexts and facing steep challenges. As
archaeologists, we communicate our understanding of the past and the broad implications of archaeological research to the diverse publics that we serve.
Drawing from recent work to organize and present the "Maya 2012: Lords of Time" exhibition, this presentation will highlight approaches taken to
contextualize pre-Columbian Maya cultural traditions and to engaging diverse communities in presenting Maya heritage for modern audiences.
[212]             Discussant
Trein, Debora (University of Texas at Austin)
[27]              Geoarchaeology at La Milpa, Belize: An Ancient Maya Community and Its Temple
This paper discusses the preliminary results of geochemical and micromorphological analysis of sediments at Structure 3, a monumental temple structure
at the site of La Milpa, northwest Belize. This analysis forms part of a project that aims to examine the impact of a community in shaping the functions of
monumental architecture. Artifact and architectural evidence gathered at Structure 3 have indicated that the Late Classic period (550–850 C.E.) constituted
a time of intense access and use of the areas surrounding the temple structure. Nevertheless, this dataset was found to be insufficiently fine-grained to
enable the identification of specific types of activities, necessary in understanding how Structure 3 functioned in relation to its community. In order to
identify and differentiate between discreet activity areas geochemical characterization of sediments through ICP-MS and ICP-AES, and sediment
micromorphology were employed in 130 loose sediment and 20 sediment core samples taken from and around Structure 3. Both these techniques are
considered to be highly successful in the study of activity areas in the archaeological record, but have had a relatively limited history of application in the
Maya Lowlands.
Treloar, James and David Chicoine
[56]              Early Horizon Warfare and Defensive Architecture in the Lower Nepeña Valley, Coastal Ancash
Results of systematic surface surveys and excavations at Early Horizon sites in the lower Nepeña Valley indicate the increased importance of armed
conflicts and intercommunity violence, especially during the second half of the first millennium B.C. Although scholars agree that warfare likely played a
major role in shaping local sociopolitical and ritual landscapes during the Early Horizon, little is known about the nature of warfare and associated
defensive strategies in Nepeña. This paper presents results of recent fieldwork carried out at the complexes of Caylán, Samanco, and Huambacho. Data
from pedestrian surveys and excavations are combined to analyzed the architectural and spatial features of defensive structures. Spatial data are analyzed
using Geographic Information Systems (GIS) tools to shed light on the scale and intensity of Early Horizon conflicts, the type of military strategies
deployed, and the potential coordination of defense between coastal settlements.
Tremayne, Andrew (National Park Service)
[217]             Maritime Resource Intensification and Lithic Technological Organization at Iyatayet, Cape Denbigh, Alaska
One of J.L. Giddings’ most important contributions to Arctic archaeology was the discovery and definition of the archaeological cultures known as the
Denbigh Flint complex and Norton tradition from the stratified Iyatayet site. There, Giddings produced a descriptive analysis of each culture's tool forms and
speculated on their lifeways. His work, however, was designed primarily to answer typological questions rather than processual or adaptive ones. Over the
past seventy years, few studies revisited Iyatayet to verify Giddings’ results or address new questions. One of the only known stratified coastal sites,
Iyatayet remains an excellent case for understanding the development of Arctic maritime adaptations. This paper discusses recent re-analyses of Iyatayet's
Norton and Denbigh stone tool collections, coupled with recently excavated samples, undertaken to test Giddings’ findings. Many of his original
observations were confirmed, but I take the evidence further by applying models from foraging theory to explain relationships between changing
technological organization and subsistence. Changes through time in technological design do not necessarily reflect hunting capabilities, but rather are
adaptive features related to resource intensification and mobility, as Giddings clearly understood.
Triadan, Daniela (University of Arizona) and Takeshi Inomata (University of Arizona)
[59]              Maya Economic Organization and Power: Elite Households at Aguateca
The rich data from elite households at the Classic site of Aguateca indicate that each household was a relatively autonomous economic unit of production
and consumption of staples and utilitarian goods. While individual households were also specializing in the production of a variety of prestige items, there is
little evidence for central control of any sphere of the economy by the royal court or elites. Individual households also seem to have maintained their own
long-distance relationships with other elites from different areas. One intriguing question is why Maya elites, in apparent contrast to elites of complex
societies in other parts of the world, did not seem to have developed and used a centralized economy as a means of power and political control. The
unique data from Aguateca elite households contributes to a better understanding of Classic Maya economic organization.
Tricarico, Anthony (University of South Florida), E. Christian Wells (University of South Florida), Georgia Fox (California State University, Chico)
and Reginald Murphy (The National Parks Authority of Antigua)
[120]             Geomorphological Assessment of Plantation Farmscapes in Antigua, West Indies
Geomorphological survey and analysis of anthropogenically modified soils surrounding the Betty’s Hope Plantation in Antigua, West Indies, sought to
model the impacts of colonial farming on local landforms. Sugarcane was extensively farmed across the island from the mid-seventeenth century until
independence from Great Britain in 1981. Physical and chemical analysis of subsurface soils and sediments was conducted to understand the landscape
legacies of British colonialism on landscape modification. This work is concerned with differentiating and modeling erosion and landscape degradation
resulting from intensive agriculture. Geomorphological survey and analysis at Betty’s Hope is ongoing, with an ultimate goal of providing a complete picture
of land degradation island-wide and across different time scales, both ancient and historic. This project contributes to archaeological research on post-
abandonment degradation of a built landscape, while also considering the cumulative impacts to modern farmers.
Tringham, Ruth [261] see Ashley, Michael
Triozzi, Nicholas
[6]               All Methods, no Madness: Making Sense of Burial Orientations using GIS
Mapping the excavations at the Fallen Tree Mortuary Complex, St. Catherines Island, GA, effectively consolidated nearly sixty burials and hundreds of
features into a cohesive view of the site. Similarity of burial orientation and bodily positioning jumps out immediately. At a glance the norm is that
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               449
individuals face east with their heads to the south. Examining this pattern more closely called for a more advanced utilization of GIS. Techniques used to
quantify burial orientation of the large number of individuals at Fallen Tree were successfully used on secondary sources depicting maps of mortuary sites.
In this poster a model workflow is presented to benefit both novice and advanced ArcGIS users with access to either primary or secondary data.
Additionally, access to a customizable toolbox that consolidates steps in the workflow is made available for download.
Trocolli, Ruth (D.C. City Archaeologist) and Mia Carey (Dept. of Anthropology, University of Florida)
[90]             Public Archaeology in the Nation’s Capital: The Yarrow Mamout Project
A unique project in Washington, D.C., was initiated by residents when redevelopment threatened a property once owned by Yarrow Mamout. Freed in
1797, Yarrow was literate in Arabic when he was enslaved in west Africa. He purchased a Georgetown lot in 1800 and upon his death was said to be
buried in his garden. While many Georgetown residents at the time were former slaves, Yarrow stands out only because his portrait was painted twice. As
with most formerly enslaved property owners, he left only a trace in the documentary record. Archaeology is the only avenue for directly accessing more
tangible evidence with which to understand his life story. The D.C. Historic Preservation Office is sponsoring a public archaeology project and utilizing
donated resources to conduct excavations on Yarrow’s former property. The efforts unite archaeologists, neighbors, K-12 educators, local universities, the
Muslim community, historic preservationists, and a host of volunteers.
Troncoso, Andres
[175]            Animating Sacred Landscapes through Making Rock Art
To understand the relationships among rock art and ritual landscapes needs recognize how the process of making engaged in a set of spatial and social
practices. These practices create a field of relationships that define the rituality of rock art as well as the sacredness of landscapes. In this paper, we
discuss this process in a prehispanic agrarian community of Central North Chile. We propose the process of making rock art related to the animation of a
world constituted by a web of non-human and human actants through the creation of central and sacred places in the landscape. This idea of central
places was experienced and constituted by a specific articulation of spatial practices that located petroglyph far away of residential sites but in mediation
points between the quotidian and non-quotidian landscapes. The sacredness of this central didn't rest only in the characteristics of the images, or in a
particular geomorphological attribute of that point. Its sacredness was the result of a complex web of relationships among space, rocks, social practices,
images and movements along the landscape. This research has granted by FONDECYT 1110125 & 1150776
[259]            Chair
Troncoso, Andres [259] see Salazar, Diego
Troufflard, Joanna (University of Florida)
[263]            Historical Ecology of Landscape Transformations and Ceramic Industries at the Site of Cedro (Lower Tapajós) from Pre-Colonial to
                 Colonial Times
The presence of demographically dense indigenous societies in the Lower Tapajós River during A.D. 900–1600 is visible in the present day’s landscape
through the existence of Amazonian Dark Earth (ADE), earthworks, and a distinctive ceramic industry. As demonstrated by recent archaeological surveys,
landscape transformations and ceramic assemblages associated to the Tapajó chiefdom are widespread at the regional scale and attest to common
cultural practices. Although these archaeological sites are found in diverse geographical settings, most of the archaeological research has focused on the
site of Santarém, located at the mouth of the Tapajós River and interpreted as the “capital” of the Tapajó chiefdom. This paper aims to present a study of
the Cedro site, located on the Belterra plateau (30 km away from the mouth of the Tapajós River) as a regionally significant socio-political center where
indigenous people lived and gathered for large-scale ceremonies. For this purpose, it uses ethnohistorical and archaeological data within a historical
ecology framework that emphasizes a long-term perspective. In the site of Cedro there are significant landscape transformations and diversity in ceramic
industries that could call into question the hegemony of the site of Santarém as the exclusive socio-political center of the Tapajó chiefdom.
Trudel, Stephanie [29] see Lewarch, Dennis
Truex, Lise (University of Chicago)
[143]            Beyond the Palace Walls: Household Perspectives on Living and Working in Late 3rd Millennium B.C. Tell Asmar, Iraq (Ancient Eshnunna)
Past studies contextualizing residential neighborhoods within the socioeconomic, political, and geographic organization of early historic urban settlements
in ancient southern Mesopotamia have concentrated heavily on architecture and ancient textual evidence to document diachronic changes in household
fortunes. As part of a Ph.D. dissertation project, this investigation of households from the late third millennium B.C. levels of the Private Houses residential
area at urban Tell Asmar (ancient Eshnunna, Iraq), reconstructs household economies for several houses across time using 1930s University of Chicago
Oriental Institute excavation data, but it relies to a greater extent on object and findspot data within houses, showing the value of using object data to
conduct archival household archaeology in early historic contexts where excavations yielded only a limited number of ancient texts after episodes of
looting. At least one elite house played a major economic role in the neighborhood across generations. Toward the end of the third millennium,
neighborhood reorganization through reconstruction and new construction of elite houses on the northern edge of the residential area coincided with
architectural reorganization of the adjacent Northern Palace and evidence connecting individuals and economic activities in high status households to
urban administration.
Trusler, Kate (University of Missouri)
[103]            Approaches to Understanding Skeletal Part Frequencies in Roman Assemblages
Since the 1950s, zooarchaeologists have noticed that the expected number of each skeletal element varied from the recovered frequencies. Determining
the reason for such variation is an important aspect of zooarchaeological research. Several approaches to understanding skeletal part frequencies are
current, including density mediated attrition and differential transport. One method of interpreting skeletal part frequencies that is underused in studies of
complex societies involves food utility indices. Food utility indices provide a framework for interpreting skeletal part frequencies based on the food (meat,
marrow and grease) associated with each element. Food utility can also be used as a proxy for economic value in complex societies. A food utility index for
cattle was created for this project and the site of Maasplein, Nijmegen is used as an example.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             450
Tryon, Christian (Harvard University)
[22]              Discussant
Tryon, Christian [177] see Ranhorn, Kathryn
Tsai, Howard (University of Michigan)
[102]             The "Coastal Cajamarca" Style Did Not Come from the Coast
The "Coastal Cajamarca" style of painted bowls was first documented by Disselhoff in the 1950s at the site of San Jose de Moro (Lower Jequetepeque
Valley, Peru). There are two competing hypotheses with regard to the origin of this ceramic style: (1) it originated from the coast or (2) it was produced in
the middle valley or chaupiyunga zone, an intermediate area between the coast and the highlands. In this paper I present evidence from the site of Las
Varas, located in the Middle Jequetepeque Valley, to support the second hypothesis—that the "Coastal Cajamarca" style in fact came from the
chaupiyunga zone. Identifying the correct "homeland" of this variant of Cajamarca pottery is vital for understanding coast-highland interaction in northern
Peru and provides a crucial first step for evaluating John Murra's vertical archipelago model of exchange and colonization as it pertains to the North Central
Andes.
Tsukamoto, Kenichiro (The Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (Aoyama Gakuin University))
[59]              A Discrepancy between Elite Office and Economic Status in the El Palmar Dynasty, Mexico
The identification of elite titles through epigraphic studies has raised new questions about the relationship between elite office and economic status. The
present study focuses on a social group referred to by the title lakam, which was detected in the inscriptions of a hieroglyphic stairway at the El Palmar
archaeological site. Our epigraphic studies revealed the involvement of lakam officials as emissaries in political alliances between El Palmar, Calakmul,
and Copán, suggesting that they held a relatively high political position. Nevertheless, archaeological data indicate that such political privilege with the
distant dynasties appears not to have been reflected in their economic status, a discrepancy that gives us a deeper understanding of the Classic Maya
political economy.
Tucker, Gregory (University of Michigan)
[33]              Moderator
Tucker, Bryan (Georgia Department of Natural Resources) and Jennifer Weber (Georgia Department of Natural Resources)
[213]             The Effects of Reenactment on Historic Battlefields: A Pilot Study from McLemore Cove, Georgia
Natural and historic resource managers are confronted with conflicting obligations and priorities; they must provide access to a resource while
simultaneously protecting the resource for future generations. This tension between use and preservation is apparent when members of the public want to
stage military reenactments on historic battlefields. Military reenactors are a passionate constituency who support battlefield preservation and volunteer
time and funds to preserve these resources. Many of these groups want to educate the public by reenacting a battle on the original site.
Though the National Park Service (NPS) has banned reenactments on NPS sites, no systemic studies have been conducted to investigate the effects
reenactments have on historic sites. To assess the impact of reenactment on historic sites, the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and New South
Associates, Inc. conducted a comparative metal detection survey before and after the 2013 Battle of Chickamauga reenactment at McLemore Cove,
Georgia. These results provide evidence that large-scale reenactment can negatively impact historic resources through the introduction of replica
materials, the introduction of new features and the potential damage to above ground features and the landscape and support the NPS ban on
reenactment in National Parks.
Tucker, Bryan [295] see Krigbaum, John
Tun Ayora, Gabriel [127] see Ringle, William
Tune, Jesse (Department of Anthropology, Fort Lewis College)
[159]             The Clovis-Cumberland-Dalton Succession: The Evolution of Behavioral Adaptations During the Pleistocene/Holocene Transition
Considerable debate has recently been focused on understanding the effects of the Younger Dryas on human behavioral adaptations throughout the
Northern Hemisphere. It has been proposed that adverse paleoecological conditions in southeastern North America triggered a decline and/or substantial
reorganization in human populations. The Tennessee Paleoindian biface data in the Paleoindian Database of the Americas is used to assess the evolution
of behavioral adaptations during the Pleistocene/Holocene Transition. These changes are considered in relation to regional paleoecological data. Patterns
in technological organization, landscape use, and toolstone selection do not support the hypothesis that climate changes during Younger Dryas adversely
affected human populations in the interior Southeast. An alternative hypothesis is proposed and contends that changes in behavioral adaptations were a
result of settling-in processes associated with initial regional colonization and increased regionalization throughout the Pleistocene/Holocene Transition.
Tune, Jesse [218] see Miller, D. Shane
Tung, Tiffiny [204] see Proctor, Terren
Tung, Tiffiny (Vanderbilt University, Department of Anthropology), Theresa Miller (Vanderbilt University, Department of Anthropology), Jessica
Oster (Vanderbilt University, Department of Earth & Envir) and Larisa DeSantis (Vanderbilt University, Department of Earth & Envir)
[205]             Evaluating the Utility of Using Stable Oxygen Isotope Analysis to Study Ancient Migration and Climate Reconstruction in the Ayacucho
                  Basin of Peru
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              451
This study examines whether oxygen isotope analysis can be used to study ancient human migration in the central, highland Andes of Peru (Ayacucho
Basin). Although strontium isotope analysis is a reliable way of exploring questions of migration, oxygen isotope analysis, which is significantly less
expensive, may offer preliminary insights regarding the possible presence of migrants at a site. This approach has not yet been used in the Ayacucho
Basin where the Wari empire was centered, so we explore its utility in this region of the Andes. We present oxygen isotope ratios from local streams and
rainwater from different seasons in the modern era, and from animal and human dentition that correspond to two temporal contexts at the site of Huari:
Terminal Wari (ca A.D. 1000–1100, N=34 humans) and Post-Wari (Late Intermediate Period, A.D. 1250–1400, N=26 humans). Results show that among
the 102 enamel carbonate samples from the 60 humans, the δ18OVPDB ranges from -10.32 to -6.82 and the mean δ18OVPDB=-8.9 (sd=.64). These
oxygen isotope values will be compared to those obtained from local modern water and archaeological fauna to evaluate their utility in establishing local
baseline values and in detecting whether any individuals might be non-local.
Turck, John (Geoarcheology Research Associates)
[253]             GIS and Remote Sensing in Archaeology: Jerry Kennedy's Influence on Large Scale Studies
The use of GIS and remote sensing for discerning patterns in past cultural phenomena has exploded in the last 15 years. It has moved beyond mere map-
making, to sophisticated analyses (incorporating aspects such as spatial statistics, regional archaeological data, LiDAR data, and 3-D representations) that
synthesize large and diverse datasets to better understand the past. This is especially true when reconstructing human settlement patterns to understand
the nature of social change and the relationship between people and their environment. The research presented in this paper will highlight some of our
work where GIS and remote sensing analysis has helped us to better understand the complex patterns seen in the archaeological record. Our initial
introduction to GIS in archaeology can be credited solely to Jerry Kennedy, encouraging us to learn, and take full advantage of, this burgeoning field of
inquiry. This was just one of the many aspects of Jerry Kennedy's mentoring that helped us focus our studies, and transition from students to professionals
at the beginning of our academic careers.
[157]             Chair
Turck, John [157] see Thompson, Victor
Turcotte, Sari [204] see Walter, Tamra
Turner, Bethany [45] see Gagnon, Celeste
Turner, Daniel, Steven Meredith (Panamerican Consultants, Inc.) and Martha Dorland (Panamerican Consultants, Inc. )
[225]             Excavation of a Chickasaw Homestead in Tupelo
In March and April 2015, a Phase II cultural resources investigation was conducted to assess the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) eligibility of
the Webb Site (22LE516) in Tupelo, Mississippi. Excavations identified 36 cultural features, including the outlines of two Chickasaw houses and several
nearby clay-extraction pits, or okaakinafa'. Materials recovered from the site suggest a single-component occupation between A.D. 1680 and 1760. The
site lies near the eighteenth-century complex of settlements known as Chokkilissa' or "Old Town" and represents one of the few Chickasaw settlements
investigated using modern excavation standards. The apparent short-lived occupation of the site opens an opportunity for a detailed review of site
formation and material use in the volatile eighteenth century on Mississippi's Black Prairie.
Turner, Michelle (Binghamton University)
[228]             Chacoan Heights at Aztec Ruins
At the Chacoan outlier of Aztec Ruins in northern New Mexico, the unexcavated Aztec North great house is located on top of a river terrace overlooking the
broad Animas River Valley. Down below, but out of sight from Aztec North, are two other great houses. The builders of these three great houses enmeshed
them in a planned cultural landscape that reflects their cosmology and that intentionally reproduces a portion of the landscape at Chaco Canyon. Aztec
North differs from its fellow great houses in a number of ways, most significantly in its unusual adobe construction, but also in its terrace siting and broad
viewsheds. Research suggests that Aztec North, built around 1100 A.D., was the earliest great house at Aztec, but how did its construction and occupation
reflect the ambitions of new arrivals on this landscape, as well as their political and social relations with Chaco? Exploring the use of high places in greater
Chaco and drawing on my ongoing research on surface ceramics from this unexcavated site, my paper considers the significance of Aztec North as a high
place within the greater cultural and political landscape of Aztec Ruins and the Chacoan region.
Tuross, Noreen [223] see Bos, Kirsten
Twaroski, Melissa
[165]             Celebrating Partnerships in Preservation: The Southern Region of the U.S. Forest Service and the 50th Anniversary of the National Historic
                  Preservation Act
The Southern Region of the U.S. Forest Service encompasses fifteen national forests in fourteen southeastern states and Puerto Rico. For decades, the
important work of investigating and protecting significant cultural resources on these national forests has depended on partnerships with universities,
Native American tribes, and non-profit organizations. In celebration of the 50th anniversary of the National Historic Preservation Act, this presentation
highlights some of these key partnerships and important projects.
Tykot, Robert (U. of South Florida) and Andrea Vianello (United Kingdom)
[81]              Island Obsidian Distribution and Socioeconomic Patterns in Prehistoric Sicily and the South-Central Mediterranean
Sicily is located in between two small island sources of obsidian, Lipari and Pantelleria. Their use of obsidian starting in the Early Neolithic (ca. 6000–6500
B.C.) is well documented, but only over the last few years have intensive studies been done on the specific sources and subsources of artifact
assemblages from many museums and superintendencies. With the use of a portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) spectrometer, the specific source of
many hundreds of obsidian artifacts from sites in Sicily (in the areas of Palermo, Agrigento, Siracusa) and islands to its south (Malta, Gozo, Lampedusa,
Zembra) have been conducted.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  452
Lipari obsidian was the most extensively used in the central Mediterranean, beginning after volcanic formations at Gabellotto Gorge and Canneto Dentro
just before the Early Neolithic when animal and plant domesticates arrived and ceramic production also began. Lipari obsidian was immediately distributed
to the north, reaching as far as southern France and the northern Adriatic in Croatia. In contrast, obsidian from Pantelleria was regularly used in western
Sicily, on Malta and other islands to the south, and in Tunisia. Our extensive study now allows a clear interpretation of obsidian use and socioeconomic
changes over the neolithic and bronze age time periods.
[81]              Chair
Tykot, Robert [146] see Freund, Kyle
Tynan, Justine [149] see Parditka, Györgyi
Ubik, Emily [184] see Marston, John
Uchiyama, Junzo (World Heritage Center Division, Shizuoka Prefectural Government) and Christopher Gillam (South Carolina Institute of
Archaeology and Anthro)
[132]             Pottery, Shellmounds, and Monuments: Environmental Impacts and Landscape Management of Hunter-Gatherer-Fisher (HGF) in Jomon
                  Japan
The Jomon Period in Japan (ca. 16,500-3,000 B.P.) is one of the world’s earliest ceramic-making cultures. The Jomon sustained a hunter-gatherer-fisher
(HGF) economy for an extensive period of time until the introduction of the wet rice paddy system from the Asian continent. Three major factors
characterize the Jomon cultural landscape: pottery, shell mounds, and stone/wood monuments. This paper will discuss the roles these elements played in
the alteration of the landscape. First, despite the early emergence of pottery, ceramics dramatically increased in quantity and came into daily use only after
a sedentary lifestyle became widespread in the Early Holocene. As firing pottery requires substantial firewood, pottery uptake must have produced
considerable pressure on local environments, fostering a complex use of resources. Second, large-scale shell mounds followed the development of
pottery, probably functioning as landmarks to strengthen social bonds of local communities. Finally, stone/wood monuments were the last to appear, when
the Jomon society expanded into previously unused settings, such as alluvial flatlands and deep mountains. All of these are closely related to the
perception, management and alteration of the Jomon's hunter-gatherer-fisher environment and cultural landscape.
Ueda, Kaoru (Boston University)
[51]              Exotic or Familiar? : Exploring the Multi-directionality of Cultural Influence of Asian Porcelain in the late 17th- early 19th-century Dutch sites
                  in Banten, Indonesia
This paper explores the roles of Chinese and Japanese porcelain excavated at the Dutch East India Company forts built in the Sultanate of Banten, Java,
Indonesia and raises the questions of how to interpret Asian porcelain in European-related sites in Asia. The paper pays particular attention to the multi-
directionality of cross-cultural influence and the assumed exoticness of Asian porcelain to European consumers. In 1596, the first Dutch expedition in the
East Indies went to the Sultanate of Banten in search of a pepper-trading partner. Eventually, the Dutch colonized the indigenous population through
indirect rule at the beginning of the nineteenth-century. Dutch material culture in Banten, however, remained largely Asian, including Chinese porcelain in
this early stage of colonialism: the Dutch used Asian porcelain extensively, rather than importing European ware. Were the Dutch in Banten fascinated with
exoticness of Asian porcelain, or were they already familiar with Asian ceramics in the Netherlands before arriving in the East Indies? For the purpose of
interpreting archaeological records more finely, this paper suggests the importance of understanding the evolving and dynamic nature of Asian porcelain to
17th -19th-century consumers and its place in this increasingly connected world on a global scale.
[51]              Chair
Ugalde , Paula [62] see Osorio, Daniela
Ullah, Isaac (Arizona State University)
[72]              Traces Of Complexity: Connecting Model Output with Archaeological Reality
Simulation models are explicit descriptions of the components and interactions of a system, made dynamic in software. In archaeology, they are most often
used to conduct controlled experiments, in which key socio-ecological parameters are varied, and changes to system-level dynamics are observed over
time. An interesting emergent property of these kinds of experiments is that they produce a range of possible outcomes for any set of initial conditions.
Thus, rather than use simulations to explain particular case studies from the past, they are better suited to examine the dynamics of ancient systems in a
more general way. Models need to be parameterized and validated, however, and so *do* need to be connected to empirical data; a useful model must be
capable of producing the same *kinds* of patterns observed in the archaeological record (but not *only* these patterns). It is often difficult, however, to
connect model output to real data. In this presentation I draw upon research and modeling techniques being developed by the Mediterranean Landscape
Dynamics Project to explore ways of connecting the output of simulation models to archaeological “reality”. I will discuss best practices, and will show
examples from a variety of modeling case-studies.
Ullinger, Jaime [149] see Capece, Matthew
Ulloa Hung, Jorge (Postdoctoral Researcher ERC Synergy-NEXUS 1492) and Roberto Valcárcel Rojas (Postdoctoral Researcher ERC Synergy-
NEXUS 1492)
[220]             Migrations, Colonizations, Perisferies, and Historical Divides. An Analysis of the Construction and Deconstruction of the ¨Archaics¨ in Cuba
                  and Hispaniola
The diversity, complexity, and continuity of ¨archaics ¨ communities is one of the most recurrent themes in contemporary Caribbean archeology. Despite
this, the tradition of research on this phenomenon goes back more than 40 years in Cuba and La Española, prompting classifications and models under the
dominance of four basic theoretical approaches: colonization, difussion, evolution, and transculturation. This paper examines, discusses and compares the
treatment and management of archaeological data on these communities on both islands, and the impact of these approaches to create the so-called
archaic vs farmers historical divide; and homologies with another divide, pre-colonial vs colonial. It is de-construct and contextualize the essential features
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             453
of both divides as a result of handling of archaeological data that have generated ideas on marginalization and invisibility of indigenous population cores in
two different historical moments and result of various ¨colonizers processes¨. Aspects which in turn have become in creations of transformation prototyping
about the ¨archaic¨ indigenous societies.
Ulloa Hung , Jorge [220] see Valcarcel Rojas, Roberto
Umbelino, Cláudia, Francisco Francisco Curate (CIAS, University of Coimbra), Teresa Ferreira (Cencifor, University of Coimbra), Eugénia Cunha
(Cencifor, University of Coimbra) and Nuno Bicho (ICArEHB, University of Algarve)
[49]             Cortical Bone Loss in the Human Skeletons Recovered from the 21st Century Excavations of Cabeço Da Amoreira Shell Midden
Bone loss has been extensively evaluated in archaeological samples, adding diachronic complexity to the biomedical knowledge about skeletal changes
associated with gender, age, genetics, menopausal status or lifestyle. In this paper, the first results of Portuguese Mesolithic cortical bone loss are
presented. Radiogrammetry of the second metacarpal was used to assess cortical parameters (diaphysis total width, medullary width, and cortical index).
The classical osteoporotic fractures (vertebral compressions, hip, distal radius, and proximal humerus) were also assessed.
The final Mesolithic sample comprises four adult individuals recovered from the Cabeço da Amoreira site: a young female, with an age at death between
18 to 20 years and an adult male (recovered during the 2000 and 2001 excavations), and another young female with approximately 20 years old and a
middle-aged to old individual. Results were compared with cortical bone parameters in two samples from Portuguese skeletal reference collections
(Coimbra Identified Skeletal Collection [N=196] and the Twenty-First Century Identified Skeletal Collection [n=44]), aiming to detect diachronic variations in
the overall patterns of cortical bone loss, and to identify the etiological factors of cortical bone loss during the Mesolithic.
Ur, Jason (Harvard University)
[12]             Assyrian Landscape Planning in the Core of the Empire (ca. 900–600 B.C.)
A variety of evidence has been used to suggest that the Assyrian kings and their planners made dramatic changes to the landscape of the imperial core,
and these changes were deliberate. This evidence mostly consists, however, of anecdotal observations and uncritical readings of propagandistic royal
inscriptions. The hypothesized planned Assyrian landscape also conflicts with the results of systematic archaeological research on preceding Bronze Age
landscapes, which were largely self-organized. This presentation analyzes two seasons of survey and landscape research by the Erbil Plain
Archaeological Survey in the core of the empire, in what is today the Kurdistan Region of Iraq. Initial results of settlement patterns and hydraulic
engineering suggests that in the shift from the small kingdoms of the Bronze Age to the massive Assyrian empire of the Iron Age, the ability of central
planners to impose their will on the landscape had grown, and that the imperial core was heavily designed.
[12]             Chair
Urban, Thomas M. [148] see Chisholm, Linda
Urban, Thomas (Cornell University)
[217]            The Lessons of J.L. Giddings' Early Attempt at Geophysical Surveying in the Western Arctic
Archaeologist J. Louis Giddings is known widely for his excavations of major sites in the western arctic from the 1940s until his untimely death in 1964.
Giddings was also a notable innovator in archaeological science, integrating new techniques into his research almost immediately after they were
developed. Very early on in his career, for example, Giddings made use of dendrochronology, establishing some of the earliest tree-ring chronologies in
Alaska. This was immediately after dendro was introduced as a dating technique. He also made use of radiocarbon dating shortly after the technique
became available in the early 1950s. Less well known, however, is Giddings early attempt at implementing geophysical techniques in his field
investigations. Most notably, Giddings attempted magnetometer surveying only two years after the technique saw its first serious use in archaeology, and
two years before the first published magnetic survey in N. America in 1962. This paper discusses Giddings’ early use of geophysical methods in light of
later developments in archaeological geophysics and current field research in the region.
Ure, Scott [104] see Richens, Lane
Uribe, Mauricio [57] see Correa Girrulat, Itaci
Uribe, Mauricio
[259]            Márgenes y Centros del Tawantinsuyo en el Norte Grande de Chile (Andes Centro Sur)
A partir de los postulados de Murra sobre los Incas, Llagostera planteó para el Norte de Chile la ausencia de una conquista propiamente tal, puesto que
sus poblaciones se hallaban insertas en sistemas preincaicos de complementariedad ecológica, cuyas cabeceras o “señoríos” se encontraban vinculadas
al altiplano central del Titicaca. Las que una vez anexadas al Tawantinsuyo, implicó un dominio casi automático de las entidades restantes ubicadas en
lugares más bajos como los del norte chileno, situándolas en una condición periférica e incluso al margen del control cusqueño. De acuerdo con su
propuesta, esta situación se dirimía en términos de cuán abundante o no era la materialidad del Inca en los territorios ocupados, cuánto se atenía al estilo
original del Cusco y cuáles eran sus relaciones con la explotación “vertical” del espacio andino. Lo anterior ha redundado en plantearse la expansión y/o
formación del Tawantinsuyo de manera dicotómica como una dinámica de presencia o ausencia, de centro o periferia, hegemonía o territorialidad,
especialmente determinada por indicadores cerámicos. Aprovechamos el marco de este simposio para discutir dichas categorías desde el análisis
cerámico y a partir de distintos casos del Norte Grande que permitan avanzar en la comprensión del fenómeno panandino.
Uribe , Mauricio [57] see Vidal Montero, Estefania
Urquhart, Kyle R. [101] see Solinis-Casparius, Rodrigo
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               454
Urton, Gary (Harvard University)
[172]             Color in Wari and Inka Khipus
This paper analyzes the uses of color in the Wari and Inka khipus. The focus of the study will be on the ranges and ways of combining colors used in each
tradition. The central question to be addressed is: How was color used as a medium of coding information in each tradition and what can we say about how
and why the system of color may have changed as it did from Wari to Inka times?
[172]             Chair
Usai, Donatella [177] see Banks, Kimball
Usman, Aribidesi (Arizona State University)
[177]             A Report of Recent Excavation at Okete-Kakini Palace Precint, Idah, Niger-Benue Confluence, Nigeria
This paper will report the recent excavation at Okete-Kakini site near the king’s (Attah) palace in Idah. Okete-Kakini was the residential area of Attah’s
eunuchs (amonoji), one of the two major palace officials who carried out various functions for the Attah. The aim of the investigation is to identify the
activities of the palatine elites through an examination of their material culture found in archaeological excavations. It is thought that the members of the
palatine groups, like the formal elites, used their settlements and their day-to-day consumption to exhibit their status. The overall goal of the research was
to have a better understanding of the social and political organization of Igala and the intrasite distribution of materials.
Vacca, Kirsten [247] see Schoenholzer, David
Vacca, Kirsten (University of California, Berkeley)
[251]             Let the Memory Live Again: Creation and Recreation of Hawaiian Households
Investigating the use of memory allows for an increased understanding of how historical knowledge is used in the reproduction of social actions in the past
and production of knowledge in the present. This paper analyzes the importance of memory in Hawaiian culture and academic literature. Many
archaeological analyses of pre-European contact Hawaiian households are predicated on the writings of nineteenth century ethnohistorians (among others)
that recorded Hawaiian oral traditions. The act of utilizing oral traditions as a form of remembering and reproducing the cultural structure through
scholarship creates an image of a falsely simplistic and static society lacking in temporally and spatially diverse practices. The importance of Hawaiian
cultural production and reproduction through corporeal acts of remembrance is made obvious in the current recorded Hawaiian traditions, yet the static
implementation of these descriptive practices in the analytical process by archaeologists prohibits a nuanced understanding of how reproduced memories
are enacted differently through time and space, instead assuming that the remembered lives of Hawaiians from one point in history are representative of an
entire people through time and space. The recorded traditions should instead be utilized as an illustration of the fluidity and complexity of Hawaiian culture.
Vaccari, Andrés [272] see Lanata, Jose
Vadala, Jeffrey (University of Florida)
[77]              Reconsidering Heirarchy, Caching, and Architectural Practices at Cerros Belize
Caches have been recovered in the Maya area dating to every period since the Middle Preclassic (c. 700 B.C.) and are among the most common
assemblage type recovered from Maya architecture. In the past, most scholars have treated caches as a normative Maya custom, failing to identify
significant spatial and temporal variation within cache assemblages. Additionally, many studies have isolated cache contents from their larger contexts,
especially the context of the rituals of which they were a component. Taking a different view, my project illuminates caching as a set of repeated ritual
events that would have organized ritual and productive social processes resulting in “structured depositions” that linked many aspects of ancient Maya life.
The social processes that produced caching events have been characterized by mapping the activities associated with caching as networks that emerged
in each caching event, creating 3D computer generated reconstructions to examine ritual space. Furthermore, each of Cerros’ recovered caches has been
contextualized by diachronic approach employing Bayesian modeling. The results of this analysis have dramatically shortened Cerros’ Preclassic
occupation history and have provided data to support new interpretations about the rise of hierarchy and the development of social order at Cerros.
Vadala, Jeffrey [270] see Leonard, Daniel
Vaiglova, Petra (University of Oxford), Amy Bogaard (University of Oxford), Panagiotis Karkanas (Wiener Laboratory, American School of
Classical St) and Maria Pappa (Hellenic Ministry of Culture & Sports, Thessalonik)
[189]             Preparing the Feast: Understanding the Nature of Agricultural Economy at Neolithic Makriyalos, Northern Greece, using Multiple Isotopes
The aim of this study is to gain a deeper understanding of the agricultural management strategies employed by farmers at Neolithic Makriyalos, northern
Greece. Building on results of previous archaeobotanical and archaeozoological analyses, it brings together the results of a series of stable isotope
measurements to ask questions about the scale and intensity of farming at a Neolithic flat ‘extended’ site. Stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes of charred
plants will be used to infer crop-growing conditions (such as soil fertility) and, together with the values of domestic and wild animal remains, will help
interpret possible dietary sources of protein for the humans. Stable carbon and oxygen isotope values from sheep/cattle tooth enamel carbonate will be
used to assess seasonal variation in diets and grazing behavior of these domestic animals. Finally, in view of the site’s role as a center for communal
feasting, strontium isotopes from tooth enamel will be used to assess whether the cattle slaughtered at this feast were managed locally and/or imported
from elsewhere. This study demonstrates the usefulness of combining several strands of stable isotope analysis to address new questions about the
nature of ancient farming economy.
[189]             Chair
Vail, Gabrielle (New College of Florida)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            455
[15]             Audience and Ritual Context Associated with Painted Capstone and Codical Texts from the Northern Maya Lowlands
The northern Maya lowlands provide a rich corpus of painted texts associated with the interior and exterior walls of buildings; capstones serving to seal off
vaulted chambers, which often contain burials; and painted screenfold books, or codices. In a number of cases, these texts and their associated pictorial
component were painted to commemorate—or provide the template for—important rituals. Many of these rituals can be identified based on ethnohistoric
sources, including Diego de Landa’s "Relación de las cosas de Yucatán," which highlights the "festivals" associated with each twenty-day month of the
year, as well as other ritual occasions. This information, in combination with that from the hieroglyphic and iconographic sources, provides important clues
for determining context and audience. This paper examines the underlying agricultural basis of both capstone and codical texts and explores what the
different media, time periods (the former date to the Late and Terminal Classic periods and the latter to the Late Postclassic Period), and hieroglyphic
captions tell us about elite versus agrarian rituals and what they reveal about a group’s social memory.
[15]             Chair
Vail, [92] see Fenn, Mallory
Valcarcel Rojas, Roberto (Postdoctoral Researcher ERC Synergy-NEXUS 1492) and Jorge Ulloa Hung (Postdoctoral Researcher ERC Synergy-
NEXUS 1492)
[220]            Levisa 1. Diversity and Complexity in a Key ¨Archaic¨Context of Cuba and the Caribbean
The archaeological site Levisa 1, in northeast Cuba, possesses one of the earlier radiocarbon dates for the so called ¨archaic¨ communities in this Island
and one of the earliest one from the Caribbean region. For this reason that place is a basic reference for the study of the ¨archaic¨ groups. Also due to its
location and potential link with other important archaic sites, and because possesses contexts that reflect diverse types and moments of pre-Arawak’s
occupations, and even ceramic use. This paper revises the archaeological data of Levisa 1, the history of its investigation and its implications in the
knowledge of the archaic societies in Cuba and the Caribbean. We discusses how the methodological and theoretical changes more than the incorporation
of new data or a detailed and deep analysis of the available information have determined the understanding of that space.
Valcárcel Rojas , Roberto [220] see Ulloa Hung, Jorge
Valdez, Fred [130] see Aebersold, Luisa
Valdez, Fred (University of Texas At Austin)
[162]            Maya Archaeology: Research & Interpretations with Dr. Scarborough
More than 25 years of collaborative research with Dr. Scarborough has provided for interesting ups & downs in understanding prehistoric Maya activities.
Beginning at Cerros, intervening distant research, rejoining at Kinal (Guatemala), and culminating in NW Belize (for now) has allowed for a fascinating
journey of archaeological investigations. Presented here are both scientific endeavors as well as events from field activities during nearly three decades of
mutual research interests from settlements questions to water management concerns.
[162]            Chair
Valdez, Francisco (IRD / France - Ecuador)
[178]            Early Complexity in the Upper Amazon: The Mayo Chinchipe-Marañón.
Hypotheses that held Amazonia untenable for the development of complex societies have now been discarded. The presumed incapacity of the soil to
ensure permanent agricultural production (sustain large populations) has been proved false, not because of the limitations of the soil, but rather because
Amazonians found ways to overcome the flaws and develop adequate strategies for sustainable food production. Recent studies show that early
complexity was present in the tropics with forms of typical Formative period technologies and practices, such as pottery, polished stone artifacts or long
distance exchange networks. The presentation will focus on the material culture and the ideology of an early complex society called the Mayo Chinchipe-
Marañón, situated on the upper Amazon frontier region between Ecuador and Peru. Evidence dating around 5500/3500 B.P., from the site Santa Ana–La
Florida (Palanda) shows the existence of a precocious ceremonial center that rallied the neighboring areas. The complicated stone architectural layout and
the importance of the funerary paraphernalia found on the site suggest a strong ideological structure that led and managed the population on a regional
scale. Similar findings have been studied in the Jaén/Bagua region of the Chinchipe-Maranon basin in Peru.
Valdez, Jr., Fred [130] see Locker, Angelina
Valencia, Rogelio [256] see Martin, Simon
Valencia Rivera, Rogelio [256] see Vázquez López, Verónica
Valentine, Benjamin (Dartmouth College), Penny Jones (University of Cambridge) and Erik Otárola-Castillo (Purdue University)
[134]            From Scatterplots to Statistics: Identifying the Local Isotope Range in Multivariate Data
In recent decades, isotopic assays of strontium, lead, and oxygen in biological remains have revolutionized archaeological migration studies by providing
direct evidence for the occurrence, timing, and geographic origins of individual residence change. Such research requires the clear identification of ‘local’
isotopic baselines for comparison against assayed individuals, and yet no single method to accomplish this task has emerged as best practice. Some
researchers advocate the use of commensal fauna for determining ‘local’ isotopic ranges whereas others look to the structure (e.g., modality) of the dataset
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                456
under investigation. The use of multiple isotopes complicates the matter further, requiring new approaches to reduce the subjectivity and arbitrariness that
characterize many earlier methods like scatterplots and standard deviations. Here we suggest a novel approach using standard statistical methods. We
build on the assumption that the central tendency of faunal isotope ratios from habitation areas largely overlaps with the isotope ratios of ‘local’ humans.
Furthermore, we use likelihood estimates of clustering solutions to systematically eliminate ‘non local’ fauna in multi isotope data sets. We present
strontium and lead isotope case studies based on multiple taxa from Indus Civilization faunal assemblages in order to highlight the advantages of a
standardized faunal metric.
Valentine, Benjamin [295] see Krigbaum, John
Valenzuela , Lucía [63] see Levy, Jessica
Valenzuela-Lamas, Silvia
[176]              Urbanisation and Animal Husbandry in Ancient Western Europe: How Territoriality Affects Negatively Husbandry Productivity
Mobility is key to the survival and adaptation of human and animal populations. In all cases, having the ‘right of way’ is necessary to move across
territories. How was it in the past? How humans decided about mobility in the context of demographic growth and increase of social complexity that
occurred in Europe in the first millennium B.C.?
Strontium isotopic ratios are a powerful tool for investigating mobility in the past. This paper offers a review of strontium isotopic ratios for Western Europe
from the Neolithic to Roman times, and correlates them with other three variables: the relative frequency of the main domesticates (%NISP), their size
(biometry), and their cultural context. The results obtained show a decrease of cattle relative frequencies and size across all Europe from the Neolithic to
the Iron Age, then higher cattle %NISP and size in the territories within the Roman Empire in classical times. Strontium isotope ratios show a progressive
reduction in mobility from the Neolithic to the Iron Age and then an increase of geographic diversity in Roman times. Consequently, the results suggest a
close correlation between the three variables —%NISP, biometry and mobility—and the degree of urbanisation of human populations.
Valera, António Carlos [103] see Grimes, Vaughan
Valley, John [176] see Beasley, Melanie
Van Alstyne, Benjamin (UNLV)
[68]               Understanding the Architecture of the Virgin Branch Ancestral Puebloan Using a Digital 3D Model-Based Process
On the Shivwits Plateau, there is scarce information concerning how the Virgin Branch Ancestral Puebloan people constructed their pueblos. This is a
result of post-depositional processes that have destroyed much of the building materials. Thus, to further our understanding of the Ancestral Puebloan
efforts to live in a semi-arid environment, this research incorporates information obtained from Puebloan ethnographies, experimental archaeology, and
excavations. The data is combined through a parametric 3D model-based process known as Building Information Modeling, to produce digital
reconstructions of the ancient pueblos. These digital 3D models output volumetric data that are used to estimate material quantities and labor investments,
and to evaluate whether the pueblos were occupied seasonally or year-round.
Van de Pas, Lucienne [225] see McTavish, Rachel
Van Den Bel, Martijn (INRAP - FRANCE)
[220]              The Late Archaic and Initial Ceramic Age in Coastal French Guiana
Recent excavations at two archaeological sites in French Guiana (Eva 2 and Saint-Louis) presented evidence of a Late Archaic an Early Ceramic Age
occupation which is comparable to other coastal sites in South America, such as the Alaka Phase in Guyana and the Mina Tradition in Pará, Brazil. These
early ceramic sites represent the suite of a larger Archaic Age Littoral Tradition in which ceramics represented an innovative aspect to the Archaic way of
life. Starch grain analysis showed that maize, sweet potatoes, arrowroot, and jack beans, were consumed among the Early Ceramic Age population of
French Guiana who made use of polished tools, earth ovens, and large and spherical cooking pots in order to prepare food during the second half of the
third millennium BC. The results of these large scale excavations add new data to this almost unknown but innovative episode in northern Amazonia, i.e.
the shift from the Preceramic to the Ceramic Age or Formative Period.
[23]               Discussant
Van Der Leeuw, Sander (SHESC)
[138]              Looking at the Ancient Maya from the Outside
I owe Vern Scarborough a great debt for the opportunity to look into the dynamics of Maya research in the context of the IHOPE Maya project. As a
historian and prehistoric archaeologist, I have been struck by the way in which, in the research, two perspectives were commingled: the prehistorian's
perspective looking (back) towards the origins of the heyday of (Classic) Maya culture and the historian's perspective looking (forward) for the emergence
of certain elements of it. It seems to me that unraveling these two perspectives might result in some more clarity. In particular, we have the choice between
(a) looking for the (singular!) origins of the Maya sphere as a whole, and (b) reconstructing how (a number of) different societies in different parts of the
Guatemalan highlands and the Yucatan emerge and grow into one cultural sphere. Do we look back from the present to the past or do we look forward
from the past to the present and the future? In view of the data at our disposal both are necessary, but need to be distinguished. The paper will look at this
from the perspective of water management and its relationship to social organization.
van Dolah, Elizabeth [191] see Hambrecht, George
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                457
Van Dyke, Ruth (Binghamton University)
[201]             Discussant
Van Gijseghem, Hendrik (Dickinson College), Kevin Vaughn (UCLA), Jelmer Eerkens (UC Davis) and Gry Barfod (UC Davis)
[13]              Hematite (Ochre) Mining and Use on the South Coast of Peru ca. A.D. 1–400
 Located in the Nasca region of southern Peru, Mina Primavera was an important source of hematite for centuries, and in particular, was intensively
exploited by people of the Nasca culture for a variety of end products. Here we explore technical and ritual dimensions involved in the mining process. We
also present new data on iron isotopic (56Fe/54Fe) diversity from a single hematite source as information that is critical in sourcing and provenience. The
new data are compared to previously published isotopic data from ochre samples found far from the mine, and from red and black paints on ceramics.
Van Keuren, Scott (University of Vermont), Jeffrey Ferguson (MURR Archaeometry Lab, University of Missouri) and Mary Ownby (Desert
Archaeology, Inc.)
[66]              Tracing the Production of Fourteenth-Century Red Ware in East-central Arizona
Ancestral Pueblo peoples in east-central Arizona crafted a unique type of representational-style pottery (Fourmile Polychrome) by the early A.D. 1300s.
Questions remain about where the type was manufactured and how it circulated in the region. We present the results of a neutron activation analysis
(NAA) of sherds from three villages where the type was likely produced. Building on earlier research, our analyses clarify issues of provenance and speak
to the fourteenth-century social networks through which this pottery was exchanged.
Van Meirvenne, Marc [197] see De Smedt, Philippe
Van Oss, Sarah (The College of Wooster) and Olivia Navarro-Farr (The College of Wooster)
[235]             Serpents and Bowls: An Analysis of the War Serpent Vessel from Burial 61 at El Perú-Waka'
In 2012, Dr. Olivia Navarro-Farr and her team excavated the tomb (Burial 61) of a Maya ruler in a large ceremonial structure at the site of El Perú-Waka’ in
Petén, Guatemala. A confluence of taphonomic, epigraphic, and ceramic evidence underscored the identification of these remains as likely pertaining to
Lady K’abel, a queen already well known from texts associated with that ancient city. This poster will explore one of the artifacts found in Burial 61, called
the War Serpent Vessel, placed at the interred’ s feet. In this study, I present an iconographic analysis of the plate that incorporates its archaeological
context and significance. I will consider the vessel’s imagery and contextual arrangement within the chamber to explore how gender and rulership were
performed. I am also interested in how this particular iconography signaled Lady K’abel’s particular role as ruler of Waka’ in Late Classic Maya society.
Through these explorations, I hope to further our understanding of the performance of rulership and gender, and how an ancient Maya queen and those
who interred her expressed those structures and incorporated them.
Van Pool, Todd (University of Missouri), Christine VanPool (University of Missouri) and Lauren Downs (University of Missouri)
[67]              Dressing the Casas Grandes Person: Medio Period Clothing and Ritual
Casas Grandes Medio period (A.D. 1200–1450) human effigies are unique in the North American Southwest in that they depict primary and secondary
sexual traits, making determination of sex possible. We consider the importance of depicted clothing (e.g., belts and sashes), personal adornments (e.g.,
necklaces and bracelets), facial decorations, and other aspects of dress. We find that Medio period symbolism for males and females was based on
gender complementarity that combined the productive, reproductive, and ritual activities of men and women within a single symbolic and ritual system.
There are instances of overlapping dress shown on males and females (e.g., arm bands), but also sex-based differences (e.g., women wear low horizontal
belts across their hips whereas men wear distinctive sandals and elaborate headbands). Aspects of dress also appear to be continued from previous
cultures such as the Classic Mimbres (A.D. 1000–1150) and continued into historic northern Mexican and Southwestern groups (e.g., head gear).
Ultimately, we find that males are more elaborately dressed and associated with smoking and ritually important symbols. Females are associated with
cloud/fertility symbolism, sternal decorations, and birds.
Van Tuerenhout, Dirk
[58]              Maya 2012. Prophecy Becomes History
The Houston Museum of Natural Science hosted an exhibit on the Maya 2012 phenomenon. This presentation reviews the various stages of preparing an
exhibit from initial concept to cutting the ribbon. In particular, the speaker will address developing the storyline, object selection and marketing of the
exhibit.
Vandam, Ralf (Koç University - SUNY Buffalo), Peter Tomkins (KU Leuven), Bert Neyt (KU Leuven), Becki Scott (KU Leuven) and Patrick
Degryse (KU Leuven)
[79]              Investigating the Late Prehistoric (6500–2400 B.C.) Socio-Economic Landscapes in the Burdur Plain, SW Turkey
A diachronic intensive survey in the Burdur Plain, carried out by the Sagalassos Archaeological Research Project, revealed that the excavated mound
sites, such as Hacılar and Kuruçay Höyük, were no isolated features in the landscape, but part of a large settlement system of both shorter lived hamlets
and small villages. The paper presents our survey results from the Neolithic to the Early Bronze Age II period (ca. 6500–2400 B.C.), alongside our
outcomes of the provenance analyses (i.e., petrography and p-XRF) of the collected survey artefacts, as well as those from the excavated sites: ceramics,
obsidian and metals. This approach would allow us to shed a light on production, exchange networks, and the continuity and change within this period.
Furthermore, it is aimed to link the provenance results with the societal developments within the Late Prehistory. How, for instance, did production and
exchange relate towards the increasing complexity during the Late Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age in West Anatolia? The paper also hopes to illustrate
the value of a provenance analysis on surface survey material, despite the limitations that it inherently has
Vandam, Ralf [95] see Willett, Patrick
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 458
VanderVeen, James (IU South Bend), Rebecca Gibson (American University) and Sabrina Lute (Indiana University South Bend)
[193]             Founding Daughters and Wives: Looking For Women in a Male Dominated Artifact Assemblage
While historical documentation is, for the most part, a deliberate system of record keeping, the archaeological record primarily exists because of the
accidental deposition of artifacts. Often these artifacts cannot be coded as representing either male or female use or ownership; however, in certain artifact
assemblages where the history of the site is well documented, the researcher can examine the artifacts with an eye toward gendering them and re-creating
the story of the people who utilized the site. This paper will examine a collection of artifacts from the city of South Bend, Indiana, which the researchers
have coded as belonging to females, including jewelry, buttons, a stocking clip, pen nibs, and other small household materials. The Gilded Age site
contained residential and commercial structures later razed by two of the area’s founding families, the Studebakers and the Olivers, to create a grassy
park-like area. Much is known about the men of these founding families, but little about their wives and daughters. In this paper, the researchers will show
evidence about the leisure activities and social associations of these women’s lives.
[193]             Chair
VanderVeen, James [193] see Finnigan, Patrick
Vandrei, Charles [208] see Witt, David
VanPool, Christine [66] see Krug, Andrew
VanPool, Christine, MacLaren Law-de-Lauriston (University of Missouri), Heidi Noneman (University of Missouri) and Andrew Fernandez
(University of Missouri)
[67]              Booze or Food? Experimental Archaeology of Low-Fired Pottery to Examine Tribochemical Processes
Ceramic ethnographic research from Africa shows that the fermenting of alcohol in low-fired pottery results in a variety of tribochemical processes, which
cause pitting in the interior of the vessel. Jars and sherds from the Casas Grandes region (A.D. 1200–1450) have similar pitting, causing researchers to
propose that either alcohol or hominy was made in these jars. To evaluate these hypotheses we created low-fired vessels and used them for boiling water,
making hominy, fermenting corn (corn beer), and fermenting agave (pulque). We examine the residues and usewear from the various tribochemical
mechanisms to determine if they cause the vessels’ walls to deteriorate differently (e.g., type of abrasion [pitting or shearing], erosion, corrosion). In
particular we determine how hominy (an alkali food) and bacteria-induced fermentation (e.g., Zymomonas mobilis) deflates the interior wall. This research
helps us better understand the mechanisms that might have resulting in the pitted Casas Grandes ollas.
VanValkenburgh, Parker (Brown University)
[51]              Landscape, Labor, and the Production of Difference in Colonial Peru: Indios and Negros in the Zaña Valley, 16th through 18th Centuries
                  C.E.
Historians and historical anthropologists have long suggested that racial and ethnic categories in the Spanish colonial Americas were discursively
produced. But it is only recently that historical archaeologists have begun to chart the roles that household practices, economic transactions, and
settlement configurations played in their emergence and reproduction. Archaeological excavations and documentary research on sites in Peru’s Zaña
valley provide new perspectives on how indianess and blackness emerged over the course of nearly three centuries of colonial rule, in tandem with major
transformations in the organization of land and labor in the valley. I bring together discussion of colonial initiatives, including settlement planning and
financial administration, with evidence of interaction between people of native and African descent, to trace a genealogy of race and social identity in the
viceroyalty.
VanValkenburgh, Parker [122] see Kennedy, Sarah
Vanzin, Rudi [205] see Jones, Terrah
Vara, Rachel (University of Texas at San Antonio) and Whitney Lytle (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[226]             Small Programs, Big Impacts: Benefits of Partnerships in Community Outreach
The positive impact of public outreach and education to the preservation of archaeological resources has become increasingly apparent to professionals
within the field. Outreach programs not only help disseminate the knowledge gained from excavations and research but also how the public can play active
roles ensuring this knowledge is not lost. Making archaeology accessible to those outside the field strengthens our ability to neutralize the mass of
misinformation found in the media. The University of Texas at San Antonio Center for Archaeological Research outreach program, “LEGACY: Hands on
the Past” has developed partnerships to overcome the hurdles faced by small programs. The mission of LEGACY is to enrich the community through public
education in archaeology and cultural preservation to promote a collective responsibility for our diverse and shared past. LEGACY is limited to a two
person staff and a revolving host of volunteers attempting to serve the population of 1.4 million in San Antonio. Smaller outreach programs, like LEGACY,
can lack the staff and funding of their larger counterparts thus creating challenges. This paper will discuss LEGACY’s strategies to overcome such
challenges by generating partnerships within the university and community to reach a large demographic.
Varga, Virág [149] see Szigeti, Anna
Vargas, Gabriel [139] see Flores-Fernandez, Carola
Vargas Ruiz, Juan (Doctoral Candidate University of Pittsburgh)
[282]             Social Variability and Leadership Strategies in the Llanos of the Orinoco
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              459
Ethnohistoric descriptions and archaeological evidence suggest that in the Llanos regions of Casanare (Colombia) and Barinas (Venezuela) between the
Andes and the Orinoco/Amazon basin, agricultural intensification provided the resources that enabled aspiring elites to pursue their political strategies
during prehispanic times. Warfare and feasting were especially important strategies in the early complex societies of Barinas. The presence of nearby
highly developed Muisca chiefdoms, however, provided Casanare elites with opportunities for focusing on specialized production and medium-distance
exchange that were not available for the inhabitants of Barinas. This presentation explores how the historical trajectories of change differed in two parts of
the same broad environmental zone and how the distinct aspects of those differences relate to each other. Central to this discussion is the nature of
leadership and the conditions of its raise and transformation through time. The concept of chiefdom as it was originally thought for this region does not
capture the huge variability of the social organization of the societies from the Llanos before the arrival of the Europeans.
[282]            Chair
Varillas Palacios, Rosa Maria [151] see Alexandrino Ocaña, Grace
Vasquez, Josefina (Universidad San Francisco de Quito)
[282]            Can We Measure the Degree of Social Complexity within Quimi Valley?
The Upper Amazon has been considered a place of weak socio-political integration, along with poor agricultural production, mostly sustained on fishing
and hunter-gathering. However, during the last decade, archaeological research carried out in Quimi Valley (Zamora-Chinchipe) has demonstrated the
presence of social complexes of about thousands of inhabitants around the valley. While discussion about the existence of sedentary communities during
the Integration Period (700–1420 A.D.) has been already settled, we do find imperative to use certain variables to assess the degree of social complexity
within these societies. In this case, we propose to utilize material culture collected during excavation of eight archaeological communities through
multivariate analysis of artifact types. Quimi Valley communities comprise household areas and gardens reaching the top of mountains which delineate the
Cóndor Cordillera landscape. Ceramic and lithic remains identified as artifacts and ecofacts have been grouped by household, and then by community with
the aim of evaluating how they behaved in terms of density, variability, and dispersion within each community. If inside each community these relationships
might be interpreted as simple, those relationships between the communities could be measured as complex.
[282]            Chair
Vasta, Meredith [265] see Costello, Laura
Vaughan, Andrew (University of Colorado), Dominique Meyer (University of California, San Diego), Jeffrey Glover (Georgia State University),
Dominique Rissolo (University of California, San Diego) and Sebastian Afshari (University of California, San Diego)
[20]             Conil Revisited: Aerial Survey and Verification along Quintana Roo's North Coast
The site of Conil is located in the northern part of the state of Quintana Roo, Mexico. Not far removed from the modern shore of Laguna Holbox, Conil
appears to have been inhabited at various times between the Preclassic period and the present day. In AD 1528, the conquistador Francisco de Montejo
reported that Conil was a large town of 5,000 houses. First investigated by William Sanders in 1954, Conil has seen little in the way of research since that
time. Recent research by members of the Proyecto Costa Escondida is beginning to hint at the extent of the site. This paper presents the findings of the
traditional survey work, which has been augmented with an intensive UAS (Unmanned Aerial System) survey, along the results of a small test-pitting
program conducted in 2014 and 2015. These renewed efforts at the site of Conil aim to establish the extent and density of occupation at the site as well as
trace the development of the site through time. The high resolution of UAS imagery greatly increases what is possible to detect from remotely acquired
imagery, though this remote survey does not supplant the need for verification and excavation of detected features.
Vaughn, Kevin [13] see Van Gijseghem, Hendrik
Vaughn, Kevin (UCLA)
[91]             Production and Pilgrimage: Summarizing a Decade of INAA in the Southern Nasca Region
This poster presents a comprehensive evaluation of INAA work on ceramics from the Southern Nasca Region from the Early Horizon through the Late
Intermediate Period. For the first time we present previously unpublished work from the Las Trancas Valley in Nasca. The results from the analysis confirm
previous studies suggesting centralized production in the region during the Early Intermediate Period and decentralized production before and after this
period. We attribute this long-term pattern to pilgrimage associated with the ceremonial center Cahuachi and associated behaviors centered at the site.
[292]            Discussant
[91]             Chair
Vázquez López, Verónica (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México), Felix Kupprat (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México), Rogelio
Valencia Rivera (Universidad Veracruzana) and Hugo García Capistrán (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México)
[256]            The Social Function of the Title "K’uhul Chatahn Winik"
Dozens of Maya ceramics from the Late Classic Period feature the epithet "k’uhul chatahn winik", ‘divine person of Chatahn’. Most of these are codex-style
vessels of unknown provenance, but some specimens have been recovered during archaeological explorations at Calakmul, Nakbe, and Tintal. Moreover,
the same title appears in monumental inscriptions, most prominently at Calakmul, where there are at least four examples. Despite a recent increase in
research on this specific title, the different assessments of its meaning and social function are far from being a consensus. In this paper we re-examine the
texts which include this epithet and, where possible, their archaeological contexts, which are still under-studied. Based on the presented evidence, we
discuss different scenarios, which might explain the title’s temporal and spatial distribution. Furthermore, the pairing of the expression "k’uhul chatahn
winik" with other titles, as well as its toponymic element are topics to be explored. Finally, we argue that the epithet was used as an Emblem Glyph by the
members of a lineage that played an important role at Calakmul and surrounding sites, before and after the arrival of the Kanu’l lords.
Veall, Margaret-Ashley (Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the History of Art, University of Oxford)
[181]            Stuck Like Glue: Case Studies in Assessing the Variability of Hafting Adhesives during the Southern African Later Stone Age
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  460
Variations in design and function of any tool represent adaptive strategies employed by humans to exist within a landscape. With the increased application
of both chemical analysis and microscopy to archaeological material, the identification of hafting adhesives, the glue of composite tools, provides a means
by which we may evaluate how members of our species existed within dynamic environments and exploited its resources. In southern Africa, the well-
preserved assemblages of the Later Stone Age (LSA), though considerably neglected in recent decades, presents a unique opportunity to evaluate raw
material procurement strategies related to tool manufacture from an organic perspective. This poster presents the findings of several case studies that are
the foundation of a doctoral project utilizing microscopy and molecular analysis in tandem to identify the adhesive composition of hafted technologies from
stratified LSA sites located in a variety of geographies and ecologies. This research will attempt to broaden our understanding of the relationship between
adhesives, stone tool manufacturing, and the ecology of a surrounding region. The overall aim of this work is to contribute to the long-standing narrative on
the appearance and continued application of hafting adhesives in the manufacture of composite tool technologies in southern Africa.
Vega, A. [159] see Hemmings, C.
Vega, Jesus
[253]             From Spanish Shipwrecks to Coastal Development: The Archaeologist as Adventurer, Public Enemy and Philosopher (Did Anybody Say
                  Scientist?)
Forty years of research in submerged prehistoric sites, shipwrecks, masonry forts, pirates, colonial wars, bridges, piers, lighthouses, eroding highways,
fishing communities, estuarine shantytowns, beachfront condos, hotels, resorts, abandoned Olympic swimming pools, deep-water outfalls, trans-oceanic
fiber-optic cables, etc., provide first-hand data for my own conflict theory of coastal evolution. From the earliest prehistoric hunters to my own research, the
coast is a place of endless activity, conflict, and ephemeral projects. To see the evolutionary processes beyond historic events, I developed the model of
Puerto Virgen, a Pleistocene island encompassing Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, illustrating tectonic and eustatic factors of coastal change. The sea
has no dichotomies of prehistoric vs. historic, socialist vs. capitalist, islander vs. mainlander, natural vs. social scientist. This approach allowed me to see
the San Juan Bay channels in historic charts as paleo-rivers, facilitating an explanation for the origin of San Juan Islet and the San Juan Bay Estuary, and
predictions for engineers. Like art, sites outlive their creators and are open to interpretation; but they are unconscious reflections of social rather than
individual action, yielding measurable data.
Vega-deJesús, Ángel (Centro de Estudios Avanzados de Puerto Rico y el Caribe)
[156]             Use-wear Analysis of Flaked Stone Tools from the Cueva Ventana Site, Arecibo, Puerto Rico
Functionality of lithic assemblages from Puerto Rico has been traditionally based on tools morphology. These suggestions, which are rarely proven, are put
to test in the present study in using use-wear analysis of 87 chert flakes from the early site of Cueva Ventana (2400–1010 B.C.). Experiments were
conducted on 28 flakes of the same raw material, in which microscopic traces present on stone tool surfaces were compared with those present on the
tools from the site. These experiments included replicating activities on hard and soft wood and the study of their use-wear to interpret economic processes
at the site.The results show that the lithic assemblage of the site is not related to the activities and functions suggested by morphology, giving us a
cautionary tale regarding interpretations about tools function, and at the same time reminding us of the importance of use-wear analysis for the
interpretation of archaeological contexts in the island.
Veit, Richard [284] see Lobiondo, Matthew
Velasco, Matthew (Vanderbilt University)
[206]             Patterns of Cranial Trauma in the Late Intermediate Period Colca Valley, Peru (A.D. 1000–1450)
Cranial trauma studies of Late Intermediate Period populations (LIP, A.D. 1000–1450) suggest that conflict and social stress were endemic across the
south-central Andes, although the nature of interpersonal violence was strongly mediated by local political and social structures. This study explores how
individuals buried in elaborate cliffside tombs from the Colca valley of southern Peru experienced violence across the 400-year period preceding Inka
imperialism. Cranial trauma rates show high levels of violence within this community, affecting over half of all adults, although less than 5 percent of injuries
were lethal. The prevalence of antemortem trauma also decreases significantly from 71 percent (N=66) during the early LIP (pre-1300 A.D.) to around 50
percent (N=80) during the late LIP (post-1300 A.D.). This downward shift coincides with the expansion of cranial modification practices across society,
suggesting that the construction and embodiment of a cohesive ethnic identity mitigated the effects of inter-group conflict. Compared to individuals
exhibiting modification (N=57) during the late LIP, unmodified individuals (N=22) exhibit trauma rates nearly 1.5 times higher (46 percent vs. 68 percent,
p=0.08). This paper will also explore the patterning and severity of traumatic lesions to elucidate the role of warfare in ethnogenetic processes of
integration and differentiation in the Colca valley.
Velasquez, Veronica, Carlos Salgado (The University of Exeter), Dolores Tenorio (Instituto Nacional de Investigaciones Nucleares) and Melania
Jiménez (Instituto Nacional de Investigaciones Nucleares)
[183]             Geochemical analysis of Spanish-style amphorae in the Mexican Caribbean
Fragments of Spanish-style amphorae known as botijas, which date from the Mexican colonial period, were recently recovered in excavations at the port of
Campeche, Mexico. Despite being common finds amongst artefacts recovered from colonial-period sites, they have not been sufficiently studied under an
archaeological science approach. This would allow understand aspects related with the production and circulation of these vessels. The sample of botijas
that was recovered from excavations in the Baluarte of San Carlos and other areas in the historical quarter of the city of Campeche, enabled insights to
some aspects related with the commercialization of Spanish comestibles and the vessels themselves in this remote area of the viceroyalty of New Spain.
Through the application of chemical analysis to the fabrics it was possible to identify their provenance and contest previous assumptions about their origin.
Velásquez García, Erik (Instituto de Investigaciones Estéticas de la UNAM.) and Sandra Balanzario Granados (Instituto Nacional de Antropología
e Historia.)
[256]             The Rulers of the Kanu’l Dynasty from the Perspective of Dzibanche, Quintana Roo, Mexico.
This paper discusses data on the presence of the Kanu'l dynasty in southern Quintana Roo, Mexico, particularly at the major site of Dzibanché. The
hieroglyphic inscriptions give us explicit testimony on three important Kanu'l characters during the Early Classic: Yuhkno'm Ch'e'n I, Sky Witness, and Yahx
? Yopaat. In addition, we will talk about the presence of another Kanu'l character from Late Classic, associated with the Pom Plaza from Dzibanche,
together with an explanation of the associated archaeological and architectural contexts. We also discuss evidence from other eastern sites located around
Dzibanché, where we have mentions of Kanu'l rulers before their earliest mentions elsewhere. Finally, we also describe the results of osteological analysis
of the tomb we believe to be of Sky Witness, as well as two possible geographic scenarios that could be associated with the phenomenon of Kanu'l royal
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              461
courts: one of Eastern Ch'olan filiation, and other of Western Ch'olan affinity.
Velasquez Lopez, Antolin [212] see Barrios, Edy
Velchoff Littlefield, Nancy (Gault/Texas State University)
[274]             Chair
Vella, Clive [59] see Golden, Charles
Venter, Marcie (Pennsylvania State University)
[216]             Ballgame Ritual: Authority and its Transformation during Late Classic Collapse
One of the characteristic features of the Classic Veracruz style complex is ballgame imagery on ballcourt panels, molded ceramic vessels, paraphernalia
such as yokes, hachas and palmas, not to mention the presence of courts, markers, and stelae or other monuments. Various components of the Classic
Veracruz style have been documented throughout the Gulf lowlands and adjoining regions of Mesoamerica. Few examples, however, derive from
stratigraphic excavations of in situ deposits. In this presentation, we document the discovery, excavation, and preliminary interpretations of a monument-
yoke-offering complex at the site of Matacanela, located in the south-central Tuxtla Mountains. We also present convincing evidence for associated
decapitation ritual. We conclude by assessing these new data and offering suggestions regarding the transitioning of authority at the center. We situate the
Matacanela complex within the larger region and demographic, political, and economic transformations that occurred at the end of the Classic period.
[264]             Discussant
[216]             Chair
Vento, F. J. [159] see Hemmings, C.
Vera, Jaime (INAH Oaxaca) and Nelly M. Robles (Zona Arq. Monte Alban. INAH)
[231]             Recorridos arqueológicos en sitios de la Cañada Oaxaqueña.
Esta presentación es respecto a los recientes recorridos de superficie en sitios arqueológicos de la región de la cañada oaxaqueña. La dinámica de esta
región de Oaxaca muestra una constante ocupación. Desde épocas prehistóricas grupos nómadas ocuparon abrigos en una región tan rico y variado en
ecosistemas que permitió el establecimiento de sociedades prehispánicas complejas las cuales se asentaron a lo largo de las zonas de playas de los ríos
Grande, salado o el río las vueltas como algunos ejemplos. En época colonial se fundaron misiones en las partes altas donde estuvieron asentados las
sitios prehispánicos importantes como parte de la dinámica de conquista de los españoles. En la región se fundaron grandes haciendas que exploraron la
riqueza de la región de las materias primas que fueron de alta demanda para la sociedades de ese momento. Ya para el siglo XX con la entrada del
ferrocarril la economía a lo largo de la vía fue fuente de ingresos para familias que se asentaron a lo largo del trayecto rico y variado de la región de la
Cañada Oaxaqueña.
Vercellotti, Giuseppe [147] see Stewart, Marissa
Verdugo, Cristina [93] see Marquez, Heriberto
Verdugo, Cristina (University of California, Santa Cruz), Lars Fehren-Schmitz (University of California, Santa Cruz) and James Brady (California
State University, Los Angeles)
[117]             Sacrifice at Midnight Terror Cave, Belize
Skeletal data from Midnight Terror Cave (MTC) have recently been used to suggest that individuals with physical deformities would have formed a class of
“social outcasts” who were preferentially selected as sacrificial victims. Close scrutiny reveals a number of flaws in the data used. The extraction and
sequencing of DNA recovered from a number of the bones in question is used to clarify the situation. Considering the size of the MTC assemblage, well
over 100 individuals, the authors are impressed by the lack of obvious deformities. Ethnohistoric data is presented to suggest that the crippled or deformed
may have actually been rejected as sacrificial victims.
Verlee, Jotka (Ghent University), Cornelis Stal (Ghent University), Britt Lonneville (Ghent University), Cameron McNeil (City University of New
York) and Alain De Wulf (Ghent University)
[121]             UAVs for Archaeology: The Sky is the Limit
The use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) has seen a tremendous development over the last decade. The department of Geography of Ghent University
has deployed these platforms to perform high-level research on the modelling of cultural heritage. The selection of a suitable system was mainly based on
compactness and flexibility in terms of transportation and deployment, as well as cost-efficiency.
The platform was deployed in various international field campaigns. The first campaign’s objective was the creation of highly accurate and realistic 3D
models of the archaeological site of Edzna (Mexico). This allowed the researchers to develop a systematic acquisition methodology, which was enhanced
during a field campaign in Thorikos (Greece). With the deployment of the UAV, high resolution ortho-images and elevation models were generated within a
limited time frame, covering a reasonable area of the site with a resolution of a few centimetres. Afterwards, the platform was equipped with an auto-pilot
system, allowing the autonomous traversing of a series of waypoints. This system was successfully deployed at the archaeological site of Turpan (China).
The latest field campaign was conducted at Rio Amarillo (Honduras), and comprised the creation of NGB ortho-images of various sites, in order to uncover
hidden archaeological remains.
Vermillion, Lindsay and Carolyn Boyd (Shumla Archaeological Research and Education Cente)
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             462
[131]             It’s Not an Illustration; It’s a Graphic Database: Rock Art Documentation in the Digital Age
Shumla incorporates new technologies that are revolutionizing rock art illustration and documentation. This presentation discusses the method developed
by Shumla to engage these technologies in the production of graphic databases. Using Adobe Photoshop and a Wacom Cintiq Interactive Pen Display,
digital Photoshop layers are used to graphically document data for individual figures. These living documents include accurate scale illustrations and the
color calibrated and enhanced photographs used to produce the illustrations. Additional layers serve as maps documenting locations of analyses
conducted in the field, such as digital microscopy to determine paint stratigraphy, non-destructive elemental analyses of the pigment, and collected sample
locations for radiocarbon dating. This approach not only increases data integrity and replicability, it also provides a dynamic, visual record for individual
rock art figures and, collectively, entire rock art murals.
Verostick, Kirsten (University of South Florida)
[237]             Reconciling Disease and the Presence of Infections on Human Skeletal Remains with Emerging Technology in Bioarchaeology
With advancing technologies in recent years, numerous methodologies are used to identify disease and causes of infection in human skeletal remains. Use
of ancient DNA (aDNA) and scanning electron microscopy aid in pinpointing diseases. In particular, ancient tuberculosis and treponemal disease are at the
forefront of identification with these new techniques. Recent evaluation shows some of these methods still require refinement, such as the recent discovery
of aDNA markers used to identified tuberculosis also representing other bacteria that are not disease causing.
Bioarchaeologists need to work with multiple lines of evidence in order to develop comprehensive ways of studying disease and infection in human skeletal
remains. The human skeleton is a wealth of information, and the study of both individuals and populations can inform researchers on a multitude of levels,
from diet and activity patterns to stress and human variation. Taking into consideration other subdisciplines of Anthropology, research and information from
medical anthropology, primatology and human biology as suggested by Reitsema and McIlvaine 2014, can aid bioarchaeologists in further understanding
of processes and formation of disease and infection, making linkages and refinements based on multiple lines of evidence
Versaggi, Nina (Binghamton University (SUNY))
[208]             Binghamton University and the NYSDOT: A Focus on Research and Outreach
For over 40 years, the Public Archaeology Facility, Binghamton University (SUNY) has benefited from an uninterrupted relationship with the New York
Department of Transportation through projects administered by the NYS Education Department & New York State Museum. This started out as a non-
competitive partnership with some SUNY campuses but became a competitive bidding situation about 20 years ago. The underlying principles of the
contract call for a research focus that makes archaeological results widely available and maintains that information within an accessible public domain.
PAF is strongly committed to these principles and implements them for our DOT projects. Sites found within narrow rights-of-way become potential field
school sites; field school sites become research projects for community outreach programs; community outreach fosters public education and an empathy
for historic preservation. Our DOT projects have also provided hands-on training and thesis data for graduate students, the future practitioners of CRM.
This paper will explore our decades long relationship with NYSDOT and how this contributes to the advancement of knowledge about the past through
academic research, student training, and community outreach.
Vestal, Patrick [6] see Sherwood, Sarah
Vetrisano, Lucas (University of Buenos Aires)
[204]             Blade Production at El Sosiego Locality, Southern Patagonia, Argentina.
Evidence for blade production has been found in the Santa Cruz River basin, with chronologies between ca. 1900 and 1100 years B.P., although not all the
cases gexhibit the same characteristics. Differential frequencies in blade numbers have been used to argue that the Santa Cruz River was a frontier
between human populations, but there is also variability in knapping methods.
I will focus on El Sosiego locality, which includes an archaeological site dating to ca. 1900 yr B.P. and surface materials with similar technological
characteristics. It represents one of the few cases in the region with consistent evidence for blade production, including prepared blade cores and a higher
than usual blade frequency, both as blanks and tools. It also exhibits a higher level of shaping of the cores, including preparation of the flaking platform and
the flaking surface, resulting in multiple blade extractions per core, and blades with one or two ridges parallel to the sides.
This study is used as a mean to generate expectations to contrast with other sites with scarcer blades in order to evaluate variability in blade production in
relation to frequencies and knapping methods.
Vianello, Andrea (independent researcher)
[81]              The Introduction of Metallurgy in Sicily: Preliminary Data using a pXRF
Several artifacts representing the oldest metals known in Sicily (Copper to Middle Bronze Age) together with many from the Late Bronze Age have been
analyzed using a portable XRF to determine their composition. These are nearly all of the early metal artifacts existing in Sicilian museums. Multiple spot
analyses have been performed and averages obtained to alleviate potential heterogeneities on the surface of metals, ensuring consistency and validity of
the data. Among the materials, there were many swords and daggers, with a more limited selection of ornaments. Evidence of metalworking within Sicily is
rare, as are metal vessels and ingots, even if scraps are considered.
The preliminary results show a marked use of nearly pure copper in most cases, especially for the Copper and MBA artifacts. They also reveal a very late
introduction of alloys made of added tin or arsenic, with swords in pure copper still present in Late Bronze Age funerary contexts. Metals were probably not
widely available until the Early Iron Age, because there are no prehistoric ore sources known in Sicily. A comparison with other areas rich in metals shows
marked differences. Future research will target Calabria, the nearest region culturally and geographically with more mines.
Vianello, Andrea [81] see Tykot, Robert
Vicencio Castellanos, Gabriel [179] see Lopez Corral, Aurelio
Vicencio Castellanos , Alonso Gabriel [179] see Serra Puche, Mari Carmen
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            463
Vickruck, Cory [199] see Matheson, Carney
Vidal, Estefanía [76] see Ballester, Benjamín
Vidal Montero, Estefania (Fulbright-CONICYT Chile, Department of Anthropology, University of Chicago), Mauricio Uribe (Departamento de
Antropología, Universidad de Chile), Ester Echeñique (School of Anthropology, University of Arizona) and Andrew Menzies (Universidad
Católica del Norte, Chile)
[57]              Pottery Production, Circulation and Exchange during the Formative Period in Tarapacá, Northern Chile
In the area commonly known as Pampa del Tamarugal, in the middle portion of the Atacama Desert, the valleys of Tarapacá, Guatacondo, and the oasis of
Quillagua have been important spaces for characterizing the Formative period in northern Chile. In this paper, we present the results of pottery analyses
from this region, comprised by samples obtained from residential and ceremonial contexts, as well as transitory sites along prehispanic routes (Fondecyt
Project 1130279). The purpose of these analyses is to offer a detailed examination of the ceramic technology of the period through integrated approaches,
including traditional typological classifications and quantitative characterizations, as well as compositional analyses aimed at understanding the chemical
and petrographic qualities of the different ceramic types of the area. These results provide new data for the study of the development of pottery during this
period in Tarapacá, as well as its links to the Formative as a historical phenomenon in the South Central Andes, allowing us to discuss and interrogate the
processes of production, movement and exchange of pottery from ca. 900 B.C.E. to 900 C.E.
Viel, Rene [237] see Sterling, Stephanie
Vierra, Bradley (Statistical Research Inc)
[170]             The Origins of Agriculture and Neolithic in the American Southwest: The View from Western Europe
The transition from foraging to farming is certainly one of the most dramatic processes in human history. The use of domesticated plants spread widely
across Western Europe from the Near East, and across the American Southwest from Mexico. Research in Western Europe has traditionally focused on
the movement of farming communities across the region which displaced or subsumed local foragers. Recently various aspects of this process have been
discussed including climate change, the expansion of farming populations, the integration of cultigens into local foraging economies, the coexistence of
foragers and farmers, language dispersal, sedentism, diet breadth, the effects of a farming economy on fertility and health, and the importance of social or
communal activities. This paper will take the lessons learned from this research in Western Europe and see how they can be used to help understand a
similar process in the American southwest.
Viganò, Claudia (Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, University of Zurich), Gülfirde Akgül (IEM, University of Zurich), Frank J. Rühli (IEM,
University of Zurich) and Abigail Bouwman (IEM, University of Zurich)
[103]             Ancient DNA Analysis to Investigate the History of Malaria and Malaria Genetic Adaptations in Europe
Historical records and epidemiological studies can be a wealth of information about ancient diseases, nevertheless in some cases DNA evidence is also
needed. The data showing high frequencies of malaria genetic adaptations (MGA) in modern and historical populations testify to the presence of malaria in
the past along the Mediterranean coast. However, neither modern epidemiological data nor historical records can explain the differences in MGA
frequencies that we observe in some regions. Analyzing the DNA of individuals who inhabited these areas in the past can help better understanding the
history and evolution of malaria and its genetic adaptations in Europe. In this study, samples from three European regions with different malaria history and
genetic resistance correlation have been analyzed: Sardinia, former endemic malaria island with presently high frequency of MGA, Corsica, with a similar
history of endemic malaria but a low frequency of genetic resistances and Switzerland, historically a non-endemic malaria country with low frequency of
MGA. Protocols to detect Plasmodium sp. DNA, G6PD A- and β-Thalassemia were designed and optimized and ancient G6PD and beta-globin sequences
were recovered from skeletons over the last 2000 years. Here we present the methods used and the preliminary data obtained.
Vilar, Miguel [204] see Alfonso-Durruty, Marta
Vilar, Miguel (National Geographic), Flavia Morello (Universidad de Magallanes) and Marta Alfonso-Durruty (University of Kansas)
[206]             Migration Waves, Genetic Drift and the Peopling of Fuego-Patagonia
The colonization of Fuego-Patagonia is filled with questions of origin, timing and migratory routes taken by early colonizers (inland hunter gatherers) and
later migrants, the highly-specialized marine populations. Our study compares mitochondrial DNA sequences taken from 20 prehistoric samples (teeth)
ranging in age between 7,200 and 1,000 cal yrs B.P. (before present) to results from 38 modern Patagonians (Kaweskar, Mapuche-Huilliche and Yagan)
who participated as part of the Genographic Project.
The prehistoric results show three distinct Native American haplogroups (C1, D1 and D4h3a), whereas modern participants were C1b, C1b13, D1, D4h3a,
B2i2. The prevalence of haplogroups C1, D1, D4h3a in the modern and ancient samples shows consistency, while the higher diversity in modern groups
reflects mixing from Mapuche populations from central Chile and Argentina, introducing lineages C1b13 and B2i2. Among the Yagan, haplgroups C1b and
D1 dominated, likely reflecting processes of early settlement followed by genetic drift, exacerbated by the genocide committed against them during
historical times. The oldest sample (7,200 B.P.) was also C1. Among the modern Kawesqar, 60 percent were D4h3a, a lineage also found in prehistoric
marine settlements and among modern coastal groups further north, suggesting the Kawesqar were possibly part of the second marine-adapted migration.
Vilches, Flora (Universidad de Chile) and Hector Morales (Universidad de Chile)
[135]             From Herders to Wage-Laborers and Back Again: Mountain Mobility in the Puna of Atacama, Northern Chile
Towards the end of the 19th Century, the subsistence mode of indigenous Atacameño society transited from an agricultural-pastoral economy to a more
diversified capitalist-based one. This transformation resulted from a growing mining industry in the northern region of Chile. While part of the indigenous
population migrated to the new productive enclaves, others remained in their territory, especially the herders of the puna. These highlanders, however, also
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            464
took part of the new capitalist order as wage laborers in sulfur mines and llareta exploitation companies, all located in the mountain range. From
archaeological research and oral history, we have detected the constant movement of indigenous laborers between different companies depending on the
benefits that they offered. Such “transhumant” mobility was possible due to the cultural capital of these peoples, which translated in a deep knowledge of
their territory as well as outstanding physical strength and endurance, all of which enabled them to accomplish hard work in a harsh environment. We
contend that highlanders’ cultural capital operated as a means of resistance to poor labor conditions. Indeed, along with their constant itinerancy,
Atacameños managed to maintain wage labor hand in hand with Andean practices such as earth rituals and the “flowering” of herds.
Villasenor-Marchal, Antonio [207] see Kuzminsky, Susan
Vinson, Dale [148] see Chisholm, Linda
Vint, James (Desert Archaeology, Inc.) and Fred L. Nials (Desert Archaeology, Inc.)
[55]              Riparian Oases and Environmental Variation during the Archaic Period in Southern Arizona, 4000 to 2000 B.P.
Late Archaic forager-farmers in the Sonoran Desert lived in a resource-rich but water-poor environment. Rivers that flowed through major valleys supported
lush riparian habitat, creating linear oases bounded by foothills covered by desertscrub vegetation and “sky island” mountain ranges. Hunting and foraging
in these diverse ecosystems supported small but stable populations throughout the region, and by 4000 B.P. low-level maize agriculture was incorporated
into the subsistence diet. Irrigation-based agriculture on river floodplains was developed by 3500 B.P., and became an integral though not central part of
the subsistence economy. Rivers and their riparian corridors were vulnerable to climatic variation, in particular changes in precipitation regimes due to
ENSO fluctuations. We present a reconstruction of the Santa Cruz River in southern Arizona as a case study of human response to local environmental
variation. Geomorphic and archaeological data combined with proxy climatic measures based on tree ring records are used to infer potential effects of river
regime on forager-farmer communities in the Tucson Basin. Chronological analyses reveal change in early agricultural settlement locations attributable to
changes in river conditions. We conclude that the mixed foraging-farming economy minimized risk from local environmental variation, and remained a
viable subsistence strategy for some 2,000 years.
Vitry, Christian [259] see Cruz, Pablo
Vogel, Melissa [92] see Buhrow, Kristin
Voigt, Eric [243] see Luhman, Hope
Volta, Beniamino (University of California, San Diego) and Joel D. Gunn (University of North Carolina at Greensboro)
[59]              The Political Geography of Long-Distance Trade in the Maya Lowlands: Comparing Proxies for Power Structure and Exchange Networks
A critical issue for understanding the relationships between Maya political geography and long-distance economic exchange is that many trade goods are
archaeologically invisible. Iconographic depictions of feathers, cacao, and textiles—along with evidence for production and the sheer biological necessity of
salt—indicate that these goods were widely traded alongside more durable items such as obsidian, jadeite, marine products, and ceramics. This paper
explores the possibility of using political networks as a proxy for the flows of undetectable commodities. Such a hypothesis hinges on the notion that
exchange systems and power relations are both reflections of the underlying structure of the political economy. We use data from hieroglyphic inscriptions
and elite ceramic exchange to model the shape and extent of political networks at different moments in time. We test the proxy hypothesis by comparing
these reconstructions against studies of obsidian exchange networks in the Maya region. We then extend the model of economic flows to perishable
commodities using least-cost path calculations to evaluate relative efficiency and potential variations among trade routes for different commodities. In
particular, we focus on reconstructing the political geography of long-distance exchange in the Elevated Interior Region of southern Campeche and
northern Peten.
Von Baeyer, Madelynn (University of Connecticut)
[19]              How Do Households Work? Examining plant use during the Late Chalcolithic at Çadır Höyük, Turkey
This paper presents archaeobotanical data from the Late Chalcolithic (LC) archaeobotanical assemblage at Çadır Höyük, a mounded site on the north
central Anatolian plateau with almost continuous occupation from the Middle Chalcolithic through the Byzantine period. Architectural and metallurgical
evidence indicate that during the LC, Çadır was developing as a regional rural center, which makes it an ideal site to study the role that households
occupied during in emerging systems of social hierarchy and complexity. This study addresses how understanding the depositional and taphonomic
processes that acted on the macrobotanical plant remains can inform studies on household subsistence economies, organization of labor, and differences
in plant use between households.
von Nagy, Chris [230] see Russ, Jon
von Nagy, Christopher (UNR / FSU)
[230]             The Urban Origins Project at Quiotepec-Oxtotitlán, Guerrero
The large Early to Late Formative site of Quiotepec-Oxtotitlán, best known for Oxtotitlán Cave and its associated Middle to Late Formative polychrome
murals, is the site of on-going archaeological research since 2012 by the Urban Origins Project. Our goal is twofold: to develop a richly detailed
documentation of the art and its physical and chronological context at Quiotepec-Oxotitlán and to investigate the political economic underpinnings of the
artistic production and possible elements of a ritual economy at the site and within the broader region. Over the course of three seasons of research, we
have focused on the development of a new, high resolution and three-dimensional record of the art and its immediate archaeological context, as well as the
study of the larger Formative community in the surrounding region. Our research has involved satellite and drone-based remote sensing, ground mapping,
geophysical prospection, and exploratory excavations. In this paper, we discuss our use of photogrammetric and structure-in-motion techniques coupled
with micro drone-based aerial survey to develop a detailed three-dimensional map of the site and its natural and architectural details as one element of our
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                465
broader research at the ancient community.
[230]            Chair
Von Nicolai, Caroline (Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich)
[188]            Long Distance Networks in Neolithic Europe
In Neolithic Europe, certain artefacts made of high-quality stone were distributed over considerable distances. For example, Jade axe heads, which
originate from the Alps, were found between 5300 and 3700 B.C. in small numbers all over Central and Western Europe as far as Brittany, Scandinavia
and the British Isles, i.e., up to 1700 km from their original quarries. Likewise, between 4500 and 2200 B.C. single daggers, arrowheads and other artefacts
made of flint that came from Northern Italy have been recovered in Switzerland, Southern Germany and Austria north of the Alps. Both find groups differ
from others regarding their wide distribution, their relatively rare occurrence, and—especially in the case of the jade axe heads—regarding their use and
find contexts. They can therefore be interpreted as socially significant objects. Their wide diffusion suggests the existence of supraregional networks and
communication spheres. Within these networks, a certain intercultural sense of coherence determined which raw materials were particularly appreciated,
and which objects were thought to be valuable and socially significant. The aim of this paper is to study how such networks worked and which exchange
mechanisms contributed to the large distribution of the artefacts under consideration.
Von-Nagy, Christopher [230] see Schmitz, Kirk
Voytek, Barbara
[81]             Romancing The Stones: Analyses of the Chipped Stone from the Tisza Culture Site of Hódmezővásárhely-Gorzsa, Hungary
The chipped stone tools from the Gorzsa tell in southeast Hungary have been studied over a period of 15 years with effectively five study seasons (1999,
2000, 2001, 2011, and 2012). A total of over 3,000 chipped stone artefacts were examined in terms of raw material, technology, and microscopic evidence
of use, during a study which took place at the Mora Ference Museum in Szeged. This paper provides the study objectives, methodology, and findings.
Using lithic data from the site, the author, together with Elisabetta Starnini (University of Torino, Italy), examined social and cultural developments that
characterized the Late Neolithic. It was clear that the inhabitants of the site of Hódmezővásárhely-Gorzsa had a good knowledge of, and access to, the raw
materials that they chose. By the time of the Tisza archaeological culture represented at the site, the landscape had been enculturated.The agro-pastoral
subsistence base had been established. Connections with neighbouring territories, through exchange and/or trade, had been developed. Transformation
continued, however, within the society particularly in terms of the development of social relations and the growth of socio-economic complexity.
Vrac, Mathieu [211] see Burke, Ariane
Vranich, Alexei (Cotsen Institute)
[107]            Nighttime Sky and Early Urbanism in the High Andes
Popular understanding of the relationship between the rise of early civilization and astronomy emphasizes the observance of particular moments in the
cycle of the sun. This pattern is particularly strong at the Bolivian highland Andean site of of Tiwanaku (A.D. 500–950), a megalithic site known for its
“Temple of the Sun,” “Gateway of the Sun,” and solstice festival that attracts thousands. Recent research throughout the Titicaca Basin documents a wide
range of celebrated astronomical observations during the initial development of social complexity. While early sites developed at the confluence of such
predictable variables as nearby water sources and fodder for animals, they were also preferentially located where alignments between the nighttime sky
and sacred mountains could be seen. This initially modest public architecture formed the setting for structured encounters between transhumance groups
and dispersed sedentary peoples. Most of these locations were cyclically occupied, with communal gatherings defined by small-scale architecture. A rare
few became the nucleus for settlements that reached monumental proportions. The rituals that defined social interaction in these locations, as well as the
relationship of attendees to the sacred world, developed into the complex institutions that became the basis for the development of the primary state.
Vujevic, Dario [189] see Zaro, Gregory
Wackett, Joshua and Sofia Chacaltana Cortez
[219]            Ceramic Production in the Colonial Moquegua Valley
Recent scholarship demonstrates a growth in archaeological analysis of Spanish colonial reducciónes (which is the resettlement of several small villages
into one larger Spanish controlled town) in Andean South America. Critical to understanding the impact of reducciones on indigenous populations is
examining the ways in which the production and circulation of craft goods was reworked with Spanish conquest. In characterizing the elemental
composition of archaeological pottery, Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) is an invaluable tool in examining
resource procurement as well as long distance exchange in the past. In this paper, I report new data derived from LA-ICP-MS analyses of two sites in the
Moquegua Valley, Peru: Torata Alta and Sabaya. Both sites were founded during Inca control of the valley but were also occupied into the seventeenth
century and have strong Spanish colonial components. Analyzed samples included early colonial Period ceramics that were excavated from two structures
identified as indigenous (Van Buren 1993) at Torata Alta and two structures at Sabaya. Comparing the data with the existing ICPMS data base on locally
available clays, I examine differential resource procurement as well as access to imported goods among indigenous and Spanish communities in early
colonial Moquegua.
Wagner, Friedrich [145] see Wagner, Ursel
Wagner, Ursel (TU-Muenchen), Friedrich Wagner (TU Muenxhen), Werner Haeusler (TU Muenchen), Benilde Costa (University of Coimbra) and
Jean-Yves Blot (Universidade Nova de Lisboa)
[145]            Mössbauer and XRD Study of Roman Amphorae Buried in the Sea for Two Millennia
A decade ago Roman Haltern 70 amphorae were found in the sea near Cortiçais on the Atlantic coast of Portugal. They stem from a shipwreck dated to
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                466
between 15 B.C. and 15 A.D. We have studied fragments of these amphorae by Mössbauer spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction to look for changes caused
by two millennia of exposure to seawater. For comparison we studied Haltern 70 type amphorae excavated on land at Castro do Vieito in the north of
Portugal. The sherds show a layer structure with 2 to 3 mm thick soft buff outer layers and a harder gray core. The different layers were studied by
Mössbauer spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction. The Mössbauer spectra of the surface layers show that up to 80 percent of the iron is present as goethite
particles which are superparamagnetic at room temperature but exhibit magnetically split spectra at 4.2 K. The goethite is too fine-grained to be detected
by X-ray diffraction. The spectra of the cores contain up to 40 percent of ferrous iron and resemble those of the land-buried amphorae. The results show
that the iron in the outer layers of the sherds converted to goethite under the prolonged influence of the seawater.
Wagner, Mark
[175]             Chair
Wait, Gerald
[89]              Discussant
Wake, Thomas [132] see Lightfoot, Kent
Waldron, Tony [187] see DuBois, Erin
Walker, Renee (SUNY Oneonta) and Tanya Peres (Florida State University)
[9]               The Ups and Downs of Uploading Data to the Eastern Archaic Faunal Database with the Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR)
Uploading faunal data from eastern Archaic sites to the Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR) as members of the Eastern Archaic Faunal Working Group
(EAFWG) was a very exciting prospect. We are pleased to be involved in a project that will address significant questions about animal use during the
Archaic period. However, making the data comparable entailed some challenges and compromises. While most zooarchaeologists agree on taxonomic
designations, developing ontologies for elements, portions, fragments, modification, and other areas proved challenging. For example, decisions had to be
made about using existing ontologies or creating new ontologies. In the case of the taxonomic designations, much of the existing ontology could be used.
Conversely, a new ontology for the Eastern Archaic subperiods had to be developed. The sites of Dust Cave and site 40DV7 illustrate how data from two
different sites collected by two different zooarchaeologists can be integrated to answer questions regarding the use of aquatic vs. terrestrial taxa during the
Archaic period in the southeast.
Walker, William (New Mexico State University) and Chadwick K. Burt (Vista Sciences, Las Cruces, New Mexico)
[18]              Pottery Agents: A Case Study of Nonhuman Beings from the American Southwest
Since the enlightenment western approaches to material culture have distinguished between natural and supernatural processes. This demarcation
produces archaeological perspectives at odds with ethnographically known cultures and likely past ones. Contemporary Native American ontologies
emphasize the animacy of things such as architecture and pottery. An important theoretical question therefore, is what social relationships did people
establish with material objects, and how did these associations change through time? Theory based on this approach to material culture would
dramatically impact a range of fundamental archaeological assumptions about analytical categories. In this paper we offer a case study from the American
Southwest focused on the life history of mortuary practices involved with placing ritually broken pottery vessels (i.e., kill holes) with the dead. Starting with
the Hohokam in the 10th century, we trace this custom through its apex with the Mimbres during the 11th century and beyond in various prehistoric
populations including the Anasazi, Mogollon, and Salado into the historic period at Hopi and Zuni. We then explore the implications of this tradition for
study of past object agency and the significance of considering indigenous ontologies. We argue that these mortuary vessels likely existed as nonhuman
beings in their own right.
Walker, Martin P. [98] see Craib, Alexander
Walker, Debra (University of Florida)
[109]             Moderator
[158]             Discussant
Walker, Jeff, Don Hann (US Forest Service), Cathy Lindberg (US Forest Service) and Alicia Beat (Us Forest Service)
[165]             Celebrating Partnerships and Investigating Historical Cultural Diversity in the Pacific Northwest Region of the U.S. Forest Service
The Pacific Northwest (PNW) Region of the U.S. Forest Service has engaged partners and volunteers from diverse groups for over four decades: Friends
groups to restore lookouts and log cabins; Passport In Time projects to engage the public in archaeological site testing; and universities, museums and
independent researchers to investigate and interpret a wide variety of sites. We collaborate closely with the Native American tribes to preserve and protect
their heritage and places of cultural and religious significance. PNW Asian communities have partnered with the USFS to explore their deep histories on
Western public lands, with particular interest in the Chinese diaspora and Japanese WWII Internment. The PNW Region has identified unique African
American historical logging communities, and evidence of Greek, Basque, Italian laborers sites. As we celebrate the 50th anniversary of NHPA, we are
examining historic records and archaeological evidence to identify distinguishing markers for other distinct ethnic populations who have had a presence on
the landscapes the USFS manages.
Walker, Martin (University of Tennessee, Knoxville) and Thaddeus Bissett (Cultural Resource Analysts, Inc. (CRA))
[277]             Working Within the Curves: Examining Issues of Resolution and Accuracy When Using Sea-Level Curves in Archaeological Contexts
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             467
Sea-level curves have been one of the main tools used within archaeology to understand human settlement patterns in coastal environments. Questions
remain, however, about which curve (or curves) are most appropriately used both at different geographic and temporal resolutions. In order to evaluate
these differences in resolution, we examine 161 radiocarbon dates from 32 shell rings from across the lower Atlantic and Gulf coasts. We then plot them
against a regional high-resolution reconstruction of past sea levels and local sea-level curves to assess curve-specific differences in predictions about sea
levels, shoreline migration, and the extent of intertidal zones near dated shell rings between 6000 and 2500 cal B.P. This paper furthers the discussion
regarding coastal sea-level curves and the balance between hypothesis testing and understanding the limitations of existing data sets.
Walker, John (UCF Department of Anthropology)
[282]             Mapping a Large Scale Amazonian Landscape using GIS
Among the many challenges for landscape archaeologists is the “palimpsest” nature of the landscapes that they try to study. Archaeologists around the
world have long been at work using GIS to study a wide range of questions across scales from meters to thousands of kilometers, and from single
occupations to thousands of years. Thinking of archaeological landscapes as a palimpsest uses the recognition that connecting individual landscape
features exclusively to a single moment or period of time is not possible. In a case study from the Southwestern Amazon, a landscape of earthworks that
                                                                                              2
are now accessible in public domain imagery, was mapped in detail over about 10,000 km , and can now be more easily analyzed at several scales. A
palimpsest interpretation of this landscape, based on this more comprehensive dataset, makes possible new interpretations of the connection between
spatial patterns and Amazonian histories, at several scales.
Walker, Karen (Florida Museum of Natural History), William Marquardt (Florida Museum of Natural History), Lee Newsom (Pennsylvania State
University) and Merald Clark (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[290]             The Pineland Site Complex: A Southwest Florida Coastal Wetsite
South Florida is internationally known for its waterlogged sites, Key Marco and Fort Center being perhaps the best known. In 1990, the Florida Museum of
Natural History was given a marvelous carved wooden bird figurehead, 27.4 cm in length, later interpreted as part of a mechanical waterbird figurehead
(ca. A.D. 865–985). It had been found in 1971 in a spoil pile adjacent to a mosquito-control ditch at the southern boundary of the Pineland complex. That
such an important but normally perishable artifact was found in good condition had us wondering what Pineland’s potential was for presenting wet deposits.
Less than two years later, we discovered an intact waterlogged midden along one of the earlier (ca. A.D. 200–250) shorelines. We excavated a 4-x-1-m
area (30-cm depth) of it, recovering unburned wood, cordage, and seeds, in addition to the usual shell, bone, and ceramic materials. More recently, in 2015
at another shoreline location, we excavated a 2-x-3-m area (40-cm depth) of waterlogged midden (ca. A.D. 500–600), again recovering unburned wood,
seeds, and cordage, including a large fragment of knotted cordage. We comment on these discoveries in terms of intra-site location and temporality, and
the predictability of future finds at Pineland and elsewhere.
Walker , Martin [55] see Anderson, David
Waller, Joseph (PAL) and Alan Leveillee (PAL)
[42]              Villages, Horticulture, and the Narragansett: Native American Settlement and Resource Exploitation along the Southern Rhode Island
                  Coast ca. 1300–1400 A.D.
The Salt Pond archaeological site was identified during environmental review planning for a proposed residential subdivision in the 1980s. Archaeological
investigations in the 1980s, 1990s, and early 2000s provided glimpses into Native American settlement and subsistence strategies within Rhode Island's
coastal zone. Continued multi-disciplinary study of this culturally significant place has provided a wealth of new information on the late pre-contact
environment, Native American village settlement, structure, seasonality, coastal resources exploitation, horticulture, and the formation of Narragansett
Indian territory during the centuries leading up to European contact.
Waller, Kyle [66] see Krug, Andrew
Waller, Kyle (University of Missouri)
[275]             Gene Flow at Paquime: Cranial Non-Metric Approaches to Regional Social Interactions
The origins of the Casas Grandes phenomenon remain an essential, if elusive pursuit for southwest/northwest archaeologists. The explanations are
numerous, and include migrations, in-situ development, local emulation of prestigious Mesoamerican traits, and several different combinations therein. In
this study, a series of biodistance analyses are conducted using different cranial and dental metric and non-metric traits. Several hypothesized sources of
migrants and cultural transmission are compared to Viejo period and Medio period skeletal samples to investigate patterns of prehistoric gene flow, and to
examine how they change during the Medio period transition. Routes of transit between sites are calculated by least cost and waterway analyses to
control for patterns of isolation by distance.
R-Matrix analyses suggest several meaningful patterns. First, Paquime is more phenotypically similar to West Mexican and Mimbres populations than
would be expected based upon geographic distances. Second, Paquime has greater than expected phenotypic variance when compared to Viejo and
other regional Southwestern populations. Lastly, these patterns appear to differ when conducting analyses by sex, indicating patterns of migration or
exogamy. The implications for understanding the development of Paquime, and its interactions with late prehistoric Northwest and Southwest groups are
considered.
[275]             Chair
Wallis, Neill [8] see Donop, Mark
Wallis, Neill (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[18]              Materialities of Religious Transformation from Coast to Coast in Pre-Columbian Florida
During the seventh century in Florida, a decisive shift is apparent in the ways people were positioned in relation to burial sites and how they manufactured
and interacted with portable objects. The transition ushered in the Weeden Island archaeological culture, well-known for the prevalence of exquisitely
crafted pottery vessels and a characteristic mortuary regime widely adopted across the Gulf coastal plain and beyond. This paper examines the historical
moment of change in terms of shifting material nodes in relational networks constituted through burial mounds and their contents. From the vantage point
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  468
of three distinctive coastal regions—the eastern panhandle, the lower Suwannee River, and the Lower St. Johns River—diverse ways of navigating
changing relational fields through various loci of spiritual power are explored. Considerations include the forces exerted by the materiality of existing (pre-
seventh century) burial mounds, the orientation of mounds in relation to other landscape and celestial features, the depositional structure of mounds, and
the distributed networks enacted through pottery vessels, particularly three-dimensional effigies of birds and humans with singular referents. This multi-
sited analysis illustrates the dynamic interplay of local and regional material intercessions of spirit worlds and the cosmos.
Wallman, Diane (University of South Florida)
[100]              Histories and Trajectories of Socio-Ecological Landscapes in the Lesser Antilles: Implications of Colonial Period Zooarchaeological
                   Research
The arrival and colonization of the Caribbean by Europeans beginning in the fifteenth century transformed the already dynamic landscapes of the region.
To accommodate the slave-labor supported colonial plantation system and its orientation towards market exports, the region witnessed the introduction of
exotic plants and animals, creating a ‘creolization’ of flora and fauna. In this paper, I discuss how environmental archaeology contributes to a nuanced and
diachronic understanding of the human-environment dialectic in the West Indies; such research also serves to delineate the timing of introductions and
extinctions, and identify any changes in biodiversity and ecosystem health. Further, under colonial rule, disenfranchised and enslaved communities
developed informal ways to resist or respond to the dominant system, such as artisanal fishing and agriculture. Many of these economic practices continue
today, and are now vulnerable to anthropogenic climate change, habitat destruction and overfishing. Zooarchaeological data can elucidate these localized
histories and help explain how the colonial past continues to impact current patterns of natural resource use and modern socio-ecological landscapes. To
this end, I present faunal data from three sites in the Lesser Antilles to illustrate how well structured research designs allow for the robust exploration of
these problems.
[100]              Chair
Walsh, Matthew [171] see Prentiss, Anna
Walsh-Haney, Heather (Florid Gulf Coast University) and Victoria Sanford (Lehman College)
[24]               Feminicide and the Struggle to Fight Impunity in Guatemala
The mortality rate of women in peacetime Guatemala has reached the level documented at the height of the genocidal war that took 200,000 lives. These
female victims tend to be between 16 and 30 years-old with most of these brutal killings occurring within or near Guatemala City. To paraphrase UN
Rapporteur Philip Alston, female homicides are only the beginning of the cost because a society that lives in fear of killing is unable to combat impunity and
cannot get on with life and the business of creating a just society.
Indeed, impunity is an invitation to commit crime and promote lawlessness. In order to document Guatemalan feminicide and impunity, Drs. Sanford and
Walsh-Haney observed system-wide failings over the last 8 years that included poor or absent documentation of physical evidence as well as the lack of
judicial will to process feminicide cases. As a case on point, these anthropologists accompanied the family of a feminicide victim to the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights in Spring 2015. This presentation discusses the frontier landscapes of a family seeking justice and a court attempting to dismantle
political structures that support impunity and devalue female lives.
Walter, Tamra, Valentina L. Martinez (Florida Atlantic University) and Sari Turcotte (Texas Tech University)
[204]              Clay Matters: Pottery Changes at C4-084B, a Manteño Site in the Cloud Forest of El Pital, Coastal Ecuador
Recent archaeological investigations at site (C4-084B) within the Rio Blanco valley in coastal Ecuador yielded significant data regarding Manteño
occupation of the region during the Integration Period (A.D. 700–1500). Situated in a cloud forest in the community of El Pital, the site contains the
remnants of masonry residential structures along with evidence for at least two different occupations. Phase I, the earlier occupation, is separated from
Phase II, the later occupation, by a gravel fill. Generally, the formal and stylistic ceramic analysis suggests cultural continuity between the phases.
Specifically however, the study implies that the early Phase I Manteño pottery differed in decorative techniques from Phase II ceramics. This poster
explores the potential these new data have for helping outline the Manteño occupation in the cloud forest. The poster also examines intra-site correlations
and the meaning such changes in decorative ceramic techniques might convey.
Walters, Michael (University of Oklahoma)
[7]                Shaft Tombs in the Caddo World
Shaft tombs are an interesting McCurtain Phase (1300–1700 A.C.E.) mortuary ritual in the Caddo region. The tombs are dug into the center of preexisting
mounds and around 8-10 individuals are supine, primarily interred, and facing the same direction. The shaft tombs could have been constructed as a
revitalization ceremony after a period of abandonment from a site. Alternatively, the tombs could have functioned as a termination event at the end of an
occupation for these sites. However, the purpose of the tombs are unclear. The goal of this project is to compile data from all shaft tombs in the Caddo
region to test hypotheses about the place-making function of shaft tombs. Variables such as the date the shaft tomb was constructed and periods of
settlement will help to address this question. Other variables (age, sex, artifacts, etc.) will be used for further inquiries. Data will be gathered from all known
published sources.
Walters, Kristina (The University of Montana) and Lorena Craig (The University of Montana)
[247]              The Co-phylogeny of Earth-Diver Creation Myths and Language: Insights into Evolution Processes and Migration
This paper presents results from co-phylogenetic analysis of Earth-Diver creation myths and regional language history. This study seeks to understand
process of dissemination of traits of historically congruent cultural traditions across time and geographic space. We hypothesize creation myths and
language have parallel evolutionary history and form a combined set of core cultural traditions. Thus creation stories and language will map closely
together. Results from phylogenetic methods and other statistical analysis of data sets will demonstrate that in the case of language and creation myths,
evolutionary processes of culture traditions are a unified system. Creation myths, similar to language, are subject to conformity bias and less prone to
horizontal transmission because errors in transmission will be subject to correction. In a broader sense, co-phylogeny studies, like this one, will provide
new insights into evolutionary processes of multiple cultural traditions. Additionally, branching trees from Earth Diver creation myths found in both Eurasia
and North America are suggestive of an early migration to the new world. Therefore our research adds to existing studies of early migration patterns to the
New World and population spread across the North American continent.
[247]              Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              469
Walton, David (Boston University)
[129]             Use-wear Analysis and Obsidian Tool Functions Before and After Teotihuacan
Obsidian was one of the most important commodities for residents of ancient central Mexico before and after the great city of Teotihuacan. While previous
research on stone tools in Mesoamerican archaeology has focused mostly on identifying production sequences, workshop locations, and market exchange,
this presentation highlights how different technological forms of obsidian tools were actually used by household residents for specific tasks. A sample of
464 obsidian artifacts from the sites of La Laguna (Terminal Formative Period), the Tlajinga Barrio, Teotihuacan (Classic Period), and Cihuatecpan
(Postclassic Period) were analyzed through the methods of high power use-wear analysis. The results indicate change over time in the frequency of non-
subsistence related activities associated with blade tools, which peak at Teotihuacan. Different spatial patterns also exist between the excavated
compounds at 17:S3E1 and 18:S3E1 within the Tlajinga Barrio. The identification of ritual bloodletting instruments at La Laguna and Teotihuacan is
discussed. The results of original use-wear experiments with central Mexican obsidian and materials such as maguey, turkey, wood, bone, and shell are
presented and compared directly to archaeological examples. Specific directions will also be provided to help other researchers develop future use-wear
studies.
Walz, Jonathan (Rollins College)
[269]             African Power Plays: Inland Beads, Shells, and Shell Beads in Tanzania, A.D. 700–1350
This paper grapples with seemingly mundane objects frequently encountered, but largely ignored, in East African archaeology: beads and shells. I report
on beads of various materials, shells, and other residues identified during systematic research in hinterland NE Tanzania, A.D. 700–1350. Finds of glass
and stone beads with Indian Ocean origins and local beads of landsnail shell alter, in a meaningful manner, archaeological views of oceanic ties to interior
East Africa. Material patterning suggests, for instance, that Africans were conscious to shifts in the region’s political economy a millennium ago as ties to
the Swahili Coast waned. Copious landsnail shell discs produced in the continent’s hinterland may have served to help reforge ties with the littoral as the
coastal Swahili increasingly oriented themselves to the Indian Ocean. Beads, shells, and shell beads in hinterland Tanzania demonstrate early Indian
Ocean ties and African power plays in antiquity. Attention to the socially embedded nature of African objects helps to remake the region’s archaeology.
Wanatee-Buffalo, Suzanne (Meskwaki Nation, Iowa, USA)
[266]             Chair
Wandsnider, LuAnn (University of Nebraska) and Matthew Douglass (University of Nebraska-Lincoln)
[94]              Human Use of the Sand Hills (Central Plains, North America) during the Peri-Medieval Warm Period: Expectations and Preliminary
                  Observations
The Sand Hills of northcentral Nebraska (Central Plains, North America) were transgressively devegetated and revegetated during the Medieval Warm
Period yet also may have hosted several oases. We rely on Binford’s hunter-gatherer frames of reference to model a series of expectations for human
occupation here in terms of innovation, resource management systems organization, social network scale and character, and place development as the
Medieval Warm Period waxed and waned. Extant archaeological data comment on these models.
Wang, Li-ying
[106]             The Influence of European Contact in the 17th Century in Taiwan
This proposed research will discuss the interaction between Europeans and indigenous people in the seventeenth century, which is one of the important
topics of historical archaeology in Taiwan, and explore how the indigenous societies responded to the intense culture contact with Europeans. Taiwan was
colonized by Europeans in the early seventeenth century and was viewed as a trading base for commerce with Japan and the coastal area of China. In this
period, Taiwan had become part of the global trade network in the post-European period, which not only brought the indigenous societies great amount of
imported materials, but also influenced the indigenous material culture and societies. European trade network might stimulate the social differentiation if
individuals control these imported goods and lead to social complexity. On the contrary, the intense circulation of trade goods might also undermine the
monopolization of leaders to accumulate the wealth. By comparing the material culture of indigenous people before and after European contact, we might
be able to figure out if there is the transformation of social organization in indigenous societies due to European contact, or Europeans were just another
trader traders who under previous established principles of exchange network.
Wang, Xin [173] see Li, Yuqi
Wang, Yanxi (The Field Museum)
[173]             Landscape Variability and Regional Settlement Pattern of Shang's Periphery: From Regional Full-Coverage Surveys
The landscape variability was one of the most important factors influencing the regional sociopolitical organizations in the peripheral regions of Shang. In
this study, we compared the regional settlement pattern of two regions—one at the broad alluvial plain of the Middle Huai River, which presents a loosely-
structured, but still hierarchical regional settlement pattern; and the other at the hilly Guan River Valley, which shows a dramatic retreat of human
occupation. By investigating these two settlement patterns, we hope to look into the variability in the sociopolitical organizations at the peripheral regions
during the Shang period.
Wang, Qiang and Enrique López-Hurtado (Programa de Investigación Arqueológica, Instituto)
[283]             The Role of Metals in Ychsma Society: A Case Study of Panquilma
In this paper, I present a study of the role of metals at Panquilma site during the Ychsma phase (c. A.D. 1000–1470). Although metals were found in all
three sectors at Panquilma (ceremonial, residential, and mortuary), the largest collection was from Sector 3, the burial area. Some mummy bundles were
found in Sector 2, but they contain far fewer metals compared to the burial area. Similarly, very few metals were found in ritual or ceremonial contexts in
Sector 1. It is widely accepted that metals are very important in Andean society. But what metals meant to the people of Panquilma still needs more
research. In addition, there is no evidence that metals were produced locally, so the production area for the metals is also an important question that needs
to be addressed. In this paper, I explore the role of metal at panquilma and its possible source areas by considering excavated materials from Panquilma
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 470
and other contemporary Ychsma phase sites.
Warinner, Christina [62] see Lewis, Cecil
Warinner, Christina (University of Oklahoma), Krithivasan Sankaranarayanan (University of Oklahoma), Thomas Stoellner (Ruhr-Universität
Bochum), Frank Ruehli (University of Zurich) and Cecil Lewis (University of Oklahoma)
[223]             An Empty Gut: The Recent Loss of Our Microbial Symbionts
The increasing connectedness of global human populations during the Anthropocene has spread microbial pathogens far and wide. Yet at the same time,
the human gut microbiome has simplified, leaving industrialised societies with less complex and diverse microbiota, and increased risk for chronic
inflammatory disorders. Among the many taxa that have been lost is the bacterial genus Treponema. Treponema are present in the gut microbiota of great
apes, present day hunter-gatherers in Africa and South America, and many small-scale agricultural societies, but they have been systematically lost in
metropolitan North America and Europe. In this paper we present paleogenomic data from well-preserved human coprolites from several ancient global
populations. Our findings suggest that the human gut microbiome has undergone dramatic changes over the past two millennia. We argue that
sometimes it is the transported beliefs, behaviors, and practices of humans, rather than the direct translocation of species, that ultimately have the most
profound and widespread effects on species composition.
Warren, Daniel, Robert Church (C & C Technologies, An Oceaneering International C), Robert Westrick (C & C Technologies, An Oceaneering
International C), Melanie Damour (Bureau of Ocean Energy Management) and Leila Hamden (George Mason University)
[39]              Deepwater Shipwrecks and Oil Spill Impacts: A Multidisciplinary Investigation of Shipwreck Impacts from the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
The 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico caused substantial perturbations within the coastal and marine environments. In 2013, the
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management and other partners initiated a multidisciplinary study to examine the effects of the spill on deepwater shipwrecks.
This poster presents an overview of the ongoing research into the microbial biodiversity and corrosion processes at wooden and metal-hulled shipwrecks
within and outside the spill area. This research will provide baseline information for continued monitoring of ecosystems, corrosion processes, and long-
term site formation studies of these shipwrecks.
Warren, Daniel [83] see Damour, Melanie
Warren, Amy (University of Missouri, Columbia), Lisa Sattenspiel (University of Missouri, Columbia), Alan C. Swedlund (University of
Massachusetts, Amherst) and George J. Gumerman, III (Santa Fe Institute)
[168]             A Family of Five is Not the Same as One Household: The Effects of Disaggregation on Demographic Outcomes in Archaeological
                  Simulation Models
Many archaeological agent-based computer models (ABMs) use the household as the smallest unit of investigation but, in order to answer questions about
how factors such as disease, social interaction, and population movement contributed to population dynamics in prehistory, there is a need for individual-
level models. Our team has worked to disaggregate an early archaeological ABM, the Artificial Anasazi model, into an individual-level model, the Artificial
Long House Valley model. The baseline version of the latter model has been designed to be as similar as possible to the original model and uses identical
environmental data and demographic parameters. A new version of the model maintains the structure of the original, but includes updated environmental
and demographic input data.
We compare the results of simulations using the household-level and both individual-level models, and discuss how factors required for disaggregation,
such as individual level fertility and mortality, contribute to differing results. Most notably, individual-level simulations generate populations that are
significantly smaller than those generated by the household-level model. Through this process, we have learned that disaggregation of a model from the
household level to the individual level is not a straightforward process and can result in the emergence of unexpected differences.
Warren, Matthew (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[206]             In-Between Spaces in Far-out Places: Initial Findings on the Practice of Inka Colonialism in the Frontier Region of Pulquina Arriba
The region of Pulquina Arriba represented a geographically distant and loosely incorporated territory in the final decades of the Inka Empire. Located in the
modern department of Santa Cruz, Bolivia, Pulquina Arriba was a relatively small Inka administrative site strategically constructed along a preexisting
indigenous road network that ran adjacent to a rich agricultural valley. As such, it was involved in the oversight of local agricultural operations by
populations native to the area, and likely played an important role in supporting other Inka colonial activities along this lightly controlled portion of the
eastern imperial frontier. This poster will present the results of a regional survey conducted in the vicinity of the Inka site, specifically addressing (1) the
settlement pattern determined within the study region and any observed differences in material culture assemblages between sites, (2) the types of
activities in which indigenous groups and the Inkas alike were engaged during their occupations of the region, and (3) the extent to which Inka colonial
activities seem to have altered preexisting indigenous sociopolitical structures and the implications of these changes.
Waselkov, Gregory (University of South Alabama)
[28]              On the Zooarchaeology of Bears in Southeastern North America
Ever since Irving Hallowell's classic 1926 study of the special mythic status of bears in the Subarctic, anthropologists are generally aware that many
peoples throughout the world have treated bears as something more than a straight forward subsistence resource. Hallowell attributed that special
relationship between Subarctic humans and bears to some striking parallels between bear and human behaviors and physiologies. If that were indeed the
case, then one would expect to see similar relationships outside the Subarctic, although in fact Hallowell found little evidence for special treatment of bears
in southern North America. However, no one has yet surveyed the considerable zooarchaeological, artifactual, ethnohistorical, and ethnographic
information on bears in southeastern North America. By taking into account the zooarchaeological evidence of bear hunting in this region, and specifically
by employing the human ecological perspective long advocated by Elizabeth Reitz -including such factors as bear demography, reproductive rate, habitat
use, seasonal availability, and trophic level- we can reconsider the roles of bears in the various cultures of southeastern Native North America.
Washburn, Eden and Lars Fehren-Schmitz (University of California Santa Cruz )
[276]             Molecular Archaeology In The Central Amazon: Paleogenetic and Isotopic Analyzes of Human Remains from Hatahara
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             471
This study examines early population dynamics and ecology at Hatahara, an approximately 1500-year-old archaeological site in the Brazilian Central
Amazon. Due to poor preservation of pre-Columbian human remains, little is known about the genetic make-up and diversity of this region before European
contact. In contrast to other regions of South America and especially the Central Andes, this underrepresentation of human paleobiological data inhibits
our potential to fully reconstruct Native South American population history and the demographic impact of European colonization. In order to reveal to what
extent population dynamic events accounted for cultural development in the Central Amazon, we analyzed ancient mitochondrial and nuclear DNA of 9
individuals originating from Hatahara. This analysis was done by using hybridization capture assays, coupled with Next Generation Sequencing.
Additionally, through collagen extracted from permanent molars, stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes were measured in order to reconstruct precise
changes in dietary composition, with the goal to potentially shed light on human-environmental interaction and its regulating effect on social organization.
Data from this study will provide key information into understanding this region prior to known European contact, and reveal to what extent external stimuli
shaped cultural development in the Central Amazon.
Watanabe, Shinya (Nanzan University, Japan)
[102]              Cajamarca during the Middle Horizon: Excavations at El Palacio Site
In this paper, we present the excavation data from the El Palacio site, a supposed administrative center of the Wari Empire, to consider interaction between
the Cajamarca culture and other areas. Kaolin ceramics are an important characteristic of the Cajamarca culture and present a tradition as long as 1,600
years, but at the same time indicate gradual changes during 5 phases. El Palacio site corresponds to the period from the Middle Cajamarca Phase B, C, to
the first part of the Late Cajamarca Phase. This site functioned when the Wari Empire had power and was abandoned at the same time as the demise of
that empire around A.D. 1000. We found foreign ceramics at the El Palacio site as well as new types of tombs and architecture, which are clear evidence of
interaction with other areas. We analyzed the material culture to reconstruct the composition of the people and the range of activities carried out at the site.
Finally, we consider the peculiarities of the Cajamarca culture and society.
Waterman, Anna J. [103] see Lillios, Katina
Waters, Gifford [18] see Cobb, Charles
Waters, Michael (Texas A&M University)
[21]               The First Americans South of the Continental Ice Sheets–Correlating the Late Pleistocene Archaeological and Genetic Records
There is strong empirical evidence showing that North and South America were occupied before Clovis. This comes from sites such as Monte Verde,
Chile, Paisley Caves, Oregon, Schaefer and Hebior, Wisconsin, Page-Ladson, Florida, Debra L. Friedkin, Texas, Wally’s Beach, Canada, and a few
others. This evidence places the initial occupation of the Americas at about 15,000 cal yr B.P. Quality chronological data for Clovis still place this complex
between 13,000 and 12,600 cal yr B.P. Genetic studies show that the First Americans hailed from northeast Asia. Genetic studies also show that a single
migration occurred into the Americas (south of the ice sheets) from this genetic source population after a brief isolation in Beringia. This migration gave
rise to all prehistoric and historic Native groups. This clearly means that there is continuity between pre-Clovis and Clovis sites, with these being the same
people with changing technologies. Given the Ice-Free corridor would have been closed until ca. 14,000 cal yr B.P., it seems logical to think that people
migrated along the Pacific coast and studies show that this corridor was viable by ca. 16,000 cal yr B.P. Agreement between the genetic models and the
empirical archaeological record is emerging.
Watson, Adam (American Museum of Natural History), Jim Enote (A:shiwi A:wan Museum and Heritage Center) and Nell Murphy (American
Museum of Natural History)
[30]               Consultation and Beyond: NAGPRA as a Gateway to Collaboration
With NAGPRA’s passage 25 years ago, many saw this federal mandate as an opportunity for museum professionals, scientists, and Native Americans to
assess and change the dynamics of their relationships. Few however, likely anticipated the full range of collaborations between Native communities and
institutions that emerged from NAGPRA consultations. One such example is the ongoing partnership between the American Museum of Natural History
(AMNH) and the A:shiwi A:wan Museum and Heritage Center in Zuni, New Mexico, which began with an NPS NAGPRA Documentation grant in 2010. The
ensuing consultations led to a number of positive outcomes including the discovery and Zuni remake of a 1923 ethnographic film of the Zuni Shalako
ceremony. These same consultations precipitated the Zuni Map Art exhibition at the AMNH, impacted continuing collections-based museum research, and
provided mutually enriching educational and internship opportunities. Finally, the AMNH has joined with other institutions in the development and
implementation of the innovative online Amidolanne Database Project. Seven years later, the Zuni-AMNH collaboration endures, strengthened by parallel
and at times intersecting projects, each with their own trajectories that ensure the longevity of the partnership for years to come.
Watson, Jessica and Jack Rossen (Ithaca College)
[90]               Tool Manufacture and Bone Breakage Patterns at a Haudenosaunee Site in New York
The Myers Farm site is located on a hill ten miles east of Cayuga Lake, central New York. It is a small mid-fifteenth century Cayuga farmstead and feasting
ground identified by a midden approximately ten meters in diameter. A large roasting pit, hearth features, and storage pits contained animal bone,
including worked tools and food debris. This paper describes a preliminary faunal analysis of selected features. Recovered fauna include a generous range
of local species, including mammals, birds, fish, and mollusks, and provide a diverse sample of elements suitable for identifying bone breakage patterns.
This research focuses first on identifying bone tools, which were vital for efficient food processing and clothing manufacture; second, on patterns of bone
breakage as evidence of meat processing and tool manufacture; and third, on worked bone sherds as expedient tools.
Watson, Sara [181] see Peart, Daniel
Watson, Rachel (Louisiana State University)
[238]              An Overview of the Stratigraphy at Witz Naab and Killer Bee, the Remnants of Salt Making Mounds, Paynes Creek National Park, Belize
Three partially submerged earthen mounds at Witz Naab and Killer Bee are currently the only known remaining above ground evidence of a once-thriving
salt industry in Punta Ycacos Lagoon, a large salt-water system in Paynes Creek National Park, Belize. During 2012, field season, excavations were
conducted at two of the mounds. This poster will present findings concerning the stratigraphic development of these mounds. Understanding the
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               472
stratigraphy of the mounds will aid in interpreting features of the associated submerged salt works. Over one hundred ancient Maya salt works dated to the
Classic period (A.D. 300–900) have been submerged by sea-level rise in the lagoon. We have hypothesized that these mounds were once numerous
features on the landscape prior to a Terminal Classic/Postclassic sea-level rise. Stratigraphy interpretation will illustrate a potential increase in the scale of
production at the Witz Naab site.
[238]            Chair
Watts, Christopher (University of Waterloo)
[108]            Being and Becoming in Huron-Wendat Worlds
Seventeenth century accounts of Huron-Wendat life, like those of myriad other Eastern Woodlands groups, underscore a relational ontology wherein the
media which separate humans from non-humans, as well as the organic from the inorganic, is principally porous and naturally given to communion. These
same accounts, however, also suggest that the Huron-Wendat possessed an intricate soul schema that, while variegated and capable of metamorphosis,
was nonetheless primary and essentialist in nature. In this paper I highlight and think through the complexities of such an ontology, chiefly the inherent
tension between the relational and the essential, and assess where and to what extent this might be manifested in Huron-Wendat material culture.
Watts Malouchos, Elizabeth (Indiana University)
[137]            Creating a Cahokian Community: Rethinking Mississippian Storage Practices
The procurement, processing, preparation and most importantly here, the storage of food, are inextricably tied to the everyday lived experiences of peoples
of the past and cannot be disentangled from larger social, economic, and political processes. Storage pits and structures feature prominently in prior
studies of Mississippian households but they are mostly regarded as utilitarian and economic spaces rather than integral to communities. Similarly,
previous interpretations of Mississippian storage practices have focused on politico-economic functions, connecting the intensification of maize agriculture
and control of surplus to the rise of complex hierarchical polities. However, changes in storage practices would have altered the ways communities and
identities were physically constructed and how people moved around, interacted with, and related to food, objects, stores, pits, and each other. In this
paper, we explore more nuanced entanglements of everyday storage practices and embodied experiences and how they are linked to the physical and
relational reconfiguration of communal identities at the onset of the Mississippian period. Utilizing data from the Greater Cahokia region in Illinois, we
contend that changes in storage practices during the Mississippian transition were integral to the physical reorganization of communities and the
construction of communal identities in a new Cahokian world.
[137]            Chair
Watts Malouchos, Elizabeth [137] see Peterson, Staffan
Waudby, Denis (Denis B Waudby)
[63]             Plant Fibre Diagnostics: Retrospect and Prospect
Here I review ethnographic studies of hunter-gatherer groups from North America, Siberia, and Scandinavia to examine plant-fibre material cultural
heritage and natural husbandry practiced by these societies. This study considers plant-fibre textiles and their diagnostic differential typology to aid
understanding of plant fibre processing and utilization and attendant diagnostic features. The poor preservation of European plant-fibre directs diagnostic
trials to modern reference material and inferential diagnosis from museum collections of textile tools and their tool wear. The intension is to share the
diagnostic potential for FT Raman-Spectroscopy, fibrillar rotational-velocity, and phytolith production as robust, non-destructive and minimally invasive
techniques to aid the interpretation of ethnographic and archaeological textiles produced prior to the eighteenth century introduction of flax. Our current
reconstructive work concerns the use of nettle fibre as a bowstring material in European medieval archery.
Weaver, Eric [130] see Smyth, Michael
Weber, Sadie (Harvard University)
[19]             Bread (Nut) Pit? Determining the Function of San Bartolo Chultúns
San Bartolo, located in the Petén of Guatemala, boasts the earliest examples of Maya murals and writing known to date in Mesoamerica. Despite the
extensive work in the monumental sector of the site, comparatively less work has been carried out on the domestic sectors. Like many Maya sites, chultúns
are a common though enigmatic feature. High quantities of charcoal and household refuse recovered during the chultún excavations, including ground
stone, animal bones, worked bone, and wood charcoal suggest that the chultúns were used as middens for refuse, rather than for food storage or
fermentation, but it is indeed possible that they had multiple functions throughout their use lives. While previous studies—both experimental and
archaeological—have proposed various, multi-faceted functions of ancient chultúns, each context is different. Here, we present the results of
microbotanical analysis carried out on ashy deposits of two chultún middens located inside collapsed house mounds from San Bartolo to better understand
the use-life of chultúns. We also present the results of experimental attempts to replicate the taphonomic processes affecting micro-botanical preservation
in these environments.
[19]             Chair
Weber, Steve [19] see Hanson, Sydney
Weber, Andrzej
[52]             Spatio-Temporal Variation in Mortuary ‘Skull Cults’ among Middle Holocene Hunter–Gatherers of the Baikal Region, Siberia.
Middle Holocene hunter–gatherers of the Cis-Baikal region in Siberia (~7500–3700 cal B.P.) are known for their rich mortuary record. The evidence
provided by about 1,300 individual burials documented from roughly 150 cemeteries of various size, contains frequent references to the heads of the
deceased allocated special mortuary treatment. These ‘skull cults’ include peri-mortem decapitation, post-mortem head or skull removal from the grave or a
treatment with fire or red ochre. While much has been written about such mortuary ‘skull cults’ in the Baikal region, either in Russian or international
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                     473
publications, systematic account of this matter is still lacking. The current paper is the first step in the direction to fill in this lacuna of knowledge with some
quantitative data assembled in the database developed by the authors. More specifically, the focus of this survey is on spatio-temporal variation with
regard to mortuary ‘skull cults’ among the Neolithic and Early Bronze Age groups in Cis-Baikal.
[52]              Chair
Weber, Jennifer (University of Bonn)
[234]             Transects, Trowels, and Technology: Recreating the Ancient Landscape at Pacbitun, Belize
The ancient Maya site of Pacbitun, Belize was first systematically recorded in the 1980s. Since then, archaeologists have continuously worked on
recreating the site’s ancient landscape. In addition to traditional survey methods, the Pacbitun Regional Archaeological Project (PRAP) has implemented
non-invasive survey tools like terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) and, more recently, the analysis of aerial LiDAR (light detection and ranging) data. In this
poster we present a comparative analysis of traditional survey and excavation techniques, terrestrial laser scanning, and aerial laser scanning,
implemented at Pacbitun. The aim is to explore how traditional and modern survey tools can complement each other in a fixed area that has undergone
over three decades of archaeological research.
[158]             Discussant
Webster, Chris (DIGTECHcrm - DIGTECHmedia - Archaeology Podcast Network) and Tristan Boyle (DIGTECHmedia - Archaeology Podcast
Network)
[35]              Podcasting as a Way to Promote Archaeology and Engage the Public, or, Archaeology—Straight from the Trenches to your Ears!
Podcasts have been around for over 10 years now and only in the last couple years, since the release of the popular This American Life spin-off, Serial,
has the American public been interested. Until Serial, it seemed that you were either a podcast listener or you weren't. Now, people are incorporating them
into their lives as trusted sources of information and entertainment. The Archaeology Podcast Network was founded as the first season of Serial came to a
close and our downloads quickly hit 7,000 a month. Podcasts on the APN range from niche shows about specific topics related to professional
archaeologists to popular shows that can reach a wider audience. Every show, however, is free and accessible to anyone on the planet. It's clear that
podcasting is a great way to engage the public and that more archaeological endevours, from projects to field schools to contract projects, can use
podcasting to present data, inform and educate the public, and start conversations.
Webster, Laurie (University of Arizona)
[63]              Forgotten but Not Gone: Restoring the Research Potential of Older Perishable Artifact Collections from Southeastern Utah
During the 1890s, more than 4,000 well-preserved textiles, baskets, wooden implements, hide and feather artifacts, and other organic materials were
excavated by local “cowboy” archaeologists from Basketmaker and Pueblo-period archaeological sites in the greater Cedar Mesa area of southeastern
Utah. Most of these artifacts were shipped to museums outside of the Southwest, where they were largely forgotten by archaeologists and the public. In
2010, the Cedar Mesa Perishables Project was born to “re-excavate” and interpret these remarkable collections and make them more accessible to
researchers, the general public, and native communities. Our work with these 700 to 2,000-year-old collections has revealed a wide range of fiber, wood,
horn, and feather artifacts related to textile and basketry production, woodworking, hideworking, animal and bird procurement, farming, personal
adornment, and other socioeconomic practices. In this presentation, I discuss some of what we have learned about the uses and manufacture of these
perishable technologies, how our work has broadened our understanding of Basketmaker and ancestral Puebloan societies, and our efforts to create a
perishable digital archive to make these collections more relevant for research and accessible for interpretation and study.
[63]              Chair
Wedding, Jeffrey [63] see Hamilton-Brehm, Scott
Wedenoja, William [66] see Worman, F. Scott
Weeks, William (Tennessee State Museum) and Edward Jolie (Mercyhurst University)
[63]              Discovering Plies in Back and Then, Just About Everywhere: Perishable Artifact Studies from the Eastern U.S. Beginning with Tennessee
The Tennessee State Museum has several collections of perishable artifacts from dry rock shelters and caves on the Cumberland Plateau containing
varieties of cordage, basketry, textiles, footwear, worked hide, wood, feathers, and other items that appear to date between the Archaic and Mississippian
periods. Preliminary analyses explore the origin, distribution, and fusion of styles that became the enduring traditions of the indigenous peoples of the
American southeast. Ethnographic and archaeological comparative data complement new insights from museum vaults replete with many things seemingly
forgotten.
Wei, Qiaowei, Feng Shi (Zichuan Museum) and Yichao Zhao (Shandong Institute of Archaeology and Cultural Rel)
[10]              State Archaeology and Private Museum: An Integrated Approach to Represent Heritage Values for Local People
The legislative system of cultural heritage in China outlined cultural heritage management and archaeological activities fulfilled under exclusive right of
state. This state archaeology proves its worth to increase the authority and quality of cultural heritage management, as well as to enhance the heritage
values at the state level. The local communities, however, hardly embedded into the activities of cultural heritage management and archaeological projects,
nor meet cultural heritage concerns of local people themselves. This paper considers that private museum as concerns of regional heritage values and
benefits in the projects of state archaeology. With a case study of collaborations between archaeologists and local agents under the excavation and
conservation of ancient kiln sites at Zibo, I argued that the private museums could be the relatively prominent platforms for public engagement in activities
of state archaeology. It remains the further discussion, however, that lack of means to enhance the power of local communities to run the heritage
management as the ethnical responsibilities of local people.
Weinberg, Camille (University of Texas at Austin), Nicole Payntar (University of Texas at Austin) and R. Alan Covey (University of Texas at
Austin)
[198]             Ecological Variation and Trajectories of Village Settlement in Formative Cusco
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                474
Regional surveys to the north and west of Cusco demonstrate that the earliest villages (c. 1000 B.C.–A.D. 300) are found across a wide elevation range,
and in varying contexts of local ecological diversity. This paper considers the role that local resource variation and subsistence practices might have played
in the long-term stability of these early communities. Using data from 131 Formative Period sites registered across a 1,200 square kilometer study region,
we evaluate the surrounding settlement patterns and environmental diversity for the region's 10 largest Formative sites. We then compare local landscape
differences with long-term occupational trajectories of these large villages. Local ecological variations associated with Formative villages suggest diverse
social and economic practices at the community and regional levels, and we consider different models for the development of village life in this part of the
Andean highlands.
Weinelt, Mara (Kiel University), Christian Schwab (Institute of Pre- and Protohistorical Archaeology,), Jutta Kneisel (Institute of Pre- and
Protohistorical Archaeology,) and Martin Hinz (Institute of Pre- and Protohistorical Archaeology,)
[95]              Climate Change and Societal Change in the Western Mediterranean Area 4.2 ka BP
In the eastern Mediterranean area, coherent patterns and synchronous events around 4.2 kaBP suggest an obvious link between cultural upheaval in
urban societies and climate forcing. Here, the 4.2 kaBP aridification event is thought the cause of severe economic consequences and social unrest. The
picture for the central and western Mediterranean regions, at the interface of North Atlantic (Bond event 3) and monsoon-influenced climate, is different. It
remains unclear whether supra-regional drought around 4.2 ka BP extended into the western Mediterranean. Yet contemporaneous pre-urban societies,
already marked by emerging complexity, were in profound upheaval during their transition from Late Neolithic to Early Bronze Age ideologies. An array of
abrupt cultural transitions, precisely dating to 4.2 kaBP, include widespread “crises” of Mediterranean Bell Beaker populations, the transitions from Pre-
palace to Palace cultures on the Greek Islands, the transition from Los Millares Culture to El Argar Culture in the south-eastern Iberian Peninsula. The
possibility that these transitions may have been responses/resilience strategies to abrupt climate change has so far hardly been considered.
Here we trace patterns of socio-environmental crisis using pertinent proxy records of seasonality, population density, subsistence, and settlement patterns
from existing and new archaeological and climate archives.
Weinstein, Karen (Dickinson College)
[62]              Morphological Signatures of High-Altitude Adaptations in the Andean Archaeological Record and the Challenges of Distinguishing
                  Developmental Plasticity from Genetic Adaptations
High-altitude hypoxia, cold ambient temperatures, and malnutrition are critical environmental stressors affecting living human populations in the highland
Andes. Decades of scholarship in human biology explain the complex physiological responses that provide adaptive fitness to living human groups at high
altitudes through both developmental acclimatization, in which the human body adjusts to environmental stress during growth, and genetic adaptations
from natural selection. Given the longevity of human settlement in the highland Andes, these same biological responses ought to have affected ancient
Andean groups. This paper uses the biology of living humans from the highland Andes as a model to explore the morphological signatures of biological
adaptations to high-altitude environments in ancient human skeletons from different elevations in the Andes: two groups from coastal regions, one group
from moderate elevations in the Atacama Desert, and one group from high elevations in the southern Peruvian highlands. This examination focuses on
distinguishing developmental plasticity due to acclimatization that can develop in a single generation from genetic adaptations that arise through natural
selection. Gene flow, natural selection, and developmental plasticity each factors into the emergence of the biology of ancient populations at high altitudes
in the Andean archaeological record.
Weisman, Russell
[175]             Marking Time and Place—Eclipse Representations in the Late Prehistoric Rock Art of the Central Mississippi River Valley
Total solar eclipses are perhaps the most dramatic of celestial events. During a total eclipse, for a few moments, while the moon passes unseen between
the earth and the sun, viewers positioned directly in line with the sun and moon experience totality. The sun goes black. Day turns suddenly to dusk, winds
stir and animals assume their night time behaviors. It is then and only then that the sun’s luminous and variable corona becomes visible.
Solar eclipse representations have been widely identified in ancient rock art. Eclipses differ from other transient astronomical events because the date and
place of their past occurrence can be calculated for every site, making it possible to consider relationships between putative eclipse representations and
dated events.
The spatial patterning of late prehistoric rock art motifs in Missouri and Illinois that may be eclipse related are reviewed in relation to the central paths of
particular eclipses visible from those sites. Sites that experienced totality during two rare ‘black sunrise’ eclipses in the years 831 and 941 are highlighted.
Eclipses may have prompted the creation of representational rock art as visual markers denoting places within the landscape that were sanctified by
contact with the celestial shadow.
Weismantel, Mary (Northwestern University)
[105]             Ontologies of Water on Peru's North Coast
The power of water is all-important in the long history of Peru’s North Coast: the arid environment, the transformative effects of irrigation, and the
devastating force of the ENSO (El Niño) ecological phenomenon. Archaeological theorizing about North Coast societies has often focused on the shaping
force of water; this paper suggests bringing emergent thinking about the human/nonhuman relationship to bear on this topic. Twentieth century Western
science saw water as something to control through the rational application of technology, and anthropologists often interpreted non-western water rituals as
attempts by pre-scientific people to achieve this technological control. In the Andes, for example, human sacrifice has been interpreted as an effort to
convince the gods to bring rain or avert floods. But new evidence points to alternative models, in which co-habitation rather than absolute control is the
desired end. These include: theoretical critiques of the universality of the nature/culture divide; environmentalist critiques of the failure of engineers to
control water in New Orleans and elsewhere; comparative data on water management by other non-Western societies; and Andean cultural evidence from
the Huarochiri manuscript and North Coast ceramics.
Weitzel, Celeste [139] see Flegenheimer, Nora
Welch, Morgan, Patrick Mullins (University of Pittsburgh) and Brian Billman (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill)
[205]             Overtaking the Past: Addressing Modern Site Destruction in the Moche Valley
Through increased study of the rural hinterlands surrounding the Chimu capital at Chan Chan, a broader understanding of state structured domestic and
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              475
administrative sites--so as to control labor, land, and water--has emerged. Located in the Moche Valley of Peru, the Chimú sites of Cerro la Virgen and
Milagro de San Jose have the potential to provide valuable data related to urban-rural relationships, but run the risk of being destroyed by modern human
activity.
Using previous research and more recent data collected as part of MOCHE Inc., the authors illustrate the archaeological potential of these sites,
demonstrate the extent of modern urban and rural destruction at both sites, and outline immediate and future avenues for site protection and preservation.
To continue studying prehistory in this region, it’s necessary to gain a better understanding of the motivations driving modern urban-rural expansion as well
as specific community relationships to nearby archaeological sites. The economic value of the land occupied by these sites, not the economic incentive
behind looting, is seen as posing the greatest threat. In conclusion, suggestions for both short-term and long-term approaches to site preservation are
provided, focusing on collaborative efforts between local communities and archaeologists.
Welker, Martin (Penn State University), Jonathan Burns (Juniata College), Jennifer Haney (Penn State University) and Sarah McClure (Penn
State University)
[176]              A Database Approach to Historic Military Provisioning
Planned military provisioning recorded in historic documents likely decreased variability in soldiers’ diets and resulted in widespread use of domestic
livestock. However, faunal remains from Fort Shirley, a French and Indian War fortification in Western Pennsylvania, indicate a heavy reliance on wild
resources, particularly deer. Comparisons with other fortifications examined archaeologically reveals a breadth of functional and dietary differences
between sites. First, the term "fort" describes a variety of military installations, ranging from defensive works manned by professional soldiers to supply
depots, fur trade posts, and even fortified homesteads. This complicates archaeological examination of soldiers’ diets and the role of historic military
provisioning. Using a database of faunal data from historic fortifications in the eastern U.S. and Canada (1754–1870), we examine species diversity,
homogeneity, evenness, and reliance on domesticates to address questions including the accessibility of standardized provisions among professional
soldiers and militia; the influence of provisioning on local ecological diversity; and changes in military provisioning through time.
Weller, Errin (University of Colorado - Boulder)
[53]               Volcanos, Imagery, and Footpaths: Research in Costa Rica
Over multiple field seasons, Dr. Payson Sheets has led the Proyecto Prehistorico Arenal in the Northwest corner of Costa Rica. A landscape characterized
by repeated volcanic eruptions has resulted in the preservation of prehistoric footpaths. Dr. Sheets established a methodology combining satellite imagery
and archaeology that could differentiate between erosional, historic, and prehistoric footpath features. This paper will focus on this methodology and Dr.
Sheets’ contribution to remote sensing methodology. I will focus on the two seasons I joined Dr. Sheets in 2002 and 2003. To summarize, the ash layers
provide footpath chronology, the stratigraphic profiles reveal a characteristic broad U-shape resulting from use, and the location of the anomaly on a high
ridge or in association with cultural features provide evidence of a prehistoric footpath. The successful location of footpaths contributes significantly to an
archaeological understanding of how humans were moving across the landscape and the reasons for doing so.
[32]               Chair
Wells, Joshua (Indiana University South Bend)
[261]              DINAA Means “Everybody Can Be a Digital Curator”: Community-Powered Disciplinary Curational Behaviors with the Digital Index of North
                   American Archaeology (DINAA)
The Digital Index of North American Archaeology (DINAA) has a massive compilation of archaeological site data. This paper presents recent findings from
development of DINAA’s site database, efforts to link DINAA with mined references from digital literature, and efforts to prepare DINAA for future crowd-
sourced professional data citations. The continental United States spans eight million square kilometers, with a multicultural past of over 15,000 years.
Archaeologists have been practically and theoretically frustrated in search of curatorial practices, digital or otherwise, to make comprehensible the
reporting and interpretation of such a vast spatiotemporal set. The federal organization of State and Tribal Historic Preservation Offices and similar entities
under the National Historic Preservation Act guarantees local systems of information management will maintain records of archaeological sites within
territorial jurisdictions. DINAA has successfully interoperated and made completely public the non-sensitive, scientific information from many of these
systems. Linkage of these data with other datasets at large scales, crosscutting political borders, facilitates archaeological and interdisciplinary studies of
human adaptation. In cultivating an open source community, DINAA hopes to add value to site and collections data (digital and otherwise), make these
accessible to researchers and stakeholders, and highlight ethical approaches toward distributed data curation.
[4]                Discussant
Wells, E. Christian (University of South Florida)
[100]              The Landscape Legacies of Plantation Agriculture in the Caribbean: An Historical-Ecological Perspective from Betty’s Hope, Antigua
This paper examines physical, chemical, and biological properties of soils and sediments from landforms in eastern Antigua, West Indies, to better
understand the long-term consequences of plantation agriculture. Plantation farming played a central role in the history of Caribbean societies, economies,
and environments since the seventeenth century. In Antigua, the entire island was variably dedicated to agricultural pursuits, including sugarcane and
cotton, from the mid-1600s until independence from Great Britain in 1981 when most commercial cultivation ceased. Today’s soilscapes are highly
degraded, although it is unknown what the role of the island’s plantation legacy has played in this process. Our research combines geoarchaeological
survey and sampling, sediment core analysis, and historical archival research to model the initial and cumulative impacts of the plantation industry on the
island, focusing on the region surrounding Betty’s Hope, a sugarcane plantation in operation from 1674–1944. We find that current erosion and degradation
issues experienced by today’s farmers are not attributable to intensive plantation farming alone, but rather are part of a complex mosaic of human-
environmental interactions that included abandonment of anthropogenic landscapes.
[100]              Discussant
[100]              Chair
Wells, E. Christian [120] see Tricarico, Anthony
Wells, Peter (University of Minnesota)
[248]              Discussant
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                476
Wen, Zeng, Yongsheng Zhao (Shandong University), Hong Zhu (Jilin University) and Jiawei Li (Jilin University)
[180]             Genetic Structure of Ancient Population of the Early Bronze Age Qijia Culture and Genetic Contribution Present-Day Chinese
The Qijia culture was an early Bronze Age culture distributed around the upper Yellow River region of Gansu (centered in Lanzhou) and eastern Qinghai,
China. It is regarded as one of the earliest bronze cultures. The Mogou site was a massive site of Qijia Culture in the Ganging region, more than one
thousand graves have been found there. In our research, we studied the genetic structure of early ancient Mogou population, and further explored the
genetic relationship between them and present-day Chinese people.We successfully analyzed and repeated 55 of 60 samples from Mogou site. Their
mitochondrial DNA haplotypes were assigned to 14 haplogroups: A, B, C, D (D*, D4, D5), F, G, M7, M8, M10, M13, M25, and N*, N9a, Z. Y-SNP analysis
revealed that six individuals which were successfully identified by molecular biology all belonged to haplogroup O3a3. We found that the ancient Mogou
population living in Ganqing region have significant genetic contributions to present-day Tibeto-Burman populations and North Han Chinese population.
Wendrich, Willeke (UCLA)
[177]             Rescue Excavations at Mai Adrasha (Ethiopia)
The combination of gold and archaeology is never a good one. The site of Mai Adrasha is under imminent threat of total destruction because of large scale
panning of natural gold traces by the local population living near to the largest Axumite site West of Axum. In December 2015, a team from UCLA started a
community project to work with the local population in safeguarding and excavating this important site. The research focus of the work is to establish the
lay-out, development and function of the site and employ the stratification to develop a well-dated ceramic sequence which will inform a broad survey in the
same area.
[33]              Discussant
Wenke, Robert
[60]              The Early Egyptian State
Of all the ancient states, the concept of heterarchy would seem to be least applicable to ancient Egypt.There, according to traditional interpretations,
successive polities in the 3rd Millennium BC successfully monopolized power and authority by means of increasingly elaborate and hierarchically- arranged
administrative structures and functions. But recent analyses and evidence suggest that state did not maintain absolute control at all times and in all areas
of the state, particularly with regard to Nile Delta occupations. The state’s extension of political control and economic exploitation to Delta provinces
required innovative and varied administrative methods, some of which perhaps involved heterarchical relationships.
Wenzel, Jason (University of Florida)
[287]             Staging Consumption: The Archaeology of Florida Tourism
This presentation will provide a review of current archaeological studies of historic resort and hotel sites in Florida. I will discuss insights yielded from these
studies that informs on commodities acquisitions, consumption, and social status through the framework of anthropological and sociological perspectives of
leisure and tourism. The major research goal of this project is to ascertain the cultural, sociological, and economic forces that have shaped Florida tourism
through time by investigating how the state’s early resorts staged socially mediated atmospheres for consumption in the context of accessibility to
environmental and market resources.
Wenzel , Jason [7] see Harding, Gregg
Werby, Nadia [267] see Smith, Lindsey
Wernecke, D Clark (The Gault School of Archaeological Research)
[253]             Jerry Sent Me to Mesoamerica and All I Got Was a Shirt...
I was a returning (older) student, a market segment many universities have trouble relating to, fortunate to arrive at Florida Atlantic University with a
number of other returning students. Dr. Kennedy let us run with our ideas, working CRM jobs, starting a lab on campus, and exploring our interests. Then
one day, he comes to me and says, “I know this person who might need your skills” and I was off to Belize and Guatemala on the start of what has been
both a great adventure and a rewarding career. I started in Archaeological Project Management and found myself involved in public archaeology,
ecotourism, and international diplomacy—and the adventure continues.
Werner, William (Syracuse University)
[258]             "The Real and Only True Documents": German Naturalists and the Systematic Observation of Antiquities in Mid-Nineteenth-Century
                  Central Veracruz, Mexico
This paper examines a small network of amateur naturalists who were among the first to document archaeological remains in central Veracruz, Mexico.
Carl Christian Sartorius (1796–1872), Karl Hermann Berendt (1817–1878), and Hugo Finck (ca. 1824–1895) shared backgrounds as German expatriates
living and working as professional farmers and physicians in Veracruz. Their detailed knowledge of the peoples and landscapes of Veracruz, as well as
their frequent trips to the field, enabled their documentation of archaeological remains in the rural municipalities in which they worked. Their methods and
discussions reflect common themes in the early disciplinary literature, including a focus on material remains as historical sources; the synthesis of multiple
sources of information (artifacts, built structures, stratigraphy, and landscapes); the production of accurate maps and sketches; and synthesis of field
observations with the archaeological literature produced elsewhere in Mexico and globally. This paper focuses on the transfer of knowledge between
these fieldworkers and their museum-based professional counterparts through correspondence, collections, and essays, and concludes with a
consideration of how the professionalization of archaeology in the late nineteenth century impacted their scientific legacies.
Werness-Rude, Maline [27] see Spencer, Kaylee
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              477
Wernke, Steven (Vanderbilt University) and Teddy Abel Traslaviña (Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos)
[174]             A GIS of Movement and Sensory Experience at a Planned Colonial Town in Highland Peru
GIS in archaeology has diversified beyond its origins as a map-and-database and predictive modeling tool to explore multidimensional views of human
experience in the past. This paper combines models of movement and visibility at the scale of a single settlement to render an approximation of sensory
experience within the built environment of a planned colonial town in highland Peru. In the 1570s, some 1.5 million native Andeans were forcibly resettled
to “reduction towns” (reducciones) based on a theory of the built environment: that compact settlements built around central churches and plazas would
generate properly civilized, Christian subjects and communities. The relict reducción of Santa Cruz de Tuti of highland Peru is exceptional in its
architectural preservation, enabling modeling of visual and kinetic aspects of dwelling in one of these towns. Specifically, traffic density maps derived from
spatial network analyses are used to distribute observers in a high resolution, site-level cumulative viewshed analysis, thus integrating a model of
aggregate movement with visibility density estimates. The results point to the centrality and visual prominence not only of the site’s church and plaza, but of
indigenous elite households and the Inkaic ritual spaces that were incorporated within the core of the reducción.
Wernke, Steve [205] see Smith, Ryan
Wesson, Cameron [4] see Ervin, Kelly
Wesson, Cameron (Lehigh University)
[137]             From Households to Communities and Back Again: Bridging Analytical Scales in Search of Conflict, Coalescence, and Communitas
Archaeological examinations of households and communities have increased dramatically over the past decade. These studies explore the ways people
define themselves while simultaneously shaping the social interactions, physical spaces, and material objects that comprise their daily existence. Despite
the considerable insights generated by such studies, it is often difficult to bridge analytical scales when research is primarily focused at either the
household or community level, with little to integrate these scales of investigation. We must acknowledge that communities are neither merely the
byproducts of actions undertaken by individual households, nor are households simply passive reflections of the communities of which they are a part. This
paper examines the difficulties we face when bridging these scales of analysis in the Mississippian Southeast, suggesting that we require new theoretical
perspectives to more adequately understand the relationships between households and communities.
West, Frankie (The University of Tennessee, Knoxville), Brannon Hulsey (The University of Tennessee, Knoxville) and Graciela Cabana (The
University of Tennessee, Knoxville)
[111]             Confirmation of Mitochondrial Haplotype C4c in Samples from Norris Farms #36, Illinois
The Norris Farms #36 site in northern Illinois (ca. A.D. 1300) has been widely featured in archaeological investigations, including foundational ancient DNA
analyses. We built on these studies, analyzing mitochondrial DNA hypervariable regions I and II from 98 individuals. The Norris Farms #36 site
demonstrates high levels of mitochondrial diversity, with all five major founding lineages present. Included in this diversity are individuals belonging to
mitochondrial haplogroup C who demonstrate the absence of the np 16325 deletion, characteristic of rare mitochondrial haplotype C4c. Confirmation of this
haplotype requires the presence of multiple mutations throughout the mitochondrial genome. Using whole mitochondrial genome typing and traditional
Sanger sequencing we confirmed that several of these individuals belong to haplotype C4c.This is significant, as currently there are less than 20
individuals in the Americas that have been identified as haplotype C4c, most of which have been obtained from modern samples. Here we analyze our
data along with existing data and geographic distributions of C4c individuals within North and South America to better understand early migration patterns.
West, Catherine [296] see Fitzhugh, Ben
Westby, Molly [267] see Kralick, Kolleen
Westrick, Robert [39] see Warren, Daniel
Weyrich, Laura (University of Adelaide), Keith Dobney (University of Aberdeen) and Alan Cooper (University of Adelaide)
[160]             Insights from Neandertal Dental Calculus: Tracking Pacific Colonization Events using Ancient Bacteria
Interpreting the evolutionary history of bacterial communities within the human body (microbiota) is key to understanding multiple aspects of disease
transmission and human health. This tight association between humans and their microorganisms can also be exploited to track past human interactions,
providing information on past human movements and their introductions to new locations or environments. Using a shotgun sequencing approach on
ancient DNA from the dental calculus in Neandertals, ancient Europeans and Africans, and greater apes, we have shown that specific oral and respiratory
bacterial and viral pathogens can be examined and disease origins can be determined using this method. By examining ancient and historic bacterial DNA
from dental calculus (calcified dental plaque) of Pacific Islanders, we can now explore past human movements by tracking bacterial lineages in the mouth,
and examine how pathogens and commensal microorganisms were impacted by changes in diet and environment. Consequently, dental calculus present
on archaeological specimens from Pacific Islanders provides a wealth of cultural and anthropological information about the past, which is critical to identify
the timing and impacts of cultural and environmental events that altered human health and history.
Whalen, Kathryn (University at Buffalo)
[147]             The Home Network: X-ray Florescence and Geochemical Data of Post-Medieval Ceramics in Ulster
The area known as Ulster is one region where complex colonial and ethnic relationships are evident in the past, as well as in the present. This study looks
specifically at the trade of ceramics in Post-Medieval Ulster, to see if coarse earthenware ceramics are being imported from elsewhere along with English
refined earthenwares or if they are being produced locally in Ireland. Through the use of portable X-ray florescence (pXRF), the multi-elemental makeup of
1342 sherd will be examine to determine their point of origin by comparing it to the Tellus geochemical data collected by the Geological Survey of Northern
Ireland. These sherds represent 22 farmsteads across Counties Armagh and Tyrone, and a range of ethnic groups and classes.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              478
This poster reports on the pXRF data analyzed for The Home Network project and its relationship to the Tellus open source geochemical data set. The
statistical methods used to compare the two data sets for similarities will be presented, and the results of this comparison, which would suggest the point of
origin for the ceramics in question, will be interpreted. The efficacy of pXRF and the statistical methods will be addressed with an eye to replicating this
study in other regions.
Wheeler, Derek [36] see Ptacek, Crystal
Wheeler, Ryan (Robert S. Peabody Museum of Archaeology)
[253]             Wm. Jerald Kennedy’s Legacy of Archaeology in Palm Beach County, Florida
In the spring of 1989, Jerry Kennedy hired me to conduct fieldwork for the first archaeological reconnaissance survey of Palm Beach County. I drove
around the county in Florida Atlantic University’s late 1980s model Ford Taurus wagon with a list from the Florida Master Site File, attempting to revisit as
many sites as possible. The station wagon endured a fair bit of off road driving, including an excursion into the South Florida Water Management District’s
newly establish DuPuis Environmental Area and the neighboring J.W. Corbett Wildlife Management Area. These public lands preserved sites along the
Loxahatchee Scarp—an upland area rimming the northern edge of the Everglades. Later, as an archaeologist with the State of Florida, I was able to
conduct a small study of one of these sites—the so-called Whitebelt Circle Ditch. Characterized by a large, circular ditch, the site resembles the Great
Circle of Fort Center and other little-studied circle-ditch sites around Lake Okeechobee. This paper summarizes that research and the regional context of
circle-ditch sites. Despite having to rescue me after the FAU wagon finally gave up the ghost, Jerry continued to be a wonderful mentor and friend, and for
that I am truly grateful.
[253]             Chair
Whisenhunt, Mary [168] see Hard, Robert
Whitaker, Adrian (Far Western Anthropological Research Group, Inc.) and Christina Giovas (University of Queensland)
[296]             When to Hunt a Sea Lion, When to Hunt a Manatee: The Evolutionary Ecology of Marine Mammal Hunting in Insular Settings
A notable feature of hunter-gatherer adaptations in mainland coastal settings throughout the world, is the ubiquity of marine mammal hunting. This pattern
is less commonly seen in insular settings, which is surprising since marine mammals are often the only large mammal available. We develop a model
based in evolutionary ecology that predicts ecological, social, and technological conditions that shape the choice to hunt marine mammals. We then
evaluate this model in light of data from the island Caribbean and the Santa Barbara Channel Islands off the coast of California.
The Channel Island record demonstrates persistent hunting of marine mammals though the species hunted change through time from dolphins and
porpoises to sea lions. In contrast, there is little evidence for the hunting of manatees, monk seals, and other marine mammals in the Caribbean. Possible
explanations that we explore include constraints of boating and hunting technology, transport costs, the effects of preservation and resource base on the
attractiveness of marine mammals as a resource, and the proximity to and connection with continental coastlines.
White, Charles (Boston University)
[11]              Schools and Public Archaeology: Igniting a Commitment to Heritage Preservation
Schools are a natural and potentially fruitful venue for public archaeology efforts; natural, because cultural transmission is a fundamental purpose of
schooling, and potentially fruitful, given the nearly 50 million students currently enrolled in K-12 schools (National Center for Education Statistics, 2015).
Schools are also a target audience of enormous importance to public archaeology, largely because the goals of heritage preservation depend on the
formation of durable habits of mind and commitments that begin developing in youth. Of course, after entering the school-house door, appreciation for
archaeology and the preservation of heritage sites must compete in a congested arena of interests. Acknowledging the challenges, this paper focuses on
the opportunities for public archaeology in pre-college education (linkages to content standards, inquiry/problem solving, and service learning) and in
teacher preparation (teaching methods and materials).
White, Devin (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) and Scott Ortman (University of Colorado Boulder)
[17]              Travel Corridors and Economic Integration in the Chacoan Regional System
It is well known that a variety of goods flowed into the center of the Chaco regional system between 980–1140 C.E. Previous research demonstrated that
these goods were generally consumed within the canyon instead of redistributed to outlying settlements. Yet, a variety of indicators from peripheral areas
indicate robust economic expansion during this same period and contraction in the immediate post-Chacoan period (1140–1180 C.E.). This suggests
greater levels of exchange and interaction among outlying settlements during the Chacoan era than previously noted. We employ a novel
geocomputational method for determining routes of pedestrian travel to test the extent to which the spatial distribution of outlying great houses was
optimized for pilgrimage to the center in Chaco Canyon vs. inter-outlier exchange. We also test the competing hypothesis that great houses were located
with respect to water sources as opposed to travel corridors. Results indicate that the model of inter-outlier exchange provides the best fit with available
data. These results suggest regional political integration facilitated economic development throughout the Chacoan regional system, and that this system
developed as an undirected network more so than one focused on Chaco. We suggest similar approaches may be useful for the study of other regional
systems.
White, Samuel (PhD Program, Anthropology Department, The University of Montana)
[62]              The Anzick Site: A Rocky Mountain Locale Featuring Recurrent Human Utilization across the Millenia
The Anzick Site is a multi-component archaeological site located at approximately 5,000 ft above sea level in the Shields River Valley of south central
Montana. Included in the archaeological discoveries at the site are the fragmentary human remains of two individuals as well as an assemblage of
approximately 115 lithic and osseous tools diagnostic of Clovis Culture technology. This assemblage of tools was thickly covered with red ochre, as was
one set of remains, presumably indicating a burial from which osseous tool samples were dated to approximately 11,000 radio carbon years before present
(rcybp) with the remains dating to approximately 10,780 rcybp. The other set of remains, discovered 30 feet distant and uphill from the ochre-covered
remains dates to approximately 8,600 rcybp and are thought to be from a separate interment. Representing a continual human presence in the Rocky
Mountains of Montana, there is still much to learn from The Anzick Site. In this paper, I consider scientific and theoretical techniques by which we may
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 479
elucidate the meaning of this site, utilizing in-depth analysis of the artifact assemblage attributes along with further logical reflection on tangible facts since
its accidental discovery in 1968.
Whitley, Tamara (Bureau of Land Management)
[114]             Predicting the Past: GIS Modeling on the Carrizo Plain National Monument
The Carrizo Plain National Monument contains some of the most significant heritage resources in North America. This includes the 100 Native American
habitation and pictograph sites within the Carrizo Plain Archaeological District National Historic Landmark. Appropriate management is critical to the
preservation of these sensitive resources. The results of GIS modeling can be directly applied toward a wide variety of historic preservation approaches.
This presentation will describe the development of a site location predictive model for the CPNM and its direct application to resource management.
Whitley, David (ASM Affiliates, Inc.)
[131]             The Archaeology of Dreams and What It Tells Us About Climate Change
Why does archaeology matter in the twenty-first century? One value is its ability to help us understand how humans react to changing circumstances, not
with law-like statements but instead in terms of general behavioral patterns. The social context south-central California rock art, a record of visions or
dreams, is an example of this fact. As partly indicated by rock art, the Medieval climatic anomaly led in one area to a population collapse but, in a related
region, to population increase and the emergence of hierarchical leadership. This demonstrates that even potentially devastating climate change results in
winners and losers. And this raises the question of how our contemporary society will react not just to North American climate change, but change across
the world, and the potentially devastating impacts it may have, e.g., in southeast Asia.
Whitley, Thomas (University of Western Australia)
[174]             Rethinking Experimental Archaeology: GIS and Simulation as a Hypothesis-Testing Mechanism.
More than 25 years since Allen et al. (1990), GIS has become a tool used almost as ubiquitously in archaeology as the trowel and the total station. But is it
a “paradigm-shifter?” One fundamental distinction between archaeology and other scientific pursuits is the lack of a formal experimental procedure for
testing large-scale hypotheses. We can work with recreated material culture or anything else on a 1:1 scale. However, ideas about larger mechanisms,
particularly those that encompass wide geographic areas, are rarely examined in a formal experimental way. Presented here are the methods and results
of a GIS simulation project that functions specifically as a means to examine certain ideas we have about the Helvetian Iron Age subsistence economy
during the time of the First Gallic War (58 B.C.). It is first, and foremost, an experiment conducted on a dataset that is not possible to replicate on a 1:1
scale. It also provides explanatory and mechanistic insight into human energetics rather than merely identifying physical correlations in the archaeological
record. My contention is that if we embrace the notion that GIS is an experimental tool, then we might move beyond physical landscapes, and begin to
examine social and cognitive ones.
Whitmore, Katie M (Department of Anthropology, Purdue University) and Michele R Buzon (Department of Anthropology, Purdue University )
[24]              Living on the Border: Health and Identity during the Colonial Egyptian New Kingdom Period in Nubia
Tombos is located at the Third Cataract of the Nile River in modern-day Sudan, and marks an important literal and figurative boundary between Egyptian
and Nubian interaction. During the New Kingdom Period (1400–1050 B.C.), the cemetery at Tombos in Upper Nubia exhibits the use of Egyptian mortuary
practices, including monumental pyramid complexes, likely used by both immigrant Egyptians and local Nubians. Despite the influence of Egyptian culture
during this colonial period, there are several public displays of Nubian identity in burial practices found at Tombos. This mixture of Egyptian and Nubian
burial practices extends into the postcolonial period at Tombos. Paleopathological analyses indicate that Nubian and Egyptian individuals living at colonial
Tombos enjoyed access to nutritional food resources and displayed low levels of skeletal markers of infection, traumatic injury, and strenuous physical
activity. While the Tombos sample is likely not representative of all Egyptian-Nubian interaction during the New Kingdom, the individuals examined appear
to have benefited from the relationship. In contrast with many situations of frontier interaction, the bioarchaeological evidence indicates a relatively peaceful
coexistence between Egyptians and Nubians at Tombos, and the construction of a new biologically and culturally entangled community.
Funding: National Science Foundation, National Geographic Society.
Whitridge, Peter (Memorial University of Newfoundland)
[108]             Ambiguous Beings: The Ontological Autonomy of Inuit Dogs
Part of the attraction of relational ontology is its encouragement to discard conventional epistemological hierarchies. We needn’t frame our investigations
with the usual weighty themes—economy, social relations, ideology—but can begin anywhere, with any sort of question, and tug on the thread until the
archaeological fabric unravels. Here I begin with dogs, and their relations with humans and other animals in the Inuit past. Inuit had an exceptionally
complex relationship with the dogs that shared their houses, pulled their sleds, helped them hunt, provided fur (and occasionally food), and generally
occupied an ambiguous space between Inuit, non-Inuit humans, and other animals in Inuit belief systems. As beings that in part elected to live closely with
humans (they often roamed free in villages) but were also entrapped by them (they exhibit repetitive patterns of stress and trauma due to work and human
violence), and that enjoyed equally complex relations with the wild canids that killed them and reproduced with them, dogs represent an interesting
opportunity to think about the ontological autonomy of non-human creatures.
Whittaker, John (Grinnell College)
[40]              Teaching Bones from my Garden
Few of my students have much experience with hunting, farming, anatomy, or even eating meat these days, so teaching faunal analysis labs in an
Archaeological Field Methods class can be difficult.
Faunal assemblages from archaeological sites are often small, fragile, and too valuable for class use. They require good comparative collections, and it
may be difficult for students to relate to unfamiliar animals and cultures.
A faunal teaching assemblage can be produced from home meat consumption. For over 20 years I have composted all organics from my kitchen, and
subsequently collected bone from my garden. A useful assemblage can be created in a much shorter time if the bones are prepared by maceration or
dermestids instead of composting. With simple instructional materials, the students can recognize the bones, collect the data, and perform simple
quantification like MNI and NISP. The assemblage is then interpretable in terms of preparation techniques, meat preferences, formation processes, socio-
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                480
economic status, and so on. My classes always find it engaging to analyze their professor’s garbage and interpret his life from it.
Whittaker, John [107] see Kamp, Kathryn
Whittington, Stephen (National Mining Hall of Fame & Museum)
[58]              Challenges and Successes of Some Mesoamerican Exhibits in Small University Museums around the turn of the 21st Century
Curating exhibits focused on Mesoamerican archaeology in two small university museums between 1993 and 2013 involved challenges with both
similarities to and differences from those involved in curating blockbuster exhibits in large museums. Four exhibits included long-term and short-term
installations, as well as traveling versions, and focused on the Maya, West Mexico, and Mesoamerica in general. Challenges were small budgets and
staffs, negotiating loans and venues with staffs of other institutions, obtaining reproduction rights, interpreting artifacts lacking good contextual information,
and incorporating field and laboratory research results in ways understandable to the public. A disheartening and initially unexpected challenge was
overcoming criticism from academic archaeologists about basing exhibits on technically legal collections that archaeologists had not excavated. Despite
the challenges, the exhibits were popular with the public, provided opportunities to offer associated lectures and events focused on Mesoamerica, drew
attention to the Hudson Museum at the University of Maine and the Museum of Anthropology at Wake Forest University, and were utilized in teaching
students from primary grades through graduate school.
[202]             Discussant
Wholey, Heather (West Chester University)
[2]               Trans-egalitarian Society in the Transitional Archaic
Transitional Period settlement ecology and material culture in eastern Pennsylvania indicates the emergence of a cultural complex expressive of trans-
egalitarian society. This includes centralized riverine settlements characterized by large thermally altered features, concentrations of soapstone vessels,
and proximity to seasonally predictable food resources, such as migratory fish and drought tolerant herbaceous plants, that could be intensively managed
or cultivated. This presentation discusses the warmer and drier climate conditions of the mid-Holocene, and examines the concept of trans-egalitarian
society and the practice of alliance feasting as a context for understanding the relatively short-term patterning of the Transitional Archaic.
[2]               Chair
Whyte, Thomas
[285]             Molded Ceramic Vessels of the Late Prehistoric Appalachian Summit
Late Woodland ceramic vessels in northwestern North Carolina are highly variable in tempering materials and surface treatments but are nearly limited to
jar forms of a limited size range. Coil breaks are found almost exclusively on shoulder, neck, and rim sherds. Vessel bodies sometimes exhibit evidence of
net impression underlying rectilinear stamping. These attributes coupled with experimental observations indicate that vessel bodies were often formed in
molds. This mode of ceramic vessel manufacture may have been common throughout the Southeast in the late prehistoric period and has important
implications for studies involving typology, social interaction, cultural identity, and native craft revitalization.
Wichlacz, Caitlin (Arizona State University)
[66]              Assemblage Perspectives on Salado Polychrome
The Salado Phenomenon has long been of interest to Southwestern archaeologists, and perhaps the most notable signifier of the phenomenon is a suite of
pottery types collectively referred to as Salado Polychromes or Roosevelt Red Wares. Previous researchers have tended to focus their ceramic studies on
the Salado Polychrome pottery itself, and few have attempted to situate these vessels within the context of the broader ceramic assemblages of which they
were part. Often, this kind of information is limited to a simple reporting of relative frequencies or general statements of temporal trends. Here I assess
patterning in ceramic assemblages from several previously excavated non-mortuary contexts within the Salado area using reported vessel type and form
data in an attempt to examine aspects of the role and place of Salado Polychrome vessels as they functioned within broader ceramic assemblages, and as
they articulated with other local pottery types and forms at the assemblage level. I also assess the potential for this kind of analysis to help archaeologists
understand the nature and historical trajectories of the varied manifestations of the Salado Phenomenon across much of the American Southwest.
Widmer, Randolph (University of Houston)
[129]             Lapidary Crafting in the Tlajinga Barrio at Sites 17:S3E1 and 18:S3E1, Teotihuacan
Fine screened (1 mm mesh) samples obtained from the heavy fractions of flotation samples at the recent excavations in the Tlajinga barrio of Teotihuacan
have revealed evidence of extensive lapidary crafting of slate and greenstone. Sorting of the sediments from these samples results in the recovery of
minute fragments of lapidary debitage as well as more typical domestic refuse. Evidence will be presented on the types of artifacts being produced, the
materials being crafted, and the intensity of production at these two sites. Also these data will be compared with the lapidary craft production at nearby
33:S3W1 that also has evidence of craft production and has already been published.In this presentation I will outline the methodology utilized in this
analysis, the reduction sequence of lapidary production of specific artifacts, the raw materials being worked, and the procedure for measuring the intensity
of production of lapidary production. What we are discovering is that the Tlajinga district of Teotihuacan has quite intense and diverse lapidary craft
production. However, this activity is typically not visible at the macro scale and so requires the use of microartifact recovery and analysis to reveal the
nature and intensity of this production.
Wiessner, Pauline
[107]             Discussant
Wiktorowicz, Conner (Purdue University), Bettina Arnold (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee), John Wiktorowicz (University of Texas Medical
Branch) and Alexander Kurosky (University of Texas Medical Branch)
[103]             A Bloody Mystery: Proteomic Residue Analysis of Funerary Ceramics from the Early Iron Age Heuneburg
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                481
This paper presents the results of a proteomic analysis (protein-based mass spectrometry) of the contents of six ceramic vessels excavated from a burial
mound near the Heuneburg, an early Iron Age (640–400 B.C.) hillfort in southwest Germany. One hundred and sixty eight proteins from human, animal,
and microbial sources were identified with high confidence and low false discovery rate, demonstrating the suitability of proteomics for discovery-based
residue analysis in untreated prehistoric funerary ceramics. More generally, the analysis also validates the viability of proteomic techniques for identifying
proteins adsorbed to archaeologically-recovered pottery vessels. Finally, the results obtained revealed a surprising probable cause of death for at least one
high-status Iron Age European individual through proteomic technology, at the same time shedding new light on mortuary practices preceding the final
deposition of the body in early Iron Age southwest Germany.
Wiktorowicz, John [103] see Wiktorowicz, Conner
Wilcox, David (Itinerant Scholar)
[258]             Synergies of Success: Stories of Avocational/Professional Archeology in Arizona
The history of archaeology is replete with stories about the synergies that have come from relationships between professional and avocational
archaeologists whose cooperation repeatedly has produced significant contributions to knowledge. Recalling some of those stories today is a valuable
reminder of how such success is crafted, and perhaps a guide to how it again can be realized. Frank Hamilton Cushing, Erich Schmidt, Byron Cummings,
Emil Walter Haury and my own experience provide five such stories from the history of archaeology in Arizona. All benefited from the cooperation of
“citizen archaeologists” who provided patronage, access to sites, financial and moral support, field-student excitement, loyalty and labor, or outright
collaboration to realize a wide variety of scientific goals. These brief case studies illustrate the diversity of the aesthetics and goals that motivate and
inform what it means to conduct what has been regarded as “professional” archaeology.
[258]             Chair
Wilde, James (AFCEC)
[73]              Moderator
Wildt, Jennifer [164] see Campbell, Janice
Wildt, Jennifer (Prentice Thomas and Assoc.)
[226]             Ancient Plazas for Modern Cities: A Role for Archaeology in City Planning Today
For thousands of years, plazas have served as spaces for public gatherings. Modern plazas continue to serve many of the same functions as ancient
plazas, providing a foundation for comparative studies. Archaeologists have begun to recognize the importance of incorporating modern studies of public
spaces into their work, but in order for archaeology to remain relevant, we must engage with and contribute to studies of the modern world. It is necessary
for us to work with scholars in these fields so that our studies can be truly interdisciplinary. In this presentation, I engage with landscape architects and
urban planners to show how we can employ archaeological data to contribute to the discussion of modern public spaces. I use a dataset from ancient
Maya plazas to support arguments for the continued importance of plazas and parks throughout cities and present this data in a way that is meaningful and
useful for city planners. The organization of public spaces in ancient cities serves as a template for the layout of modern cities, creating communities and
fostering placemaking.
Wiley, Kevin (SUNY Buffalo)
[188]             Social Networks in the European Neolithic
This paper will examine applications of Social Network Analysis to cultures of the Middle Neolithic of Central Europe. Implications for this method to better
understand circular enclosures will be explored.
[188]             Chair
Wilkerson, Brenna (UNLV)
[68]              The Proof is in the Pots: Residue Analysis of Virgin Branch Puebloan Ceramics
This study analyzes ceramics from Virgin Branch Puebloan sites on the Shivwits Plateau and in the Moapa Valley in order to examine differences in the
types of foods cooked and stored in each area. Residue analyses, by means of gas chromatography and mass spectrometry, were performed on body
sherds from ceramic jars. Three types of wares were included in this research: Shivwits Plain Ware, Moapa Gray Ware, and Tusayan Sand-Tempered. The
former two ceramic wares were included in a ceramic distribution network between upland and lowland Virgin Branch Puebloan areas. The data from the
residue analyses are presented, and results from the uplands and the lowlands are compared.
Wilkin, Shevan (Department of Anthropology, University of West Florida) and Ignacio A Lazagabaster (Institute of Human Origins, Arizona St.
University)
[207]             Specific Skeletal Injuries as a Proxy for Domestic Violence
The prevalence of violence in past societies is generally assessed through observable skeletal trauma. Common contexts of violence vary from culture to
culture, and differences in acceptable forms of violence can be evident after documenting the different shapes, locations, and stages of healing of injuries.
Contemporary cross-cultural studies show the physical effects of household violence primarily display on the middle third of the face in female victims, can
commonly cause concomitant ante-mortem tooth loss, and are often non-lethal. The universality of these visually detectable indicators of household
violence allows us to determine the acceptability and prevalence of household violence within prehistoric groups through the assessment of the
frequencies and severity of these injuries. Results from recent studies elaborate the differences in contextual trauma from warfare, raiding, and probable
domestic violence within precolumbian Peruvian sites from Middle Horizon (A.D. 600–1000) and Late Intermediate Period (A.D. 1000–1350) settlements in
both the highlands of Andahuaylas and the coastal settlements at Ancon. The injuries from each time period will be presented alongside each other to
show how the contexts of violence changed over time.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                482
Wilkinson, Patrick (University of California, Merced)
[3]                Keepers of the Cave: The Impact Caretakers Have on the Archaeological Record.
Caretakers, whether self-appointed or formally selected, have an immense impact on the distribution of material remains at sacred sites in modern day
Haiti. This paper examines the ritual use of four caves in Haiti and the effects that four different caretakers have had on the ritual remains left behind after
Vodou ceremonies have taken place. These cave/caretaker combinations include publicly accessed caves that are cared for by a cadre of self-appointed
homeless men, a cave in private hands managed as a ceremonial/tourist destination, a community managed cave system being transformed into a
tourist/festival destination, and a cave managed as part of a national park with a state-appointed caretaker. The patterns of artifact migration in these
modern instances can be of use in interpreting the archaeological record of select ceremonial locations with similar use patterns and access.
Wilkinson, Darryl (University of Wisconsin-Madison)
[108]              Relational Empire: The Non-modern Violence of the Inka State
The use of “relational” approaches in archaeology seems much more prevalent in some contexts as compared to others. Particularly, it is most often
invoked with respect to prehistoric hunter-foragers—that is, societies that are “politically non-complex” to use the classic archaeological terms. Perhaps as
a result, violence is seldom discussed in the literature on relationality, unless to point out the contrasting violence of modernity itself. Yet for those of us
who deal with indigenous empires, the issue of violence is much harder to ignore. So while it may be true that the Inkas also attributed personhood to many
nonhumans, if those nonhumans failed to march to the imperial beat, they could be executed for treason or subjected to corporal punishment. In principle
then, relationality might be no less amenable to realizing violence and domination than is modernity. In this paper I examine the violent nature of the
relational ontologies of the Inkas, and argue that this highlights a significant “blind spot” for the ethical commitments of the relational turn. We are often
enjoined to “take seriously” the alternative realities posited by non-Western ontologies, but in practice have avoided doing so where it conflicts with deeply
held humanist values.
Willett, Patrick (State University of New York at Buffalo), Peter Biehl (State University of New York at Buffalo) and Ralf Vandam (Research
Center for Anatolian Civilization in Ista)
[95]               Exploring the Late Prehistoric (8000–2400 B.C.) Human-Environment Interaction in the Western Taurus Mountains, SW Turkey
This paper presents a case study on human-environment dynamics in the Burdur Region (SW Turkey) during Late Prehistory (8000–2400 B.C.). Previous
archaeological research in the area mainly focused on the fertile lowland areas, which revealed distinctive periods of continuity and collapse of farming
communities, followed by a total abandonment of the plain areas for nearly a millennium, i.e., during the Middle Chalcolithic (5500–4100 B.C.). The working
hypothesis is that people moved to more temperate regions and/or relocated themselves further upland. By investigating the so-called ‘marginal’ areas in
the landscape we want to define the push-pull factors of marginal landscapes and investigate how different/similar the communities were in these areas in
relation to lowland communities. Furthermore, extant regional palaeoenvironmental data will be linked to the findings of the survey. There are strong
indications that the region was subject to a long-term climatic deterioration during the Late Prehistoric, particularly during the so-called 8.2ka Event, which
may be one cause for the apparent exodus from the lowlands and shift in settlement patterns during the seventh/sixth millennium B.C. Ultimately, it will be
attempted to corroborate changes witnessed in the local and regional palaeoenvironmental record with shifting preferences in landscape access and
resource exploitation.
Willhite, Brenton (University of Missouri)
[65]               When Should I Stop? Discerning the Minimum Number of Lithic Artifacts Required to Accurately Characterize Mode of Reduction
Several methodologies have been developed to analyze flaked stone debitage. Among the more popular methodologies are flake typologies similar to
Sullivan and Rozen’s (1985) “interpretation free typology,” which focused on measuring breakage patterns by classifying debitage into complete flakes,
broken flakes, flake fragments and debris. While many discussions have focused on the usefulness of these measures, especially in regards to gaining an
understanding of reduction methods via the relative proportions of flake types, they fail to document how many artifacts need to be analyzed to accurately
reflect these relative proportions. Using several lithic assemblages gathered from 76 Draw, an Animas Phase Site in Luna County, New Mexico, this study
uses bootstrapping to discern the optimal range of artifacts required to characterize reduction methods before substantial time is wasted to redundant
sampling.
Williams, Travis (University of Michigan)
[6]                [Not] Finding Vann’s Quarters: Landscape Dynamics and the Archaeology of the Subaltern on a 19th Century Cherokee Plantation
Historical archaeologists, to varying degrees, have long been interested in researching the lives of people from the past who left little (and about whom little
was left) in the form of textual documentation. In North America and beyond, such interests most often take the form of archaeology of slavery and
bondage. Unfortunately, the forces that conspired to prevent the voices of enslaved peoples from entering the historical record (i.e., colonialism,
racialization, ethnocentrism, capitalism) have also contributed to the obfuscation or destruction of the material records those peoples left behind. This
poster presents findings from research in the context of destruction and its implications for our capacity to understand the past. Through the juxtaposition of
historical surveys, decades of aerial photographs, and contemporary, computer-generated map projections, this poster explores the landscape dynamics of
an early nineteenth century plantation in the then heart of Cherokee country, contemporary northwest Georgia. It documents the researcher’s unsuccessful
attempts to find and document a specific slave community, and, more importantly, what can be learned from such a research endeavor.
Williams, Justin (Washington State University)
[40]               The Curriculum Committee’s New Curriculum Resource
When teaching archaeology, professors are tasked with the difficult undertaking of conveying the essence of a hands-on field that often must be taught
within the confines of the classroom. This restriction can make creating effective classroom activities and all-inclusive syllabi a challenge. Adding to the
difficulty is the emphasis that research receives at conferences. Latest findings from the field are the focus rather than innovative pedagogy. The SAA’s
Principles of Archaeological Ethics stresses that, as educators, we effectively disseminate archaeological information to a wider audience. This audience
includes our students. In order to promote, distribute, and encourage the creation of innovative and effective materials for archaeology courses, we are
excited to announce that the Committee on Curriculum has created a new online Curriculum Resource as part of the SAA website. SAA members will be
able to download examples of engaging classroom activities and syllabi from a wide range of courses. This poster highlights some materials that will be
included in the online Curriculum Resource. It further outlines the process through which archaeologists can submit their own pedagogical materials to
share with the SAA online community. This resource will be useful for both new and veteran archaeology professors.
[40]               Chair
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              483
Williams, Veronica [57] see Daltroy, Terence
Williams, Patrick Ryan (Chicago Field Museum), Donna Nash (UNC-Greensboro), Anita Cook (Catholic University of American) and William Isbell
(SUNY-Binghamton)
[91]              Wari Ceramic Production in the Heartland and Provinces
Between 500 and 600 A.D., the first expansive state of the central highlands of Peru emerged in the Ayacucho Basin. This state, known as Wari after its
capital city located in the same region, established far flung colonies covering much of the mountainous region of modern day Peru. Research in the
heartland sites of Conchopata and Wari and in the provincial sites of Cerros Baul and Mejia have yielded new insights into the economic production of the
early imperial state, including significant new data on ceramic production and consumption. In this poster, we examine the geochemical diversity in a
ceramic sample from both heartland and provincial sites using INAA to better understand the political economy of ceramic production in heartland and
provincial contexts.
[219]             Discussant
[219]             Chair
Williams, Veronica (CONICET- UBA)
[259]             Landscape, Social Memory, and Materiality at Calchaqui Valley during Inka Domination in Northwest Argentina
Within its territory, the Inka adapted their rule of such diverse spheres as political economy, ideology, and identity, among others, which explains in part the
diversity and disparity seen in the empire. In Collasuyu, Inka buildings were common but it is evident that their features, dimensions, monumentality and
spatial density show contrasting regional differences. New evidence regarding Inka occupation in Northwest Argentina shows different situations of Inka
conquest and domination expressed in landscape, memory, and materiality, as seen through the example of the complex process of population
assimilation in the Calchaqui valley.
Williamson, Christian (Syracuse University) and Douglas Armstrong (Syracuse University)
[126]             Housing and Living Areas of the Enslaved and Free Servants at the Magens House Compound, St. Thomas
By the beginning of the nineteenth century, the enslaved represented sixty-two percent of the urban population on the island of St Thomas in the Danish
West Indies. While St. Thomas never held slave populations comparable to the other colonial empires in the Caribbean, it was an extremely important
transshipment hub for the Caribbean and beyond. Slavery within the urban port setting of Charlotte Amalie, St. Thomas differed radically from the rural
plantations, presenting the enslaved within the city economic opportunities and social negotiations not afforded to their rural counterparts. Though only a
small number of slaves resided at the Magens House Compound, their impact appears briefly in the tax records and more substantially in the material
record via artifact assemblages associated with the outbuildings and evidence of local craft industry participation on site. A microhistorical perspective will
explore how the enslaved at the Magens House directly shaped their own spaces within and across a tightly controlled urban compound.
Williford, Carl [206] see Menzer, Jeremy
Willis, William (University of Nevada Las Vegas)
[68]              Not Just any Stones: Virgin Branch Puebloan Sandstone Artifact Distribution on the Southern Shivwits Plateau
Throughout the summer of 2015, graduate students at the University of Nevada Las Vegas began the data mining of over 20 years of archaeological site
forms pertaining to the prehistoric occupation of the southern portion of the Shivwits Plateau in Northern Arizona. This data, as collected by the National
Park Service, was organized and placed into a geodatabase, allowing for the first time a thorough spatial investigation of artifact distributions associated
with the upland Virgin Branch Puebloan. During the preliminary exploration of this data, it was discovered that the distributions and concentrations of
sandstone artifacts within this region were clustered in a spatially significant pattern. This research investigates what role such artifacts may have had in
regards to the lifeways of the Virgin Branch Puebloan, and specifically it addresses the potential role sandstone played in resource processing.
[68]              Chair
Willis, Kelsey and Clifford Brown (Dr.)
[163]             The Ceramics of San Antonio, a Site on the Pacific Coastal Plain of Chinandega, Nicaragua
Since 2009, Florida Atlantic University has been carrying out archaeological survey and excavation in the Department of Chinandega, Nicaragua jointly
with the Dirección de Patrimonio Cultural. Objectives of this research include establishing an artifact sequence and studying sociocultural processes such
as the evolution of social complexity, interregional interaction, and migration. Found in 2009, the site of San Antonio is located between the cities of El
Viejo and Chinandega. A single 2x2 m test pit and a 50 cm diameter shovel test were excavated at the site. In the summer of 2015, I studied the San
Antonio ceramics using the Type: Variety mode system of classification. I found that the assemblage was dominated by Late Preclassic Usulután related
groups and wares, including Izalco, Olocuitla, and Bolo; and Pinos Brown-black and Canchon Fine Incised; and Santa Tecla Red. The deposit exhibits
cultural stratigraphy. Modest quantities of apparently later unslipped and red-slipped wares occur above the higher of two floors revealed in the excavation;
below that floor and associated with a second, lower floor, the Late Preclassic deposit is uncontaminated with later materials. I interpret the site as
containing a Uapala or Verbena-Arenal sphere occupation closely linked to contemporaneous cultures in El Salvador.
Willis, Mark [168] see Hard, Robert
Willison, Megan (University of Connecticut) and Kevin McBride (University of Connecticut)
[61]              Indigenous Metalworking: An Examination of Metal Production and Use During the Pequot War
One of the most iconic moments of the Pequot War was the massacre at Mystic Fort, an event which occurred on May 26, 1637, and took the lives of
hundreds of Pequot men, women, and children. Immediately following the massacre, the English retreated back to their ships and were followed by
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                484
returning Pequot warriors. This paper will examine the native cuprous and ferrous objects recovered along various points of engagement on the English
retreat route and analyze them in relation to metallic objects recovered from Mystic Fort and a nearby small Pequot settlement. Through the comparison of
artifacts recovered on the retreat route with those found in domestic settings, it can be discerned if and how the Pequot repurposed cuprous trade items
and if there are discernible patterns and reasons for the creation and use of cuprous “scrap” items. This research has implications for understanding the
role of metal production in domestic contexts and the significance or lack thereof of cuprous scrap metal.
Wills, Chip (University of New Mexico)
[55]              Discussant
Wilshusen, Richard (PaleoCultural Research Group)
[243]             Mining Data, Protecting Historic Landscapes, and Understanding the Past
Forty years ago Bill Lipe dared archaeologists to fundamentally change their views about archaeological practice. We were like miners, exploiting a non-
renewable resource. If we were to have a future we would need to practice conservation as well as salvage, and education as well as preservation. Lipe
published his 1974 Kiva article just as CRM and modern government archaeology were coming into being. Today, we live in a fundamentally different
archaeological culture: there are four times as many CRM and government archaeologists as there are professors teaching archaeology; SHPOs are
annually making more than 100,000 determinations of National Register eligibility, and agencies treat many of these sites as if they were listed; in the
southwest alone there are more than 50 national parks or monuments highlighting archaeological resources. Increasingly our challenge is how to “mine”
and take advantage of the sheer quantity of archaeological observations produced each year. How do we sift through all the site forms and dots on maps
to do better archaeology, plan for the future, and support great research? Following in Lipe’s footsteps, I propose a model of archaeological practice that
challenges academic, government, and CRM archaeology to chart a common course.
Wilson, Jeremy [111] see Flood, John
Wilson, Nathan (Arizona State University) and Philip J. Arnold III (Loyola University-Chicago)
[216]             Lithic Production and Procurement at Teotepec, Veracruz, Mexico
In this paper we present new data on lithic production, consumption, and importation during the Early and Middle Classic Periods (A.D. 300–650) at the site
of Teotepec, located in the Sierra de los Tuxtlas region of Veracruz, Mexico. Using the results of recently completed technological and visual source
analyses, we identify differences in production and consumption behavior across the site and over time, and situate this behavior within the larger region.
Changes in importation in the region have been identified during the Early Classic Period, some of which were associated with the Teotihuacan-affiliated
site of Matacapan. The combination of regional-scale data from previous projects and site-level data (both from surface collection and excavated contexts)
from the Proyecto Arqueológico Teotepec allow us to characterize behavior associated with production and use of lithic materials at Teotepec and gauge
the site’s participation in larger regional processes.
Wilson, Jeremy (Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis), Lucas Stamps (Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis), William
Gilhooly (Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis) and Broxton Bird (Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis)
[285]             Climate Change, Subsistence and Warfare during the Late Precolumbian Period in the Lower Midwest
Archaeologists are increasingly turning to climate change as part of their explanatory models of regional and interregional population movement, socio-
cultural transformation, and the dissolution of societies in North America. In the lower Midwest, both megadroughts and megafloods have been invoked to
explain declining agricultural returns, rises in conflict, and abandonment of major river valleys during the latter half of the Mississippian Period. However,
the data sources and indices recording rainfall and drought have often been extrapolated over broad geographic expanses, introducing unnecessary
ambiguity.
Here, we deliver the first high-resolution record of hydroclimate change over the last 2,500 years in the Midwest. These data are examined in conjunction
with the isotopic record for subsistence change and the spatiotemporal patterning of fortified settlements. Sediment cores from lakes in Indiana provided
isotopic and lithologic data that demonstrate considerable fluctuations in atmospheric moisture during the Medieval Climate Anomaly (MCA) and
subsequent Little Ice Age (LIA). A prolonged wet period during and prior to the MCA is followed by a LIA-era drought that lasted for approximately 500
years. This research convincingly demonstrates a close relationship between prolonged severe drought and population dynamics during the depopulation
of the lower Midwest between A.D. 1300 and 1450.
Winchell, Frank, Chris Stevens (University College London Institute of Archaeology), Charlene Murphy (University College London Institute of
Archaeology), Louis Champion (University College London Institute of Archaeology) and Dorian Fuller (University College London Institute of
Archaeology)
[177]             Cereals and Ceramics: Another Look at the Late Neolithic Development of the Butana Group in Eastern Sudan during the 4th Millennium
                  BC
This paper will discuss the new findings of domesticated sorghum along with the ceramics associated with the Butana Group at an archaeological site
called, KG23. The Butana Group represents a cultural manifestation in the southern Atbai of the far eastern Sahel that dates around 3500–3000 B.C., and
was contemporary with other groups such as the Late Neolithic groups in the central Nile Valley, the pre-Kerma culture in Upper Nubia, the A-Group in
Lower Nubia, and the Egyptian Predynastic cultures of Upper Egypt. Recent archaeobotanical evidence recovered from organic-tempered pottery sherds
from the largest Butana Group site, KG23, demonstrates that peoples associated with this group were in the process of domesticating sorghum in the
fourth millennium B.C.
Windes, Thomas [17] see Peeples, Matt
Winemiller, Terrance [238] see McKillop, Heather
Wingfield, Erin [265] see Morehouse, Rebecca
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 485
Winter, Barbara [38] see Brown, Kelly
Wissler, Amanda [181] see Budd, Tommy
Witt, Kelsey (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), Inge Lundstroem (University of Copenhagen) and Ripan Malhi (University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign)
[84]              Mitogenome Sequencing Of Ancient Dogs In The Americas: Assessing Dog Genetic Diversity and Population History
Mitochondrial DNA of ancient dogs in the Americas has been studied extensively, but most studies focus solely on the hypervariable region. We
sequenced the complete mitochondrial genomes (mitogenomes) of dogs in the Americas from multiple geographic regions and time periods in order to
compare populations between regions as well as to compare the genetic diversity of ancient dogs in the Americas to modern dogs worldwide. When
comparing the HVR and mitogenome data, we found that the two data sets show different results when examining population diversity and structure; dogs
have a great deal of genetic diversity outside of the hypervariable region, so sequencing the complete mitogenome is necessary for accurately
characterizing the genetic diversity of ancient dog populations. We identified novel haplotypes in the ancient dog population, and found that some dog
populations have high levels of diversity while others are much more homogeneous, suggesting a small founding population. With the breadth of our
sampling, we also constructed a Bayesian Skyline Plot to model changes in dog population history over time, as well as to estimate the timing of dog arrival
to the Americas.
Witt, David [197] see Primeau, Kristy
Witt, David (NYS Department of Environmental Conservation), Charles Vandrei (NYS Department of Environmental Conservation) and Kristy
Primeau (NYS Department of Environmental Conservation)
[208]             Lessons from the Field: The Intersection of Field Schools and Public Land Management Concerns
The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation manages approximately 4 million acres of state owned land and an additional 910,000
acres through conservation easements with the stated goal “to conserve, improve, and protect New York’s natural resources and environment….” New
York state law interprets “environment” broadly, including cultural and historic resources within the concept. Thousands of archaeological sites, ranging
from Archaic camps to Revolutionary War battlefields to historic plane crash sites, are located on, and enhance the value of, state land, and NYSDEC is
charged with their conservation. This paper discusses the role that NYSDEC plays in managing these resources and how the agency cooperates with
colleges throughout the state as they conduct field schools on various sites. We will focus on the inherent contradictions present within the goal of
“conserving” cultural resources, while also working with schools to obtain the information necessary to better manage those very resources for the public
good and train future generations of archaeologists in the skills required to manage cultural resources.
Witt, Rachel (Tulane University) and Kimberly Munro (Louisiana State University )
[276]             Ritualistic Nature of Juvenile Interments, Cosma Archaeological Complex, Ancash, Perú
Research exploring mortuary treatments, morbidity, and trauma among juveniles has largely been left out of bioarchaeological discussions due to the
difficulties subadult skeletal remains present to archaeological investigations. Despite these limitations, analysis of juvenile burials and skeletal remains
has the potential to improve our understanding of the physical and social lives of children in the past. Excavations conducted by Proyecto Investigación
Arqueológico Distrito del Cáceres Ancash (PIADCA) during the 2014 and 2015 season uncovered 11 juvenile interments on the main temple platform
Karecoto dating to the Early Horizon (800–200 B.C.) at the site of Cosma, located in the Cordillera Negra (at 2,600 masl) in the Nepeña Valley of north-
central Perú. Systematic analysis of the mortuary patterns and skeletal remains indicate that the interments are secondary burials that may have served as
ritual offerings. Additionally, the skeletal sample is of paleopathological interest as several individuals exhibit systemic infections, traumatic injuries, and
abnormal dental conditions. Bioarchaeological investigations of this particular sample have the potential to contribute to our knowledge of juvenile health
and demonstrate that subadults were participating and active agents in Peruvian prehistory.
Wlodarczak, Piotr [24] see Toussaint, Mark
Wolf, Marc (GC CUNY) and Katherine Miller Wolf (Indiana University East)
[130]             Creating an Interdisciplinary Map of Social and Environmental Change through Topography and Bioarchaeology
Societal change does not occur in a vacuum and marks the social and physical landscape in a myriad of ways. The natural world—the lived in landscape—
is the most pervasive and enduring reminder and example of social order. Water is a staple of both domestic and ritual life and leaves its mark in
architectural and biological manifestations of society. Mountains, caves, and ravines and other landscape monuments are emblematic of regional geology
and influence the local human population both at the societal level and within the body’s biogeochemistry. The environment leaves unambiguous markers
on human remains as well cultural perceptions of space and development. This paper discusses how Geographic Information Systems (GPS) data, spatial
analysis, and bioarchaeological data (radiogenic strontium data) can effectively map societal change of cities at frontiers or transition zones. While
northwestern Belize is often the ‘laboratory’ of ideas and conceptualizations, our case studies will include examples from archaeological sites in the
Guatemalan Transversal and Petén regions as well as from Honduras and the Copan Valley at the proposed Maya southern frontier.
Wolff, Sarah (University of Arizona)
[82]              Food on Parade: The Use of Food to Create Social Identity and Differences within the Post-Civil War U.S. Army at Fort Laramie, Wyoming
On a remote frontier fort where conspicuous consumption materials were limited, officers and enlisted men reinforced distinct hierarchical social status
identities through differential food consumption. While status differences in the military are primarily signaled through rank insignia and uniform elements, I
intend to focus this paper on differences in diet to better understand the maintenance of Victorian class structure at Fort Laramie from 1870–1890. A
zooarchaeological and historical document analysis demonstrates that while enlisted men and officers had similar rations, their diets were different in many
respects. Officers maintained greater diet diversity because they were the only ones who regularly hunted wild game. In addition, officers regularly
purchase canned meats, fruits, and vegetables. This research increases our knowledge of the everyday life and social relationships between officers and
enlisted men in the U.S. Army in the late nineteenth century.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              486
Wolff, Marc [162] see Fash, Barbara
Wolff, Christopher (SUNY-Plattsburgh)
[217]            The Beat Goes On: A Continuation of J. Louis Giddings’ Research Into a Late Western Thule Drum from Cape Krusenstern, Alaska
This paper examines a small drum that Giddings found in 1959 within a Late Western Thule structure on Cape Krusenstern, and places it within a broader
historical context of drum production and use among prehistoric and historic groups within the region surrounding the Chukchi Sea and across the North
American Arctic. Giddings only published a brief description and interpretation of the drum, despite elsewhere providing vivid depictions of the use of drums
among Arctic peoples. The author’s recent examination of the drum identified distinct characteristics found in much later ethnographic Canadian Inuit and
Alaskan Iñupiat examples, suggesting that aspects of their drum-making traditions are quite ancient, and date to at least the Late Western Thule period
(A.D. 1300-1400). The small size and construction of the Krusenstern drum led Giddings to propose that it may have been a toy, as it was significantly
smaller than 19th century and later Arctic drums familiar to him. The author offers an alternate interpretation of the drum as a possible shamanic
instrument–rather than a toy–based on research not available to Giddings before his death, as well as recent documentation by the author of hundreds of
Arctic drums and associated parts from various periods.
Wolfhagen, Jesse (Stony Brook University)
[176]            Age and Sex Composition of Zooarchaeological Measurements via Bayesian Mixture Models
Zooarchaeologists reconstruct age- and sex-specific animal mortality profiles in order to examine past human strategies of animal exploitation.
Traditionally, animal age structures and sex ratios were derived from complementary but distinct data (e.g., age via epiphyseal fusion data, sex via bone
morphology or metrics), though recent research has highlighted the value of integrating these data. This paper describes how zooarchaeologists can
further that integration by fitting standard zooarchaeological measurements to mixture models via Bayesian inference. Bayesian inference emphasizes the
probabilistic nature of sex identifications (inherent in all zooarchaeological analyses), which can be used to estimate sex proportions of different subsets of
the assemblage via Monte Carlo integration. It also provides a flexible framework for incorporating prior knowledge about mortality patterns and comparing
competing hypotheses about exploitation patterns. This paper demonstrates the utility of Bayesian mixture models using sheep (Ovis aries) remains from
the Neolithic site of Catalhoyuk (Turkey; ca. 7200–6500 cal B.C.E.). The model provides age and sex proportions for both the hunted and the herded
sheep populations. Bayesian mixture models can thus explore synchronic and diachronic changes in the composition of herds in a straightforward manner
that relies on commonly recorded zooarchaeological evidence.
Wolfhagen, Jesse [176] see Otárola-Castillo, Erik
Woloszyn, Janusz (Institute of Archaeology, University of Warsaw)
[45]             Enemies—Strangers—Neighbours. Image of the Others in Moche Culture
Moche art served the purpose of not only disseminating specific content of a religious nature, but it was also a tool of social influence and control. Its
iconography gives an exceptional opportunity to study the mechanisms of perceiving and presenting others (representatives of different cultural and
probably also ethnic group) by a society which has not left behind any written documents for us. It is also interesting how these representations could be
used in the process of shaping (reinforcing) the coastal population’s own group identity. In this paper, I try to answer the question of how the information
regarding neighbors was built, what its concept could be and what social functions it could serve among the groups living in the Southern Moche Region
(the area bordering with a territory occupied by a culturally separate population, related—presumable—to another polity or polities).
Wolverton, Steve [65] see Brown, Andrew
Womack, Andrew [106] see Flad, Rowan
Wood, J. Scott [66] see Herr, Sarah
Woodfill, Brent (University of Minnesota)
[59]             Large-Scale Production of Basic Commodities at Salinas de los Nueve Cerros, Guatemala: Implications for Ancient Maya Political
                 Economy
Salinas de los Nueve Cerros is a major Precolumbian Maya city that grew around the only non-coastal salt source in the Maya lowlands. Residents of the
city were able to transform the neighborhoods adjacent to and atop the salt dome into a large-scale production operation with the capacity to produce over
10,000 metric tons of salt a year, which were then distributed throughout the western lowlands via the Chixoy, Pasión, and Usumacinta river networks. By
the Late Classic period, the city had expanded into the production and trade of other commodities that were locally produced (including agricultural and
pescacultural goods) and traded from farther upriver.
Investigations at Nueve Cerros since 2010 have shown that the salt source and basic production was tightly controlled by the local elite—workshops were
associated with administrative structures containing the tombs of important individuals—although some phases of production or refining appear to have
taken place throughout the site in each of the different neighborhoods under investigation.
Woods, Aaron [24] see Harrod, Ryan
Woods, Aaron (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Ryan Harrod (University of Alaska, Anchorage)
[104]            More than Just Bones: A Biocultural Analysis of Fremont Human Remains
Many existing studies of Fremont mortuary data have been limited to documenting the location of burials, the presence or absence of burial goods, and the
position of the remains.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              487
Furthermore, much of the analyses of Fremont human skeletal remains have focused almost exclusively on population-level comparisons or evidence of
extreme violence. Current bioarchaeological methods have expanded the type of questions that researchers can ask. Equipped with hypotheses influenced
by social theory, it is possible for analysts to discover additional aspects of quotidian Fremont life. The observation of stress and disease indicators, refined
methods of assessing entheses or musculoskeletal markers, and a growing understanding of how acts of non-lethal violence can be seen on the bones
provide an expanded view of how individuals lived and died. This paper presents the results of several bioarchaeological analyses performed on Fremont
skeletal remains in an effort to improve our understanding of the more social aspects of life in the Fremont Regional System.
Wooller, Matthew J. [124] see Glassburn, Crystal
Woollett, James [95] see Adderley, Paul
Worman, F. Scott (Missouri State University), Anastasia Steffen (Valles Caldera National Preserve) and William Wedenoja (Missouri State
University)
[66]              Field Schools as Public and Applied Archaeology
Field schools serve the vital functions of training students in basic research methods and introducing them to the realities of field-based investigations.
Beyond that, they typically have been a venue for faculty to pursue their own research agendas. In this paper I present information about two field schools,
one in Jamaica focused on community-engaged public archaeology, and a second in New Mexico emphasizing cultural resource management (CRM) as
applied archaeology. I evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of these approaches relative to traditional field schools. Specifically, I examine their efficacy
in training students in survey and excavation techniques, introducing them to the broader contexts of archaeological investigations, and producing tangible
research outcomes. I also assess the degree to which the field schools succeeded as public and applied archaeology, discuss the costs and benefits of
these approaches for students, faculty, and local communities, and identify ways to improve each of these outcomes.
Worth, John (Univ. of West Florida)
[213]             Materialized Landscapes of Practice: Exploring Native American Ceramic Variability in the Historic-Era Southeastern United States
Despite the fact that archaeological ceramics have long been viewed as a proxy for ethno-political identity, recent research exploring the precise
relationship between ceramics and identity during the historic-era southeastern United States provides increasing support for the conclusion that
geographic variability in archaeological ceramics is best viewed through the lens of practice, and that archaeological phases correspond better to
communities of practice than communities of identity. When viewed through the lens of practice theory and social learning theory, it becomes clear that the
coexistence of both communities of practice and communities of identity within the same social landscape does not guarantee automatic correspondence
between the two realms, nor even does any demonstrated correspondence necessarily prove a causal link between a community of practice and a
community of identity that happen to be coterminous. Each type of community must be studied independently using appropriate and available data, and
only by first disentangling the two can any demonstrable connection between communities of practice (such as archaeological phases) and communities of
identity (such as historically-documented polities or ethnies) be established empirically. Only then can the exact reasons for any congruence (or lack
thereof) be explored in a systematic and rigorous manner.
Worthington, Brian [222] see Colten, Roger
Wright, Alice (Appalachian State University)
[17]              Gateways and Gatherings: Economic, Ideological, and Social Networks of Southeastern Hopewell
The existence of the Hopewell Core—the concentration of remarkable ceremonial assemblages and geometric earthworks in the Ohio River Valley—
presupposes the existence of a Hopewell Periphery, a social space that includes large swaths of the American Southeast. Often, archaeologists have
attributed Hopewellian material culture at southeastern sites to their role as gateway centers facilitating the exchange and transfer of special raw materials
through the Hopewell Interaction Sphere. Alternative proposals have suggested that certain southeastern sites may have served as pilgrimage centers
where dispersed communities gathered to participate in Hopewellian ceremonial activities. While such economic and ideological scenarios are not mutually
exclusive, we suggest that it may be possible to distinguish between them by considering macro-scalar connectivity across the Hopewellian social network.
Using social network analysis in a GIS framework, we consider how multiple lines of evidence—geographic location, monumental architecture, exotic raw
materials, and finished craft objects—support or refute such interpretations of major Hopewellian sites in the Southeast, clarify the structure of the
Hopewell Interaction Sphere, and raise new questions about Middle Woodland connections across eastern North America.
[48]              Discussant
[17]              Chair
Wright, Alice [17] see Mills, Barbara
Wright, Joshua (Oberlin College), Sarah E. Jackson (University of Cincinnati), Christopher F. Motz (University of Cincinnati) and Linda A.
Brown (The George Washington University)
[27]              Categories, Space, and New Perspectives in A Late Classic Maya Community
An interest in indigenous viewpoints has grown in recent years in archaeology, coupled with a commitment to integrating these perspectives more closely
into the excavation process. To facilitate this there is a need for field recording systems that offer a means of incorporating the multivocality reflected in
various perspectives, which can include not only alternative interpretations but also category systems for the archaeological data recovered. The Say Kah
Archaeological Project, in the Programme for Belize area in northwestern Belize, has developed a field recording system that integrates an active onsite
database with a system of indigenous Classic Maya categories of objects and places (derived from hieroglyphic, iconographic, and comparative
ethnographic evidence) in a combined FileMaker-based system, used by archaeologists in the field on iPads. This links with the project’s GIS to give these
categories a central role in the spatial record of the site and provide new perspectives on ancient Maya settlements and the experience thereof. In this
paper, we discuss how our recording system worked to incorporate Maya understandings of materials in the excavation and documentation of the site and
how we used these understandings to produce alternative spatial visualizations based on archaeological data.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               488
Wright, Rita (New York University)
[107]             Engineering Feats and Consequences in the Indus: Workers in the Night
Water tanks, sump pits, street drains, toilets, sewage drains, shaft wells, bathing platforms and other waste management amenities are among the visible
landmarks of the cities of the Indus civilization. While they did provide conveniences for city dwellers, there were certain inequities in the types of
amenities associated with individual households, but it was in the interest of all to keep the system in working order. There is no direct evidence for the
complex network and infrastructural arrangements that made the system work, but using modern cities as examples, optimal times to clean waste pits,
flush drains, and remove unpleasant deposits would have been those few hours between the end of the night hours and dawn. In this paper, I explore the
efficacy of the night, phases of the moon, and the open skies in Indus cities and the technical specialists that maintained them.
Wright, Mark (Brigham Young University)
[117]             Homicide or Deicide? The Function of Deity Impersonation in Mesoamerican Sacrificial Rituals
In Mesoamerican belief systems, deity impersonation rituals temporarily transformed human agents into divine beings. While donning the accoutrements of
specific deities during ritual activity, they merged with and became literal embodiments of those gods, essentially becoming both functionally and
ontologically divine for the duration of the ritual. In rituals of human sacrifice, both victim and executioner were typically bedecked in the costuming of
specific gods, indicating that these were also deity impersonation rituals. As such, the participants would not have been viewed as mere human actors but
rather as literal embodiments of the gods (despite the compulsory nature of the impersonation ritual on the part of the victim). The recognition that these
were impersonation events dramatically elevates their cosmological import; ritual human sacrifices were not mere “re-enactments” in the sense that they
commemorated or even emulated mythological events, but conceptually and functionally they enabled the sacrifice a living, breathing god.
Wright, Aaron and Will Russell (Arizona State University)
[195]             Home Bodies: An Examination of House Cremation among the Hohokam
During the pre-Classic era (ca. A.D. 400–1150), pithouses and houses-in-pits were the preferred modes of residential architecture among Hohokam
communities. When excavated, these wood-framed domiciles often show signs of burning, which effectively closed the structures’ lifecycles as dwellings.
Among affiliated and descendant communities such as the O’odham and some Yuman-speaking groups, a person’s death could prompt the burning of their
home in order to combat any pollution, sickness, or witchcraft associated with the decedent. Fire was also used to transmute the dwelling and other
personal possessions so that they could accompany the deceased into the realm of the dead. Understandably, many researchers perceive Hohokam
house burning in a similar quasi-functional light—i.e., as a way to meet the needs of humans, whether dead or alive. Alternatively, we frame Hohokam
house burning through a relational, animistic perspective. Based on a comparison of offerings in Hohokam cremations to ritualized floor assemblages of
burned houses, we suggest that some houses were conceptualized as other-than-human persons, perhaps even family members. At the end of their lives,
some Hohokam dwellings were ritually prepared, given funerary offerings, and then burned in what amounts to architectural cremation.
[195]             Chair
Wright, Holly (University of York)
[261]             ARIADNE: Building a European Data Infrastructure for Archaeology
ARIADNE is a four-year EU FP7 Infrastructures funded project, made up of 24 partners across 16 European countries, which hold archaeological data in at
least 13 languages. These are the accumulated outcome of the research of individuals, teams and institutions, but form a vast and fragmented corpus, and
their potential has been constrained by difficult access and non-homogeneous perspectives. ARIADNE aims to bring together and integrate existing
archaeological research data infrastructures, so researchers can use these distributed datasets in combination, and in new ways. This paper will give an
overview of the progress of the ARIADNE project, focusing on efforts to create a shared cyber-infrastructure into which metadata is gathered, and a portal
to allow cross-search of this metadata. To this end, mapping work has been carried out to facilitate searching across space, time and subjects, using
Linked Open Data (LOD). This work represents LOD best practice by incorporating existing international initiatives such as the Getty Art & Architecture
Thesaurus, and Pelagios/Pleiades, and contributing to emerging best practice initiatives like PeriodO. As ARIADNE enters its final year, conclusions can
begin to be drawn about the challenges faced along the way, and possible directions for the future.
Wriston, Teresa (Desert Research Institute) and Gary Haynes (University of Nevada, Reno)
[177]             Late Holocene Foraging and Early Farming in Northwestern Zimbabwe: Excavations and Analysis of Rock Shelters and an Open‐Air
                  Village Site
Archaeological sites in Hwange National Park, northwestern Zimbabwe, record how and when food production expanded into this part of southern Africa.
An examined early farming village contains diagnostic comb-stamped and channeled thickware pottery and copper bangles dated to 1800 and 1200 cal
B.P. This earliest farming community supplemented crops with hunted local wild game, but left no evidence of direct contact with indigenous
hunter‐gatherers who had repeatedly occupied rock shelters 30 km away since before 6000 cal B.P. The biggest excavated shelter that was occupied by
the foragers served as an aggregation site between 4000 and 3000 cal B.P.; however, after 2400 cal B.P., forager use of the rock shelters dwindled to only
seasonal occupations by individual families or a few individuals who preferred smaller, more private shelters, perhaps in reaction to expanding farming
communities. Around 800 cal B.P., sherds of burnished wares and a glass bead are intermixed with the traditional hunter‐gatherer lithic, osseous, and OES
assemblage, affording the first archaeological evidence of significant interaction between the indigenous hunter-gatherers and the farmers.
Wrobel, Gabriel (Michigan State University) and Amy Michael (Michigan State University)
[116]             Discerning Patterns of Intentional and Unintentional Movement of Human Bones in Maya Caves
The caves of Central Belize were used extensively by the Maya, primarily during the Late Preclassic and Classic periods (approx. 300 B.C. to A.D. 900).
Archaeological investigations of human bone deposits in these caves typically seek to identify specific mortuary rituals, often based on analogy with
ethnohistoric, epigraphic, and artistic sources, and to interpret these behaviors within broader sociopolitical and environmental contexts. However, because
of the long history of cave use in the area and repeated deposition on ground surfaces, many of these complex deposits are palimpsests, which
complicates analyses in a number of ways. Bioarchaeologists aid in cave studies by identifying and differentiating a variety of influences acting in concert
to move and displace bones, including intentional behaviors associated with elaborate and prolonged mortuary rituals and taphonomic processes
(particularly water flow and looters’ activity). We discuss current bioarchaeological approaches to the study of Maya mortuary caves and provide case
examples in which we compare contrasting data derived from in situ and lab analyses of bones found in the terminal and middle chambers of Actun Kabul.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                 489
[158]             Discussant
Wroth, Kristen (Boston University)
[146]             Phytolith Analysis at Roc de Marsal, SW France
Phytolith analysis at Roc de Marsal, a Middle Paleolithic cave site, SW France, is used to investigate both environmental change and hominin behavior.
Specifically, the aims include correlating phytolith types with the microenvironmental context of the site, and how these conditions changed diachronically.
We also explore the pyrotechnological skills of Neanderthals at the site, broad patterns of plant acquisition and use, and spatial differentiation. Preliminary
analysis of phytolith samples collected in previous years demonstrated diachronic change in phytolith assemblages, differences in plant matter
concentrations in three main zones, and behavioral clues (e.g., use of wood/bark as fuel and over representation of specific grass types). This poster
presents a synthetic study of previously collected samples with the analysis of new, high resolution material collected in 2015. The present study includes
1) assessing whether phytolith deposition was due to natural forces or Neanderthal action; 2) mapping phytolith concentrations across specific levels, as
well as diachronically to more specifically assess spatial patterning; 3) comparing phytolith assemblages with known combustion features and artifact
concentrations; and 4) combining phytolith data with other lines of evidence to understand key ecological shifts and how plant remains tie into the larger
picture of Neanderthal action at RDM.
Wu, Mu-Chun (National Taiwan University) and Maa-Ling Chen (National Taiwan University)
[106]             GIS as a Heuristic Tool: Revisiting Spatial Concepts in the Paiwan Landscape
This research showcases how Geographic Information System (GIS) serves as a heuristic interface to visualise obscure spatial concepts and further
facilitates researchers to explore how these concepts influence people’s perception of and interaction with the landscape. The abandoned slate-stone
settlements of Paiwan are one of their most distinct icons. However, their spatial location and their relation with the wider regional landscape were not
thoroughly investigated. This research utilises analytical functions, such as site catchment, least-cost path and viewshed, to emulate the experience of an
‘agent’ and examine how past Paiwan people would possibly perceive the inhabited landscape. The results have shown distinct characteristics and
regional variations of how settlements were situated in the landscape amongst Paiwan subgroups. These characteristics and variations could have been
significant influential factors both in their perception of the landscape and in the construction of their landscape conception. The result not only allows for
comparison with the contemporary Paiwan landscape imagination, but can also inspire more discussion themes and directions.
Wu, Xiaohong (Peking University) and Ofer Bar Yosef (Harvard University)
[173]             The Chronology of Early Pottery in South China
Human evolution is punctuated by inventions and innovations. One of the important inventions in the development of Chinese civilization was pottery.
Cooking and steaming are two of the processes that change the nature of the food. The same are parching and grilling, or chopping meat and vegetables
into very small pieces. The archaeology of South China uncovered the earliest pots in the records in East Asia. In this presentation the dating of pottery
bearing layers in three cave sites from this vast region will be discussed. The dates from sites such as Yuchnayan and Xianrendong were already
published. A new cave that produced similar results was publicized this year. All three sites produced fragments of early types of pots that are similar
although the caves are separated by a distance of 400-500 km between them. The early dates range from 20/19 Ka cal B.P. and 18/17Ka cal B.P.
Stratified pottery fragments from the later layers and additional sites indicate that the use of this invention continued from hunting and gathering societies
into the time when Neolithic farming was established.
Wu, Xiangqun (Jilin University), Xu Zhang (Chinese Academy of Social Sciences) and Hong Zhu (Jilin University)
[180]             The Health and Nutritional Condition Research on the Skeletal Human Remains from Dabaoshan in Inner Mongolia, China
Dabaoshan cemetery (2300–2200 B.P.) is a recently excavated archaeological site in south central Inner Mongolia, China. Human remains from
Dabaoshan cemetery (DBS) represent one of the earlier groups of ancient people in this area, which has the potential to illuminate the prehistoric life ways
and relationships of ancient peoples in East Asia. Yet, little attention has been given to this cemetery by way of archaeological research. In this study, the
nature and health consequences of the interactions between populations in DBS were documented using multiple lines of bioarchaeological evidence to
test longstanding assumptions about dietary dependency and violent conflict of DBS and even the south central region of Inner Mongolia.This study
investigates the health condition of DBS by studying on dental disease, arthritis, fracture and trauma. The results show that the carbohydrates food was the
main part of their food supply, while there was still a small number of meat in their diet, also the results indicate that the agricultural, which the ancient
population from DBS had, probably arrived the mutual level. The results also show that the society of DBS was more harmonious than other sites in this
region.
Wyatt, Andrew (Middle Tennessee State University)
[59]              Gardens of the Maya
Houselot gardens are defined as cultivated spaces adjacent to households used to grow flowers, herbs, vegetables, and fruits. Gardens function as a
primary source of many food items including staples, condiments, medicines, and spices; they provide many non-food items such as dyes, construction
materials, or ornamentals; and also often provide food to sell in markets. Crops grown in houselot gardens encompass primary and secondary crops as
well as those grown for both individual household use and income making them a fundamental element of household subsistence production and therefore
play a central role in the political economy.
Despite their crucial role, ancient Maya gardens have received little attention, and their position within the political economy needs to be explored. This
presentation investigates the articulation of Maya gardening practices with the political economy, focusing on how political changes impact this element of
household production. I will be presenting data on gardens from the ancient Maya site of Chan, exploring how practices were affected in a dynamic political
landscape. These data will be compared with contemporary data from Lacandon Maya gardens at the site of Lake Mensabak and I will discuss the
changing role of gardens from the Preclassic through the modern era.
Wyllie, Cherra
[264]             Changing Art? Changing Identity?: Visual Culture in Ancient Veracruz during the Late Classic-Early Postclassic Transition
Group identity is visible in the archaeological record in the form of discrete burial practices, site planning, ceramic and artifact assemblages, settlement
patterns, and architecture. Yet notions of ethnic identity are multi-layered and complex; the more so during periods of intense migration and social
upheaval . The Late Classic to Early Postclassic transition was one such period, characterized by observable changes in practices and materials. In
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                490
Veracruz (at sites such as El Tajin, Las Higueras, and El Zapotal) researchers observe patterns of perceptible change, yet without major disruption. There
is no consensus as to which players and processes precipitated these changes. Are they the result of shifting ideologies, economic patterns, power
structures, populations, or some combination of factors? In this presentation I examine corresponding trends in the visual arts, exploring how color palette,
canons of representation, the attributes and array of deities, depictions of costumes and headdresses, and graphic characteristics of hieroglyphic script
contribute to our understanding of a changing regional identity.
Wynne-Jones, Stephanie [269] see Fenn, Thomas
Xhauflair, Hermine (MNHN - McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge)
[295]             A Combination of Ethnoarchaeology, Experimental Archaeology and Use-Wear Analysis as a Mean to Recover Testimonies of Past Human
                  Activities in Southeast Asian Rainforests
In order to recover the activities that took place a long time ago in the rainforests, it is desirable to have an idea of the ones which can possibly be carried
out in this specific environment with the resources available. Such knowledge can be acquired by conducting field investigation among forest experts: local
populations who currently inhabit it and rely on plants, animals and minerals for their daily subsistence. To be able to identify these activities in the
archaeological record, it is also desirable to know what material traces will remain of them, which can be achieved by archaeological experiments.
We conducted ethnoarchaeological fieldwork among Palawan communities in the forested mountains of Palawan, Philippines to know what plants are used
nowadays, to achieve what purposes, and following what technical processes. Then, we reproduced selected activities with stone tools made of local red
jasper, which is the raw material of many archaeological stone tools in the region. Finally, we recorded the residues and use-wear present on the
experimental tools, to document the specific signature of each plant and each activity, in order to be able to recognize them on archaeological artefacts.
Xia, Yin [173] see Li, Xiuzhen
Xie, Liye (University of Toronto)
[119]             Urban Construction as a Social Transformation Process
Archaeological evidence and ancient Chinese text imply that the construction of early urban settlements in China were planned events initiated by rulers
relocating their settlements in order to legitimize their arising power and establish hierarchical social systems. Accordingly, the construction of the urban
settlements may have been the transformative social environments in which power was legitimized and enacted and new social structure was created. I
hypothesize that whether this social-political practice succeeded was largely determined by how the rulers related themselves to their subjects.
To test this hypothesis, I compare the ruler-commoner relationships during the urban construction process in the lower Yangzi basin and the central plains
in China during late Longshan and Erlitou periods. In particular, I examine the labor management and implement procurement strategies as examples of
the rulers’ management skills and political strategies. I then examine how these strategies were related to the rise and collapse of complex social systems
in these two regions.
Xiuhtecutli, Nezahualcoyotl (Tulane University) and Aurelio Lopez Corral (INAH Tlaxcala)
[179]             Plaza, Trade, and Politics in Postclassic Tlaxcallan
Excavated lithic material from plazas at the Postclassic site of Tepeticpac, in the central Mexican state of Tlaxcala, suggests that obsidian production took
place in these open spaces that may have served as marketplaces in the Late Postclassic polity of Tlaxcallan. Moreover, although green obsidian is
present in Late Postclassic contexts, a decline in its presence is evident from earlier periods. In spite of ethnohistoric sources’ claims that Tlaxcallan was
cut off from trade by Tenochtitlan, these data suggest that green obsidian continued to trickle into Tlaxcallan. Given the political and economic role that the
plaza played in ancient Mesoamerican cities and the unique position that green obsidian held as a commodity as well as a restricted item because of
Tenochtitlan’s control over the quarries allow an evaluation of Tlaxcallan’s changing relations with its neighbors in the course of the Postclassic.
Yacobaccio, Hugo (Dr.)
[62]              Peopling of the High Andes of Northwestern Argentina
The goal of this presentation is to review the current evidence in order to model the early peopling of the highlands of Northwestern Argentina.
Paleoenvironmental evidence of the late Pleistocene and early Holocene is thoroughly reviewed in order to set the scenario of the process of human
settlement at the Puna region of Argentina. I will analyze chronological evidence and the archaeological record—especially the archaeofaunas- of early
hunter-gatherer occupations dated between 10,500 to the 9000 B.P. (12,500 to 10,000 cal. B.P.). Finally, I discuss specific cultural and environmental
aspects related to the dispersion and human colonization of the Andean highland plateau.
Yacubic, Matthew (Bureau of Land Management)
[291]             Obsidian Artifacts and Community Interactions at Tayasal
Lithic artifacts represent a major aspect of the archaeological record, and they are found in a wide variety of cultural settings. For the Maya Lowlands, lithic
analysis is particularly insightful for studying relationships between economics and society because stone was the dominant raw material used to produce
tools at differing levels of social organization. The purpose of this presentation is to examine community connections at Tayasal using an interactionalist
perspective. Through this approach, a better understanding of community activities can be gained through analysis of obsidian artifacts at the site.
Yaeger, Jason (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[137]             Discussant
Yakal, Madeleine (University of Caifornia, Los Angeles) and Stephen Acabado (University of California, Los Angeles)
[262]             Elite Formation and Wet-Rice Access in the Northern Philippine Highlands
Elite formation and development of cultural complexity in the Philippines have been considered to be a product of long-distance trade and interaction
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                              491
beginning at ca. A.D. 1000. Proxy indicators for this political shift have been based on increasing centralization of pottery production and consumption. In
the highlands, however, we see an alternative basis for elite formation; one based on access to wet rice and the ability to sponsor feasts. In this paper, we
explore the development of social status and pottery production in Ifugao, as the Spanish pushed lowlanders to the Cordillera. Based on pottery analysis,
zooarchaeological and archaeobotanical data sets, we argue that there is no relationship between pottery production and and elite formation in Ifugao;
instead, Ifugao elite status is associated with rice and rice terraces.
Yang, Dongya [38] see Brown, Kelly
Yann, Jessica
[193]             British Era Trade in the Midwest
This paper investigates several common assumptions regarding the economic nature of trade interactions in the Midwest during the period from
approximately 1760 to 1820. Using a resource dependency theory framework, this research analyzes archaeological and historical sources to demonstrate
that these interactions were more nuanced, and more complex, than typically portrayed. It also demonstrates that these economic interactions were
strongly intertwined with political decision making. Examining these interactions contextualizes the history of this region during this time, and allows for a
better understanding of Native American and European dynamics.
Yansa, Catherine [90] see Fulton, Albert
Yant, Anna Catesby (Vanderbilt University)
[127]             A Comparative Analysis of Ritual Architecture in the Northern Maya Lowlands
In the past as in the present, powerful people used the built environment to display and reinforce their power, so that structures play an important role in
the development and maintenance of sociopolitical inequality. Iconography and material culture indicate that ancestor veneration played an important role
in Maya society from the Formative period until the Post Classic period. Excavations over the last 15 years in the Ulum Plaza of Kiuic, a site in the Puuc
hills, supports the importance of ritual space in the development of elite power. Our work demonstrates that, over time, the public spaces first associated
with ancestor worship were gradually privatized and incorporated into an elite residential group. The ability of the elite residents to control access to the
ritual space likely served as an important tool in their maintaining sociopolitical power. This paper will present a comparative analysis of elite ritual groups
in the Northern Maya Lowlands, exploring the form of these groups, as well as how they evolved through time. Finally, it will discuss the link between the
architectural forms of the ritual group and their role in the sociopolitical maintenance of power.
Yaquinto, Brian (Bureau of Land Management) and Sarah MacDonald (Bureau of Land Management)
[114]             Recent Advances in Fremont Archaeology of Northwest Colorado
To date Gilbert Wenger's 1956 thesis remains one of the most comprehensive studies completed on Fremont culture within the Colorado Bureau of Land
Management, White River Field Office (WRFO). WRFO archaeologists have focused Section 110 program efforts over the course of the last four field
seasons on Fremont sites documented by Wenger and others and also to identify new Fremont sites through archaeological field survey. This poster
presentation provides a synthesis of inventory results pertaining to Fremont settlement and land use in northwest Colorado.
Yates, Donna (Scottish Centre for Crime and Justice Research, University of Glasgow)
[33]              Discussant
Yellen, John [13] see Brooks, Alison
Yellen, John (National Science Foundation) and Alison Brooks (George Washington University)
[22]              Crossing Deserts and Seas in the Late Pleistocene: Implications of the Aduma MSA Assemblages, Middle Awash, Ethiopia
The ca. 3 km2 Aduma region of the Middle Awash region, Ethiopia, incorporates a number of stratified sites within a matrix of sands and silts dating to
between 180 ka and ca 80 ka.(Yellen et al 2005). With the exception of one possibly earlier site with late Acheulean bifaces (A-14, Clark et al 2003), all
sites yielded diagnostic Middle Stone Age cores and most also contained typical retouched bifacial and unifacial points. In contrast to the earlier
assemblages of Gademotta (Sahle et al 2012) point, core and flake sizes diminish through the sequence (Brooks et al 2005) to almost microlithic size
ranges and suggest the development of composite projectile weaponry. The cores include Nubian and bifacial core-axe reduction strategies, which
together with the points suggest wider interactions both with the Nile Valley and across the Red Sea.
This research was part of the Middle Awash Research Project under the overall direction of T. D. White, B. Asfaw, Y. Beyene and the late J.D. Clark.
Funding was provided by the National Science Foundation, (Grant # 9521879).
Yepez, Alden and Irmela Herzog (The Rhineland Commission for Archaeological Monume)
[282]             De regreso al Valle de los Quijos (Ecuador): aproximaciones gráficas factoriales para interpretar la concentración de basura prehistórica
                  como el momento de compactación sociopolítica de los cacicazgos
Estudios neo- evolucionistas desarrollados en las últimas décadas, muchos inspirados en las investigaciones arqueológicas desarrolladas en el Valle de la
Plata, Colombia, plantean como un elemento fundamental la identificación de unidades políticas cacicales a partir de la dispersión de material cultural en
la superficie de las áreas prospectadas. Investigaciones recientes llevadas adelante por nosotros en el Valle de los ríos Cosanga y Quijos, en la Ceja de
Montaña Oriental de los Andes Septentrionales (Ecuador), gracias a la base de datos que ofrece el “Centro de Arqueología Comparada” de la Universidad
de Pittsburgh, e información propia, muestran la necesidad de incorporar algunos factores como la topografía del terreno y los desplazamientos humanos
sobre ella y entender que sin esos factores, la basura prehistórica que se dispersa en el paisaje influye severamente en la manera cómo los arqueólogos
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                492
reconstruimos los patrones de asentamientos. En esta presentación el autor principal interpreta los gráficos de dispersión de basura prehistórica, que
integran esos factores junto con una cronología relativa fina, como una herramienta más precisa para definir el momento de surgimiento de las unidades
políticas cacicales.
Yépez Álvarez, Willy [105] see Jennings, Justin
Yerka, Stephen [98] see Craib, Alexander
Yerka, Stephen (University of Tennessee), Jan Simek (University of Tennessee) and Alan Cressler (U.S. Geological Survey)
[131]             Through a Mirror, Darkly: Using Multi-Sensor Imaging Surveys as Basic Data for 3D Spatial Analysis of Cave and Open-Air Rock Art
This paper explores and compares how quantitative spatial analysis of cave and open-air rock art can be derived from high-resolution, multi-sensor 3D
digital reconstructions. For this project, three different types of survey data were collected at four prehistoric cave and rock art sites within the southern
Cumberland Plateau of eastern North America.
The project survey methods include close-range photogrammetry, high-density laser scanning, and near-infrared (NIR) multispectral imagery. The case
studies are used to compare the overall efficiency of different survey methods for mapping rock art spatial organization and production techniques. For
example, while high-density laser scanning allows for rapid collection of data over large areas, high-resolution photogrammetry allows for greater precision
in detecting and enhancing engraved or incised petroglyphs and mud glyphs. When possible, multiple data sets are fused to produce multi-sensor 3D
objects that can be investigated using a variety of GIS, 3D, and computer-aided drafting (CAD) software tools.
Spatial patterns in the distribution and form of rock art glyphs and panels can reveal culturally linked concepts within a traditional knowledge system.
Project results are interpreted based on relationships between spatial patterns, traditional knowledge, ethnohistory, and structural attributes.
Yesner, David (University of Alaska Anchorage)
[21]              Human and Animal Dispersal in Beringia: Reconciling the Genetic and Archaeological Records
Peopling of the New World involved a dispersal process across Beringia that included both humans and animals. The archaeological record from eastern
Beringia suggests a multiple-stage process of both pre- and post-Younger Dryas (YD) colonization from different regions of northeast Asia, with the pre-YD
colonization subdivisible into multiple waves. These archaeological manifestations can in turn be related to waves of terminal Pleistocene opportunistic
entry into NE Asia itself, but can only be distantly related to linguistic and genetic groupings in Northeast and East-central Asia today (with Y-chromosome
data providing the most consistent patterning). However, animal resources hunted by early human colonists, particularly megafauna such as mammoth,
bison, wapiti, caribou, and moose also show dispersal patterns in the terminal Pleistocene and early Holocene that can be traced genetically and related to
dispersal patterns of early humans in Beringia, revealing complex associations as well as important environmental and demographic correlates. The latter
include genetic bottlenecks which may be related to regional extinction patterns as human populations expanded into the region during the terminal
Pleistocene/early Holocene Period.
[242]             Discussant
Yoakam, Stacia (The Ohio State University) and Kathyrn Marklein (The Ohio State University)
[147]             Once Upon a Höyük
Oymaağaç Höyűk, the putative Hittite religious center of Nerik, was occupied as early as the second millennium B.C.E. Nearly 3,000 years later, the site
was reclaimed as a burial ground for the local populace. Within the upper stratigraphic, tile (tegula) graves and the associated burials, relatively and
radiocarbon dated to the Byzantine (i.e., Late Roman) period (A.D. 250–450), provide an informative look into the lives of the rural population. Employing
archaeological context in conjunction with human osteological data, this study aims to enhance our understanding of this understudied region and time
period. Data presented in this study represent nine Byzantine graves and individuals. Consistencies in burial orientation and placement were observed
between all individuals, regardless of age or sex, alluding to the living population’s awareness and adherence to local burial traditions. Initial analyses of
human skeletal remains reveal high frequencies of osteoarthritis throughout the body, notably among thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. Although this sample
size is too small for statistical significance, similarities in burial and physiological stress between male and female adults (ages 25–50) suggest high daily
labor for both sexes within this population, indicating comparable workloads and responsibilities between genders in this Northern Turkish community.
Yoder, David (Utah Valley University)
[104]             Fremont Figurines: In Which We Go from Culture History to Processualism to Post Processual
Anyone interested in the ‘Fremont’ knows of Fremont figurines; small figures that range from exquisitely crafted works of art to cruddy little lumps of clay
with eyes. Despite years of interest, archaeologists still know relatively little about this phenomenon. But fear not intrepid Fremont enthusiast! After
examining nearly every Fremont figurine described in the literature, hidden in museum basements, and even a few from super-secret private collections, I
have ALL the answers! Come learn how a study of over 600 figurines from more than 100 different sites can inform us about geographic and temporal
distribution, styles, context of disposal, who made the figurines and why, Fremont dress and ornamentation, ideals of personhood, participation and
recreation of cultural systems, and connections between the Fremont and Greater Southwest (all in under 15 minutes…).
Yoffee, Norman (U Michigan)
[138]             Perspectives on Water Management Systems in Mesopotamia
Over the years, Vern Scarborough has considered how water management systems have been created, altered, and in some cases abandoned, especially
in response to the evolution of political systems. For a Mesopotamianist, Vern's work obviously resonates with that of Robert McC. Adams. In this paper I
review some of the lasting contributions of Adams to the study of water management systems in Mesopotamia. I review especially a series of essays that
Adams wrote after his retirement from the Smithsonian.
[59]              Discussant
Yonenobu, Hitoshi [173] see Takamiya, Hiroto
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                                  493
Yong, Jameson (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign)
[196]             I Am a Rock: A Comparison of Lithic Art and Artifacts from the Inca and Ychsma Cultures
After the finding of many different shaped and worked carved stones from Panquilma’s excavations, in this paper, I compare the lithic artwork and artifacts
from both the Ychsma and Inca cultures and I noticed many different types of Inca stone art and artifacts, by comparison with these. The stones that were
carved in a particular shape from Panquilma can be related to either the Inca or the Ychsma. In this presentation, I explore the significance of the carved
stones in order to understand the possible meaning of their use in the structure where were found. The study of these artifacts could give us a broad
understanding of the lithic tools of both the Ychsma and Inca cultures in the site.
Yoshida, Yasuyuki (Center for Cultural Resource Studies, Kanazawa University)
[173]             The Prehistoric Jomon and Ideological Conflict in Contemporary Japan
This paper aims to suggest an alternative perspective to understand the “Jomon” in contemporary Japan within the context of public archaeology, paying
attention to the contact zone between archaeology and the public. Contemporary Japanese society includes an ideological conflict with regard to an
international cooperation with East Asian countries, a nuclear plant politics, and a modern history education under the situation of the post-cold war
equilibrium and globalization. The conflict is not one between the old-school and organized left wing movement based on Marxism and the conservative
right wing regime, but among the naturally-rising discursive social movements, the group of haters of liberalism and the one of cautioners to the danger of
return to totalism during the war. Although the “Jomon period” archaeologically references a long-term period (approximately 16000 B.P. to 3000/2500
B.P.) that begins with the emergence of pottery up to the introduction of rice paddy agricultural system from Korean peninsula, the “Jomon” has multiple
meanings between the publics in Japan apart from the strict archaeological definition. This paper will describe how archaeological discoveries related to
the “Jomon” are enhancing of rivalry of social movements as important actors.
Young, J. Ryan [8] see Meer, Kelsey
Young, Tatiana (Temple University)
[88]              Terminal Classic Maya Political Organization from the Perspective of a Secondary Site Cochuah Region, Quintana Roo
This paper focuses on characteristics of a secondary center and its satellite settlements to provide evidence for the nature of political organization in the
Cochuah Region during the Terminal Classic Period. The examination of these settlements gives insight into the political organization of a secondary
center which otherwise would not be available if investigation was limited to the primary centers. The data used for investigation of the nature of political
organization during this time are the regional settlement pattern, individual site layouts and site architecture. The goal is to use the presence and
distribution of elements of rulership reflected in the architecture within sites of this region to determine the political organization. The examination of political
organization from the perspective of a secondary site represents an alternate but complementary approach to the existing study of Maya political
organization.
Young, Ruth
[221]             Finding and ‘Heritaging’ Women in the Landlord Villages of Iran
The landlord villages of Iran were owned by a powerful, usually absentee landlord, who had near-total control over the political, economic and social lives
of all those living within them. A range of sources describe the male occupants of the villages, and when reading historical and anthropological studies of
landlord villages, it would be easy to think they were occupied by an amorphous mass of (male) peasants living in extreme poverty, who were subject
entirely to the will of the (male) landlord. Women within the village were either those in farming families who were briefly mentioned in terms of their
economic and family roles in connection with the male farmers; or the wives and daughters of landlords, who are scarcely mentioned.
Within our historical archaeology project we wanted to restore women to these villages, through analysis of village material culture informed by new
ethnographic work, and to explore relations between different classes of women and how these class identities were articulated through material culture.
We now face challenges around how to present these remains of recent, unpalatable history as heritage, and also how to tell the stories of the women who
lived here, or were part of landlord families.
Young, Stacey (TRC Columbia, SC), Brooke Brilliant (Archaeological Consultants of the Carolinas, Inc.) and David Jones (South Carolina State
Parks)
[293]             Hampton Comes Alive! An Examination of Colonoware from Hampton Plantation
Recent excavations at Hampton Plantation State Historic Site, located in Charleston County, South Carolina, have yielded colonoware from an early
eighteenth century occupation and a late eighteenth to nineteenth century occupation. The later occupation is associated with the Horry family, who
developed Hampton Plantation. A large assemblage of colonoware associated with this late eighteenth to nineteenth century context has been recovered
from the living and work areas of enslaved workers and indications of possible on-site colonoware production are present. The early eighteenth century,
pre-Horry, assemblage also includes a large portion of low-fired earthenware pottery. This colonoware is likely associated with local Native American
groups, such as Sewee Indians, and /or early European settlers and their enslaved workers. This paper will examine evidence of colonoware production,
the evolution of low-fired earthenware pottery at the site, and interactions between various groups in the area. This research has the potential to provide
information on the factors influencing the production and distribution of colonoware, the role colonoware played in the daily lives of the residents of the site,
and how occupants of the site interacted with other groups through the formation of various trading networks.
Yu, Pei-Lin (Boise State University), Robert Kelly (Univ of Wyoming), Craig Lee (Univ of Colorado Boulder), Ira Matt (Confederated Salish and
Kootenai Tribes) and John Murray (Blackfeet Nation)
[191]             Climate Change, Archaeology, and Native Expertise: an Ice Patch Success Story
Managing the impacts of climate change to cultural resources, and conducting relevant research, cross-cuts disciplinary boundaries and calls for an
innovative, outward looking mindset. Descendant communities, particularly Native groups with long ties to lands and resources and high stakes in climate
change outcomes, are rich in traditional ecological knowledge and cultural expertise. These bodies of knowledge are key building blocks for successful
strategies for risk evaluation, vulnerability assessment, minimizing or mitigating impacts, and research design. The Glacier Ice Patch Archaeology Project
team has developed a culturally informed, scientifically rigorous protocol for ice patch discoveries. This paper highlights the protocol's elements and
accomplishments to provide a useful template for other efforts.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               494
Zachrisson, Torun [192] see Hedenstierna-Jonson, Charlotte
Zahid, H. Jabran [55] see Robinson, Erick
Zaleski, Sarah (University of Florida) and Nicholas Herrmann (Mississippi State Univ., Texas State Univ.)
[7]              Differentiating Burial Contexts at Russell Cave, Alabama: pXRF and Dental Analyses
The 1956-8 National Geographic funded and Smithsonian sponsored excavations within Russell Cave and the nearby stone mound uncovered six cave
and twelve mound burials, respectively. During the 2011 osteological inventory, two burials comprised of maxillary and mandibular fragments were found
labeled “A” and “B” with neither cave nor mound context identification. This study employs elemental analysis of soil associated with individual burials as
well as dental comparisons to identify the contexts of Burials A and B. Portable x-ray fluorescence (pXRF) was used to analyze relative element
concentrations in soil samples from four cave burials, four mound burials, and Burials A and B. A discriminant function based on the relative amount of
Strontium classifies A and B as mound burials. The discriminant function has a canonical correlation value of 0.983 and accounts for 96.6 percent of
between-group variability. The cross validated classification shows that 100 percent of cave and mound cases are correctly classified with the discriminant
function. In addition to the pXRF analysis, dental data from the mound and cave samples are compared. The identification of Burials A and B as mound
burials improves further osteological analysis of the samples from Russell Cave and the nearby stone mound.
Zambrano, Raúl [233] see Capriata Estrada, Camila
Zanotto, Hannah (Northern Arizona University) and Jaime Awe (Northern Arizona University)
[241]            Tlaloc Imagery in Western Belize and its Implications for Central Mexican and Lowland Maya Interaction
Recent archaeological investigations in western Belize have recovered evidence for the representation of Tlaloc imagery in the iconographic record of this
sub-region of the Maya lowlands. In Central Mexican Civilizations, Tlaloc represented the important rain deity, equivalent, in many ways, to Cha’ac in the
Maya area. In the case of western Belize, Tlaloc imagery appears to become increasingly popular at the end of the Classic period, and is depicted on a
variety of mediums, including stucco decorations, stone monuments, and ceramic vessels. Besides discussing the nature of Tlaloc imagery in western
Belize, this paper will provide information on the contexts of the imagery, and explore their implications for Central Mexican and Lowland Maya interaction
at the end of the Late Classic period.
Zaragoza, Diana (INAH)
[216]            LA HUASTECA. PROBLEMÁTICA DE INVESTIGACIÓN.
A través del tiempo, la Huasteca ha sido objeto de considerables estudios arqueológicos que han aportado información diversa; esto nos ha llevado a
tener una idea general del desarrollo de las diversas culturas que ahí se establecieron en época prehispánica. Sin embargo, esto no explica plenamente la
situación que imperaba en la región. Dadas las generalizaciones hechas con los datos obtenidos, cada vez se hace más difícil comprender la evolución de
los pueblos que ahí se asentaron; siendo la falta de fechamientos uno de los problemas más graves a los que nos hemos enfrentado.
La carencia de documentos de primera mano, escritos por los primeros españoles acerca de las costumbres de los pueblos establecidos en la región,
dificulta el conocimiento de estas y aun cuando no pueden extrapolarse en el tiempo por lo menos conoceríamos algo más acerca de los pueblos
asentados en la región durante las primeras décadas del siglo XVI.
En esta presentación haré una síntesis de lo que conocemos de la Huasteca con el fin de mostrar un panorama que pueda servir de partida y mediante la
discusión tratar de llegar a sugerencias acerca de lo que fue la Huasteca y proponer futuras líneas de investigación.
Zaro, Gregory (University of Maine), Martina Celhar (University of Zadar), Dario Vujevic (University of Zadar) and Kenneth C. Nystrom (State
University of New York at New Paltz)
[189]            Nadin-Gradina and the Process of Urbanization in the Eastern Adriatic
In the eastern Adriatic, the process of urbanization unfolded over the course of several thousand years, resulting in significant changes in landscape,
environment, and human societal organization. With support from the National Geographic Society, our joint Croatian-American team recently engaged in a
collaborative effort to evaluate urban change surrounding the archaeological site of Nadin-Gradina, a moderately-sized center located near the coastal city
of Zadar along Croatia’s Adriatic coast. The overarching goal of the project was to lay the foundation for a long-term study concerning the links between
urbanization, climate, and environment over the past three thousand years. Nadin-Gradina reflects a long, though intermittent, occupational history,
stretching from at least the first millennium BCE into the 17th century CE. In 2015, our inaugural excavations were designed to delineate depth of deposits,
chronology, and integrity of the archaeological record. In this paper, we discuss our results and characterize what appears to be the most significant
physical transformation of the urban center—the transition from Iron Age settlement to Roman governance of Dalmatia. We also discuss the potential
impacts of urbanization on human diet and mobility through stable isotopic analyses and the potential of such studies moving forward.
Zavodny, Emily (Penn State University), Brendan J. Culleton (Penn State University), Sarah B. McClure (Penn State University), Douglas J.
Kennett (Penn State University) and Jacqueline Balen (Archaeological Museum in Zagreb)
[146]            The Iapodians in Iron Age Europe: a Stable Isotope and Radiocarbon Dating Program in Northern Croatia
In this paper, we report results from ongoing research on the Iapodian culture, a distinct group centered in the Lika region of modern-day Croatia. Despite
excavations in the area since the late 1880s, the scope of Iapodian involvement in regional interaction spheres, larger trade networks, and the general Iron
Age world is unclear, and has yet to be systematically analyzed with modern methods. Preliminary isotopic results from Iapodian samples demonstrate an
increase in millet consumption, unusual for this time period in other parts of Europe, and a decline in overall dietary quality over time. Using new
radiocarbon dates and stable isotope analyses, we seek to understand the role of millet in Iapodian subsistence and the timing of its appearance in
archaeological contexts alongside other changes in material culture. We conclude with a consideration of where and how millet may have traveled to Lika,
and what implications this may have for characterizing contact, trade, and exchange between the Iapodians and their neighbors.
Zawiskie, John [218] see Panyushkina, Irina
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             495
Zborover, Danny (Brown University)
[135]              To Move Mountains: Cycles of Indigenous Mobility and Resettlement in Highland Mexico
The quaint and seemingly static Oaxacan Chontal villages, tucked away in the highlands of southern Mexico, conceal behind a long history of population
movements and resettlement. For the last five centuries and more, entire communities migrated and changed places as an adaptive response to intricate
ecological, economic, political, and social factors. While the dispersed settlement pattern largely ‘fused’ together in the 16th century colonial congregations,
many other communities went through a poorly understood process of fission that created new sociopolitical entities. As such, nearly every indigenous
community in the region today can trace their ancestral origins to a respective ‘pueblo viejo’—literally ‘old village’—an archaeological site sometimes
several miles away from the current location. This presentation will focus on the Chontal community of San Miguel Ecatepec and its environs, where a new
interdisciplinary project brings together archaeological, linguistic, historical, ethnographic, and geographical evidence to reconstruct its surprising mobility
through space and time. In particular, we argue that in order to fully understand the dynamics of past and present communal mobilities, we must consider
regional geopolitics and associated interaction corridors on a broader regional scale.
[135]              Chair
Zeanah, David (California State University, Sacramento), Robert Elston (University of Nevada, Reno), Adolfo Gil (Museo de Historia Natural de
San Rafael), Gustavo Neme (Museo de Historia Natural de San Rafael) and Amber Johnson (Truman State University)
[94]               Human Response to Environmental Change during the Early/Mid Holocene in the Great Basin: Frame of Reference in Comparative
                   Perspective
At the transition from Early to Middle Holocene, the Great Basin witnessed higher effective temperatures and reduced aquatic resource zones. Intensified
use of terrestrial plants, reflected by the Middle Holocene appearance of milling equipment, is an archaeological signature of the transition, but the relative
importance of terrestrial fauna and aquatic resources under either climatic regime remains unclear. Here we use Binford’s environmental frames of
reference to model regional Early and Middle Holocene subsistence based on variability among recent hunter-gatherers. We compare results with the
Argentinian Mendoza region and theoretical models based on human behavioral ecology to develop future research directions.
Zeanah, David [94] see Gil, Adolfo
Zedeño, Maria (University of Arizona)
[62]               Bison Hunters and the Rockies: An Evolving Ontology
Euroamericans who encountered northern Plains bison hunters in the late 19th century believed that the Blackfoot held the Rocky Mountains in awe and
fear, preferring to remain on the plains even as bison and elk herds dwindled. This incorrect assumption has hampered our ability to understand deep-time
relationships between mountain and plains cultural expressions. Although the historic Blackfoot did not dwell in high elevations, the character of their
relationship with the Rocky Mountain Front began in “time immemorial” with the creation of the world, the establishment of social mores, and the group’s
ethnogenesis. Historical ethnology furnishes rich detail on the depth and significance of relationships among people, mountains, and other-than human
persons, not the least of which is the Blackfoot’s partnership with bison. Archaeology tells of an ancient partnership that the ancestors established with
mountain persons, which in turn explains their intimate familiarity with elevated environments; as the ice retreated, the ancestors folded this new landscape
into their worldviews and practices. This paper tracks the dynamics of this partnership to provide a cultural context for deriving connections and uncovering
contrasts among the people who populated America’s backbone.
[248]              Discussant
Zegarra, Edward (Binghamton University)
[254]              Partnerships for Patrimony: A Community-based Approach to Sustainable Archaeological Protection
This paper will discuss preliminary research related to the complex, contemporary archaeological identities built around the site of Huari, capital of the first
Andean Empire, where archaeological remains are of national value and yet contemporary native identities retain a negative connotation in the national
imaginary.
The project applies an ethnographic method referred to as ‘community-based participatory research’ (Sonya Atalay 2012), which has an initial goal of
revealing local campesino relationships to and personal identities with the site in order to introduce a framework for the long-term protection of Huari via the
crafting of State and local co-management strategies. Central to this applied-anthropological objective is investigating Pre-Hispanic cultural-continuity and
to reveal total life histories of the adjacent community of Pacaycasa.
Collaborative and Community Archaeology have made great strides to address issues of indigenous representation at archaeological sites in the recent
past, and the discipline of archaeology has generally begun to adopt research methods that integrate native populations at every stage of research.
However, multi-scalar ethnographic investigations have not yet been fully adopted by most community-based approaches prior to initiating collaboration,
for which it is the purpose of this project to demonstrate their importance to the successful decolonization of our discipline.
Zeidler, James (Colorado State University)
[178]              Configuring Space in a Valdivia Town: Social Precepts, Cosmological Mandates, and Emergent Hierarchy in Early Formative Ecuador
This paper revisits interpretations of the built environment at the Early Formative Valdivia town site of Real Alto in coastal Guayas province, Ecuador, from
the broader comparative perspective of contemporary Formative Period sites throughout the Americas. Special emphasis is placed on the Middle Valdivia
town configuration encompassing individual households, residential neighborhoods, open plazas, and central ceremonial space, but consideration is also
given to Late Valdivia transformations both at Real Alto and at other sites in the coastal Ecuadorian lowlands. These nested spatial scales are briefly
examined in terms of likely social and cosmological principles for organizing space and time in the Valdivia community and from which emergent social
complexity appeared. Finally, these social transformations in Valdivia culture are examined through the lens of Isbell’s (2000) re-conceptualized imaginary
communities following the work of Anderson (1986, 2006) and the concept is then explored for cross-cultural analyses of Formative Period settlements in
the Americas more generally.
Zena, Ashenafi [269] see Duff, Andrew
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                             496
Zender, Marc [212] see Card, Jeb
Zender, Marc (Tulane University), Jaime Awe (Northern Arizona University) and Simon Martin (University of Pennsylvania Museum)
[256]           The "Snake" Kingdom from the Vantage of Western Belize
Recent years have seen the evidence from Western Belizean sites—especially Buenavista, Cahal Pech, Caracol, Cuychen, and Xunantunich—beginning
to contribute substantially to scholarly understandings of the hegemonic networks underlying Classic Maya politics. Particularly illuminating are a series of
seventh-century monuments commissioned by Caracol's king K'an II, which chronicle his polity's shifting fortunes as a client kingdom. While his own father
was placed on the throne of Caracol by Wak Chan K'awiil of Tikal in 553 C.E., K'an II reports the dissolution of that relationship in the wake of the Snake
kingdom's military defeat of Tikal in 562, as well as his own accession under the supervision of the Snake king Yuhknoom Ti' Chan in 619. Two kings of
nearby Naranjo were also placed on their thrones by Snake kings, in 546 and again in 693. Recent discoveries at Buenavista reveal it to have been the
victim of warfare in 696 and 726 at the hands of the second of these Snake kingdom clients: K'ahk' Tiliw Chan Chahk. These discoveries join earlier
evidence suggesting an invasively hegemonic Snake kingdom presence in the Eastern Petén and Western Belize during much of the sixth through eighth
centuries.
Zenobi, Lauryl [252] see Lape, Peter
Zhang, Quanchao [180] see Zhang, Qun
Zhang, Qun (Department of archaeology, Jilin University), Quanchao Zhang (Department of archaeology, Jilin University), Xiaofang Gao
(Department of archaeology, Jilin University), Tao Han (Department of archaeology, Jilin University) and Hong Zhu (Department of archaeology,
Jilin University)
[180]           Cultural Exchanges Along the Ancient Silk Road—A Case of Cranial Trepanation from the Early Iron Age in Xinjiang, China
This presentation reports a case of intentional trepanation along the ancient Silk Road in China from the Early Iron Age, with clear evidence of it being
carried out by humans. Although trepanation has been widely performed in Eurasia, there are no definitive trepanation discoveries in western China dating
from the Bronze Age. Microscopic observation and computed tomography scan were used to analyze the area of trepanation. With the observation of a
three-dimensional deep-field microscope, the ridge of the opening was smooth and rounded in some parts. On the right section, new bone formation with a
polyporous surface was observed, which showed previous osteoclast activity on the cut section under higher magnification. The CT scan imaging analysis
confirmed the characteristic smooth, new growth of the bone on the edge of the lesion. No low-density diploë was exposed at the edges of the bone around
the opening, most likely due to the process of osteogenesis and the growth of new bone tissue. Based on the analysis of the cultural background along the
ancient Silk Road, the tradition of trepanation in Xinjiang may be related to a custom brought from Europe or western Asia.
Zhao, Yichao [10] see Wei, Qiaowei
Zhou, Jing [106] see Flad, Rowan
Zhu, Hong [180] see Wu, Xiangqun
Zhuang, Yijie [262] see Carter, Alison
Ziegler, Joshua [274] see Jenkins, Dennis
Ziel, Deborah
[213]           Which Way to the Jook Joint?: Historical Archaeology of a Polk County, Florida Turpentine Camp
The turpentine industry employed African American labor in the southeastern United States under a system of debt peonage that was similar to antebellum
slavery. One such company camp, Nalaka, located in Polk County, Florida was in operation between 1919 and 1928. The circumstance of its
abandonment is unknown. Although no structures survive, artifact scatters from 1920s Nalaka remain in situ. Despite the oppression of peonage, African
American laborers developed venues known as “jook joints” for the expression of agency through leisure. This study reconstructs the layout of Nalaka
based upon artifact provenience (documented with GPS and ArcGIS technology,) secondary ethnographic sources, and historical records to determine
whether or not the camp supported a jook joint, and if so, where was its likely location.
Ziesemer, Kirsten (Leiden University), Menno L.P. Hoogland (Leiden University), Corinne L. Hofman (Leiden University), Christina Warinner
(University of Oklahoma) and Hannes Schroeder (Center for Geogenetics, University of Copenhagen)
[160]           Challenging Environments: Ancient DNA Research in the Circum-Caribbean
Ancient DNA (aDNA) studies have had a major impact in archaeology. However, until now most aDNA studies have been conducted on samples from cold
or temperate environments, as DNA degrades more rapidly at higher temperatures. With average annual temperatures of over 25°C, the Caribbean
represents a particularly challenging environment for aDNA research and very few aDNA studies have been conducted in the Caribbean to date. Yet, there
are many questions in Caribbean archaeology that could be addressed using aDNA, and previous studies have shown that DNA does preserve in the
Caribbean context, in some cases possibly up to several thousand years. However, the factors influencing DNA preservation in this challenging
environment are as yet not well understood. In this paper, we systematically explore the effects of temperature, age, microbial action, time since
excavation, sample and soil type, and burial setting on DNA preservation in the Caribbean, using low-coverage, high-throughput DNA sequencing of
human and canine samples from over 20 different sites in across the Caribbean. This study demonstrates the importance of burial context and sample type
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                               497
in the selection of successful samples with a higher likelihood of amplifiable DNA, especially in these challenging environments.
Zimmerman, Andrew [134] see Eusebio, Michelle
Zimmermann, Mario (Washington State University), Jade D'Alpoim Guedes (Washington State University) and Mark Altenderfer (UC Merced)
[19]             Identification of Bast Fibers from Samdzong, Nepal
Textile remains have been recovered from burials at the highland site of Samdzong, northwestern Nepal. The fabrics are desiccated exhibiting and high
degree of preservation which is shown by the presence of cellular tissue pertaining to bast bundles. In this paper, we discuss methodological approaches
towards the study of plant fibers and their surrounding tissues focusing on different techniques of microscopy. We will address advantages and limitations
for transmitted and polarized light, as well as SEM and confocal microscopy. Finally, we will present an identification key based on diagnostic features for
different types of bast fibers.
Zinsious, Brandon (University of Louisville) and Jonathan Haws (Graduate Advisor)
[146]            Photogrammetry at Lapa de Picareiro: 3D Modeling of a Middle and Upper Paleolithic Cave Site
Archaeology as a practice is destructive thus once a site is excavated it is gone forever. Accurate and precise recording of spatial data is critical to
preserving information. Higher resolution data collection may lead to better spatial analysis of the site. This endeavor improves with the continuing
development of technology and methods of recording spatial data. Photogrammetry is a technology that has allowed researchers to accurately record
spatial data on excavation, stratigraphy, features, clast layers, and soil removal. It also allows for the site and its components to be placed more accurately
in space. This poster presents photogrammetric work done on Middle and Upper Paleolithic deposits at Lapa De Picareiro, a cave site in Portugal. Images
were taken with a Nikon D3100 SLR Camera and manipulated in Agisoft to create three dimensional models of specific areas of the site at different stages
of excavation.
Zipkin, Andrew [13] see Brooks, Alison
Zipkin, Andrew (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign)
[13]             Discussant
[13]             Chair
Zlatanovski, Diana [265] see Costello, Laura
Zobler, Kari (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign)
[118]            Chimú Conquest and Administration at Talambo, Jequetepeque, Perú
There are few communities in the Andes untouched by the legacies of empire. On the North Coast of Peru, the Chimú (900—1470 A.D.) formed the most
extensive empire in the region prior to Inca conquest. Significant archaeological and ethnohistoric evidence from the Jequetepeque Valley—the first region
to be incorporated by the Chimú— has illustrated the nature of this conquest and the varying impacts on local communities. The site of Talambo, located in
the lower neck of the Jequetepeque Valley, has long been identified as a Chimú administrative center (Keatinge and Conrad 1983), yet little is known about
the nature of Chimú conquest at the site or the impact of Chimú administration on the previously autonomous community. This paper presents the results
of recent archaeological excavation of the Chimú Period at Talambo.
Zöega , Guðný [24] see Murphy, Kimmarie
Zori, Davide (Baylor University)
[161]            Advances in Viking Archaeology: Aligning Data, Theory, and the Interdisciplinary Perspective
Viking Archaeology, conceived of here as a particularly influential subfield of medieval archaeology, originated in antiquarian efforts of early Scandinavian
scholars who helped to shape the identities of their nation states. From C.J. Thomson, to Jens Worsae, and Oscar Montelius, these early Scandinavian
archaeologists were formative in the establishment of a periodization of the past, development of dating techniques, and the professionalization of
archaeology as a discipline. The Viking Age continues to play a disproportionate role in the national narratives of the Scandinavian countries. Academic
projects on the Viking Age are still the most common and best funded of archaeological ventures in Scandinavia. Rather than lament this perceived
prejudice, I argue that public and scholarly interest in Vikings has meant that Viking Archaeology—as separate from textually-dominated Viking history—
has been vital in advancing our understanding of the period of the Middle Ages that we still call the Viking Age. Archaeologists studying the Viking Age,
looking for non-textual frameworks, have also been at the forefront of theoretical and scientific advances in archaeology. I conclude by suggesting that
Scandinavian (and Viking Age) archaeology continues to offer a harbinger of things to come in the wider field of medieval archaeology.
Zoubek, Thomas (King School, Stamford Connecticut)
[31]             Initial Period Irrigation-based Societies in the Viru Valley, Peru
Radiocarbon dates from the sites of V-198 and Huaca El Gallo/La Gallina in the Viru Valley of Peru illustrate that the transition inland from the coast and
the construction of monumental corporate architecture based on irrigation agriculture was not unique to the Supe Valle area along the Andean coastline. A
second instance has been identified in Viru where it is also associated with the use of ceramics as early as 3,950 years before present (2450 calibrated
years B.C.). This pushes back the introduction of ceramics in Peru some 600 years and conflicts with the Maritime Foundation for Civilization Hypothesis.
Patterns of intervisibility among sites suggest a complex valley-wide water management system evolved with the development of irrigation agriculture as
the population dispersed down valley.
, ABSTRACTS OF THE SAA 81ST ANNUAL MEETING                                                                                            498
Zovar, Jennifer (Whatcom Community College)
[40]             Trash, Histories, and Community Engagement: Integrating Service Learning into the Archaeology Curriculum
As educators teaching archaeology at the introductory level, it can be challenging to develop hands-on exercises that allow students to discover how
archaeological knowledge is generated, especially when teaching at institutions without large labs or active field projects. Another major challenge is
helping students to understand the relevance of archaeological research in the modern world. One way to achieve both goals may be to bring the
archaeological classroom into the community, as students engage in community service projects that draw on their archaeological training in recording and
analyzing material culture. For example, students could conduct a "garbage project" at a local park or historic area, curate artifacts for a veteran’s group or
retirement home, work with Native communities on archaeological outreach, help to clean up and/or record data from a historic cemetery, etc. This poster
reports the results of a pilot project designed to make connections with potential community partners and describes the integration of the resulting student
studies into an Introduction to Archaeology classroom. Projects like this one teach students that archaeology is not simply an academic exercise, but a
project through which we can substantially contribute to our communities and the world at large.
Zurro, Debora (CaSEs. Dept Archaeology & Anthropology. IMF-CSIC)
[125]            Chair
Zyaradi, Zsolt [24] see Bethard, Jonathan

