10 [86] Recent Research Along the Lower Colorado River
(86) Symposium: RECENT RESEARCH ALONG THE LOWER COLORADO RIVER
The archacology of the lower Colorado River region has not been studied as intensively as other regions
of the American Southwest. Several recent surveys sponsored by the Bureau of Reclamation and undertaken
by Statistical Research Inc. have provided opportunities for systematic study and have significantly increased
our knowledge of the region. This symposium focuses on the results of these surveys, treating themes such
as ceramic chronology, milling implement technology, ceremonial behavior, and federal land management
concerns. In addition to the archacological research, the significance of the cultural resources is presented
from a Native American perspective.
[87] Symposium: THE COLHA PRECERAMIC: NEW VIEWS ON LOWLAND MAYA ORIGINS
Excavations at the site of Colha in northern Belize have produced new data on human occupation prior
to the Maya carly Middle Preclassic. Presently, the early Middle Preclassic represents the first evidence (ca.
800-1000 B.C.) of Maya culture in the Belize lowlands, However, our research, along with investigations
in adjacent Cobweb Swamp, provide evidence of human activities between 1100-1300 B.C. and earlier.
Pottery is absent, but there are distinctive stone tools, along with agriculture and landscape modification.
This symposium examines these new data, with input from archacology, geoarchacology, palynology, and
replicative and wear pattern studics.
[88] Symposium: EXPANDING THE PALEOINDIAN UNIVERSE: NEW DATA FROM EASTERN
NORTH AMERICA
This symposium presents the results of recent site surveys and excavations conducted in the lower Great
Lakes region. These investigations provide exciting new data on subsistence, land use, and raw material
procurement strategies. These data were examined from a variety of site types including habitations, quarries
and workshops, and large game kills. Cross-cultural comparisons are made between western and eastern
artifact assemblages and their significance in the interpretation of Paleoindian economics.
[90] Symposium: GREAT BASIN BIOARCHAEOLOGY: DESERT WETLANDS ADAPTATIONS
Although there has been a long history of archacological research in the Great Basin, few human remains
have been documented. The recent recovery of three large skeletal serics from the northern ( Malheur Lake,
Oregon ), western (Stillwater Marsh, Nevada), and eastern (Great Salt Lake, Utah) Great Basin, permits for
the first time a biocultural assessment of prehistoric peoples from these regions. Papers included in this
symposium provide an archacological background to cach of the regions and utilize skeletal data to address
the genetic history, dict, health, and activity patterns practiced by human populations in this area of the
Desert West.
{92] Symposium: THE LITTORAL TRUTH: RECENT ADVANCES IN METHOD AND THEORY IN
NORTH AMERICAN COASTAL SITES RESEARCH
Scholars from the Adantic, Pacific and Gulf coasts have been assembled in this symposium to present
innovative approaches to methodological and theoretical problems common to the study of prehistory on
all coasts. Among the topics included: methods to identify and interpret discrete depositions within complex
‘ shell middens; determining seasonality through analysis of multiple species of fauna and shellfish, and stabic
oxygen isotope ratios in clams; new applications of geology and geomorphology to questions of emerging
settlement systems; sea level rise, estuarine ecological modelling and human adaptations, radiocarbon dating
as a creative survey tool; theoretical implications of carly Holocene use of the coastal zone; and a new
emphasis on coastal sites research in developing broad theory concerning human adaptation and culture
change.
[93] Symposium: ARCHAEOLOGY AS A COLONIAL ENDEAVOR
in much of the world archacology has been and remains a colonialist endeayor, This colonialism manifests
itself in archacologists studying the pasts of conquered peoples and in core state archacologists dominating
the archacology of peripheral states, in these contexts the past often becomes a locus of struggle between
colonialist and nationalistic interests, The papers in this session examine the practice of archaeology in such
contexts. They ask how does the competition between different interests shape this practice and how do
these conflicts affect the interpretations that archacologists make about the past?
[95] Invited Forum: NATIVE AMERICANS, ARCHAEOLOGISTS, AND SACRED PLACES
Throughout the United States the protection of sacred places is a prominent issue for Native American
people. This concern affects archacologists in two ways. First, many locations that we view as archacological
sites are sacred places for Native Americans and our interests in doing research may put us in conflict with
Indian people. Second, within most federal and state land management agencies compliance with the
American Indian Religious Freedom Act has been delegated to archacologists, This session will let archacolo-
gists hear from Native American elders and tribal leaders what Native American concerns are about sacred
places.
, {106} Recent Studies of Ancient Maya Skeletons Il
[96] Symposium: CONSTRUCTING AND INTERPRETING VARIATION: TYPOLOGY AND
ALTERNATIVES

Archacologists have always spent much of their time imposing order on the multiformity of material
culture and the human past, They have used material culture to construct culture histories, to measure
degrees of social interaction, to examine the role of information exchange and social messaging, and, most
recently, to emphasize the importance of context. However, over the past ten years there has been litte
critical analysis of classification and the structuring of archacological data. These papers present new and
diverse perspectives on how archaeologists constitute their knowledge of, and then interpret, variation,
[98] Symposium: GEOGRAPHIC APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF PREHISTORIC AGGREGATION

IN CENTRAL ARIZONA

At the end of the 13th century A.D., small Salado compounds of four to twelve rooms in Tonto Basin,
Central Arizona, were abandoned and populations aggregated into larger settlements. Several large sites
with associated platform mounds begin to take on regional significance while other portions of the basin
appear to be entirely abandoned. This multidisciplinary symposium studies the ecological conditions associ-
ated with this settlement shift from the perspectives of archacological setticment patterns, exploitation of
wild resources, demography, physical health and agricultural productivity,

[99] Symposium: PREHISTORIC CULTURES AS COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS

Researchers in the fields of evolutionary biology, economics, adaptive computation, physics, and ( recently )
anthropology, have modeled nonlinear systems as the complexly patterned consequences of the operation
of simple self-organizing principles. These complex adaptive systems vary from stable, seemingly predictable
(linear ) states to near “chaotic” states because of the high degree of interconnectivity between the parameters
that govern the system, small external stimuli, and historical idiosyncracies, Participants in this symposium
have found the complex adaptive systems paradigm to be useful for improving our understanding of
prehistoric socio-cultural change.

[100] Symposium: THE EVOLUTION OF SOCIAL COMPLEXITY IN POLYNESIA

Polynesian socictics provided a critical comparative basis in early studies of cultural evolution. Abandoning
such typological schemes, recent research has focused on explaining why social complexity developed in
tts varied forms. Researchers in this symposium draw on advances in evolutionary theory and emphasize
environmental and social factors in accounts of socio-political change in Polynesia.

[101] Symposium: THE JOHN W. GRIFFIN MEMORIAL SYMPOSIUM: THE MISSIONS OF SPANISH
FLORIDA

Franciscan missions in Spanish Florida were located in three indigenous provinces; Guale, Timucua, and
Apalachee. Between 1566 and 1704, the mission effort was at its greatest strength with over three dozen
established missions. This symposium presents current interpretations of archacological, bioanthropological,
and archacobotanical findings from long-term research conducted at several sites in each province.

[103] Sponsored Symposium: ROCK ART: IMPLICATIONS FOR CULTURE HISTORY AND |
CULTURE PROCESS (ICOMOS, International Rpck Art Committee)

With an empirical foundation provided by a century of descriptive studies, rock art investigations arc
increasingly moving towards problem-oricnted research. This developing trend, illustrated by papers in this
session, is based partly on new techniques, such as direct chronometric dating, spatial statistics and biochemi-
cal assays, and partly on integrative approaches analyzing rock art in conjunction with iconographic, paleoeth-
nobotanical, seulement pattern, ethnoarchacological, and ckcavation data. These allow considerations of
various historical and processual problems, including migration and mobility, cultural interaction, resource
use, and political differentiation.

[106] Symposium: RECENT STUDIES OF ANCIENT MAYA SKELETONS ;

Analysis of Maya skeletal remains has cvolved from simple case studies of age, sex, and pathology into
population-based, statistically sophisticated paleodemographic and paleoepidemiologic studies. Data accu-
mutilated during the past 20 years from a variety of temporal, social and geographic contexts are being used
to explore problems ranging from the causes of the Collapse to the effects of the Spanish Conquest.
Researchers are employing new techniques and tools to reveal rich details about genetic relationships,
cultural change, dict, and environmental change in the Maya area,
, PAPER AND POSTER ABSTRACTS

Abad, C. Kebaunani (Hawat't-Manoa)

[100] THE EVOLUTIONARY IMPLICATIONS OF HAWAIIAN MONUMENTAL ARCHITECTURE
SERIATIONS

Seriations of a class of Hawaiian monumental architecture (befau) are shown to provide a useful data
base for investigating the evolution of sociopolitical complexity in Polynesia. The results of seriations
performed on Seiau of Maui Island indicate that leeward and windward temporal patterns differ. Possible
interpretations for this divergence are explored and evaluated. Included among these is that the leeward
amd windward regions may have developed as separate political entities in competition with one another.

Abbott, D, (see Burton, J.) |42|

Abbott, David (Arizona State)

[80] SOCIAL CHANGE AT PUEBLO GRANDE DURING THE CIVANO/POLVORON TRANSITION

This paper examines the decline in social complexity that occurred from the Civano to the Polvorén
phase at Pucblo Grande, perhaps the largest Hohokam village in the Phoenix area. During the Civano phase,
there were differences between residential groups as indicated by their differential participation in social
networks and access to ceramics produced by specialists. By the Polvorén phase, the social network
encompassed a substantially larger geographical area than previously, but without notable social differentials.

The implications for the current conception of the Polvorén phase, the Hohokam abandonment of the

Phoenix area, and the process of social decline in general are discussed.

Adams, Brian (Ilinois-Urbana/Champaign)

[91] LITHIC RAW MATERIAL UTILIZATION AND THE TRANSITION FROM MIDDLE TO UPPER

PALEOLITHIC IN NORTHEAST HUNGARY

The Bikk Mountains of northeast Hungary have produced several Middle and Early Upper Paleolithic
assemblages. Several “transitional” assemblages have also been found here, now known as “Szeletian”. The
close proximity of several sites dating to the Middle, “transitional” and Early Upper Paleolithic in the
geographically well-defined region of the Bdkk Mountains permits a detailed investigation of human behav-
ioral changes at this time. Results of recent analyses of lithic raw material acquisition and use during these
periods are presented

Adams, E, Charles (Arizona State Museum) and William H. Walker (Arizona)

[85] RITUAL AND SOCIAL POWER IN THE PUEBLO SOUTHWEST

Research in the U.S, Pueblo Southwest has identified ritual structures associated with settlements covering

the last 1500 years. These ritual or “integrative” structures fluctuated in size, frequency, and formality in

conjunction with changes in settlement size and complexity. Such elaboration of ritual structures suggests

that ritual formed the basis of social power in the Southwest and that understanding the elaboration and

‘ formalization of ritual structures and associated ritual behavior may offer insights into changing power
relations in the U.S. Pucblo Southwest.

Adams, Jenny L. (Arizona) |Discussant 33]

Adams, Karen R. (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center), Joe D. Stewart (Lakehead), and

Christopber D. Pierce (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center)

[19] DETERMINING THE TAXONOMIC IDENTITY OF TREES AND SHRUBS PRESENT IN

PREHISTORIC HEARTH ASH VIA ICP-AES ANALYSIS

Multi-element profiles obtained on modern tissue samples of potential prehistoric hearth fuels, and on
archaeological samples of ash, charred wood and sediment from southwestern Colorado using ICP-AES

(Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometry ) indicate the potential for identifying fuel taxa

from chemical properties of ash. In this poster session, we present the results of our pilot study and evaluate

sources of error and variation including intra-taxon variability, inter-taxon similarity, post-depositional
alteration, and multi-taxon mixture problems.

Adams, R. (See Murphy, L.) (38|

Addison, David (Hawat'i-Manoa)

[100] PREHISTORIC MARQUESAN AGRICULTURE: INTERRELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN
ENVIRONMENTAL VARIABLES, AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION AND STORAGE
TECHNIQUES, AND THE EVOLUTION OF SOCIAL COMPLEXITY

Contact period Marquesan society differed in significant ways from other Polynesian socicties. The land
tenure system was highly privatized; territoriality and aggression were pervasive; storage of fermented
breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis) paste was an integral part of the subsistence system; prestige competition

12
, Aimers, Jim J. 13
through feasting and megalithic dance platform construction required the expenditure of considerable
resources; and chicfly power had largely been usurped by champion warriors and inspirational priests. The
Marguesan environment is temporally highly variable. Prolonged droughts are common, unpredictable
events, Interrelationships between this environment, the Marquesan agricultural production strategy, and
the evolution of Marquesan society are explored.

Addyman, Peter V. (York Archaeological Trust)

[3] BRITISH ARCHAEOLOGY, 1944-2044: THE PAST AS A GUIDE TO THE FUTURE

1994 marks the 50th anniversary of the Council for British Archaeology. Many of the concerns of the
Council's founding fathers foreshadowed developments in British Archacology 1944-94.

This paper reviews current concerns in British archacology and looks at processes now in progress. It
uses these as predictors of the shape and role of archaeology in Britain in A.D, 2044 when the Council will
reach its centenary. Both the present state of British archacology and its likely furure provide interesting
contrasts with U.S, archaeology.

Adler, M. (see Kulisbeck, J.) (58|

Adler, Michael (Southern Methodist University)

{59] VILLAGE FORMATION AND COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION AMONG THE ANASAZI OF THE
AMERICAN SOUTHWEST

Archaecologically, village formation results from the relocation of smaller, previously dispersed residential
units into a larger, spatially defined settlement. Community organization is the modern interpretation of the
social relationships that integrated and differentiated multiple prehistoric residential units. While community
organization does not necessitate spatial aggregation of residential units, it does require the aggregation of
shared rights and responsibilities among a defined group of people. This paper assesses archacological models
of the episodic creation and disintegration of villages in selected areas of the northern Southwest between
AD. 800-1400. Models of village formation are assessed both for their “fit” to the data and their utility for
understanding prehistoric community organization.

Adovasio, J. (see Soffer, O.) [69|

Adovasio, JM. (Mercyburst College), Olga Soffer (Illinois), D.C. Dirkmaat (Mercyburst
College), CL. Pedler (Mercyburst College), and R. Buyce (Mercyburst College)

[69] PITS AND MIDDENS AT MEZHIRICH: THE THIRD INSTALLMENT

Mezhirich is the first Upper Palcolithic site in the former Soviet Union to have been subjected to intensive
Sotation studies, Previous papers on the application of this technique have explored basic issucs of preserva-
tion and differential recovery (1991 ) and have attempted to discern and define the character and composition
of pit and midden fills at the site (1992). This paper presents the results of the 1993/1994 flotation
studies and focuses on the micro-vegetal remains from the site in terms of subsistence, scasonality, and
palcoenvironment. The differential recovery of vegetal remains from pits and middens is explained in terms
of bioturbation and/or human selectivity. 4
Afonso, J. (see McCutbeon, P.) |19|
Abler, Stanley (Nortbern Artzona University), Matthew J. Root (Washington State), Jerry D.
William (Northern Arizona University), and Lisa eee (Northern Arizona University)
[97] FOLSOM AND OTHER PALEOINDIAN CULTURAL ORGANIZATION AT THE KNIFE RIVER

FLINT QUARRY AREA, NORTH DAKOTA.

Abundant new information about early Paleoindian cultural organization is available from two linked
study sites at Lake Ilo within the Knife River flint (KRF) quarry area, North Dakota. -like points
- ot aol edie lenrnoerlariegebetuamelr ee lar ampere ape elreap ters
of spatially segregated deposits of Folsom lithic workshop and camp debris. Reduction sequence data for
non-local, non-KRF artifacts and production rate data for KRF support models favoring mobility over exchange
in Folsom settlement dynamics. Folsom lithic production rate and reduction trajectory data contrast strongly
with those for the Plano complex from the same region.

Aikens, C. M. (see Akazawa, T.) |56|
Aimers, Jim J. (Tulane)
[60] A REVISED INTERPRETATION OF THE MAYA E-GROUP

Maya E-groups are monumental architectural assemblages considered since the 1920s to have been used
for solar observations of the solstices and equinoxes, However, morphological variability in the assemblages,
solar observations at several sites, examination of associated artifact assemblages, and the nature of the
burial remains do not support the observatory hypothesis. The evidence suggests that rather than timekeepers
, 14 Akazawa, Takeru and C. Melvin Aikens
in stone, the assemblages seem more likely to have been monumental settings for ritual, probably in relation
to the agricultural cycle.
Akazawa, Takeru (Tokyo University Museum) and C. Melvin Aikens (Oregon)
[56] PLEISTOCENE CONTINUITIES AND HOLOCENE DEVELOPMENTS IN EAST ASIA: SYSTEM
INSTABILITY AND ADOPTION OF NEW STRATEGIES OF PREHISTORIC HUNTER-GATHERERS
The Pleistocene to Holocene transition in East Asia (13-8 ka B.P.) is one in which climatic changes over
time prompted a steady response of microlithic peoples in terms of large-scale migration patterns originating
in population growth. Archaeological evidence exists in Asia that shows common microlithic industries.
However, evidence also suggests that with the rise of ceramic industries, differences by region and a shift
from a hunting-gathering mode of subsistence to a new cconomly. This marks a shift from a dict chiefly of
animal proteins to one with a greater reliance on plant foods along with a more sedentary lifestyle.
Albaitero, J. (see Urunuela, G.) |30|
Albeck, Maria Ester (Instituto Interdisciplinario Tilcara, Argentina)
{85] SOCIAL POWER AND AGRICULTURAL MANAGEMENT: A CASE STUDY FROM NORTHWEST
ARGENTINA
The role of social power in agricultural production is a rather unexplored aspect of social complexity in
Argentina, Intensive cultivation and a high population density with hierarchically organized settlements
developed in prehispanic times in Quebrada de Humahwaca, an arid valley in Northwest Argentina. Agriculture
was practiced in the valley bottom and in the higher piedmont areas. The agricultural sites in the piedmont
cover extensive areas, show a great structural complexity, and lie several hours walk from the settlements
in the valley bottom. The agricultural management (irrigation, cultivation, and storage ) of these sites offer
interesting possibilities for the study of social power in Quebrada de Humahuaca.
Albright, T. (see Williams, R.) |55}
Alconini, S. (see J. Janusek) | 43)
Alconini, Sonia (Universidad Mayor de San Andres)
[43] HISTORY AND RITUAL IN THE SACRED PYRAMID OF TIWANAKU: TRANSFORMATION IN
TTWANAKU CEREMONIAL PRACTICE AS INFERRED FROM AKAPANA CERAMIC OFFERINGS
Although the ritual importance of Tiwanaku has been long known, we lack a clear understanding of the
forms of ceremony carried out in its monumental structures, or how ceremonial practice might have changed
through time. This study, based on two years of ceramic analysis, evaluates patterns of standardization and
variability in Akapana ritual offerings, and plots changes in such patterns throughout the history of the
structure. Transformations in Akapana ritual practice are shown to have been tied to broader socio-political
changes occurring in the urban center, and in the larger polity, through the [V and V periods (A.D. 400-
L100). —
Aldenderfer, Mark (California-‘Santa Barbara)
459] ON THE ORIGINS OF SETTLED VILLAGE LIFE IN THE ANDEAN WORLD
Over the past 15 years, the origins of sedentary communities in the Andean world has become far better
understood. This paper summarizes what is known of the trajectory of sedentarization and the origins of
village life in three key regions of the Andes: the north coast of Peru, the highland valleys and basins of
central and southern Peru, and the Titicaca basin.
Alexander, Rani T. (Northern Illinois University)
{29] ARCHAEOLOGY ON THE COLONIAL FRONTIER: THE SPANISH WORLD SYSTEM AS VIEWED
FROM [TS YUCATECAN PERIPHERY
Yucatan may be characterized as a periphery of the Spanish World System from 1545 to 1821. Economic
production, especially of cash crops, on the periphery is typically controlled by the core to ensure the flow
of goods to the system center, Communities on the periphery, however, vary in their degree of integration
with the core, which may produce variation in the archaeological record. Through the juxtaposition of
historical and archaeological evidence, this paper examines the manipulation of a specific commodity,
livestock, among Colonial period Yucatecan communities to suggest which archacological variables might
be sensitive to changes in world systems.
Algaze, Guillermo (California-San Diego)
[24] EARLY BRONZE AGE STATE FORMATION IN SOUTHEASTERN ANATOLIA
Much attention has been focused on the rise of pristine states in the alluvial lowlands of Mesopotamia.
Comparatively less research, however, has been devoted to understanding the development of states in the
plains of northern Syria and southeastern Anatolia, where indigenous states did not emerge until the mid-
third millennium B.C. Until recently, pertinent data bearing on this emergence have been derived solely
, Altschul, Jeffrey and Joseph A. Ezzo 15
from excavated sites in Syria. However, new excavations and surveys at Titrig HOydk, in southeastern Turkey,
are beginning to produce a coherent corpus of regional data that both complements and contrasts with the
Syrian data.
Allen, Jane (Bishop Museum)
[100] ORGANIZING THE LANDSCAPE: AGRICULTURE AND THE EMERGENCE OF THE PRE-
CONTACT HAWAIIAN STATE
Sociopolitical organization in Hawai'i reached the state level of complexity well before Contact in A.D.
1778. The Hawaiian state was agriculturally based, and developed largely out of structures used traditionally
te coordinate resources across a heterogeneous and casily-damaged landscape. New evidence suggests that
these structures were effective, controlling agricultural production, water distribution, and soil erosion, by
AD. 1400.
Allen, Jim (La Trobe University)
[56] GREATER AUSTRALIA AT THE PLEISTOCENE-HOLOCENE TRANSITION
While few changes are recognized in the archacological sequences which span the period 13-8 ka B.P.
on the Australian continent itself, the marine transgression which accompanied the Pleistocene-Holocenc
transition divided the single Pleistocene continent into Australia, New Guinea, and Tasmania. In New Guinea,
this separation saw the appearance of horticulturalists. In Tasmania, humans colonized its periglacial uplands
by 35 ka B.P. and maintained their use through the Last Glacial Maximum. About 12 ka B.P., however, all
of these sites were abandoned and the southwest region remained unoccupied for all of the Holocene. This
paper contrasts these extremely different responses.
Allen, Mark W. (California-Los Angeles)
[36] PA AND POWER: CHIEFDOMS AND HILLFORTS IN HAWKE'S BAY, NEW ZEALAND
This poster presents recent research on the formation of Maori chiefdoms. Prehistoric polities in Hawke's
Bay, New Zealand are identified by traditional history as well as archaeological analysis on hillforts (pa). It
& demonstrated that by 450 B.P., potential horticultural land and other economic resources were limited.
The resultant need to organize and finance the protection of scarce resources, stored food supplics, and
pepulations were key processes in the formation of polities. It afforded leaders the opportunity to achieve
mecreased power and authority as the ability of chiefs to mobilize capital, labor, and social networks were
critical for effective pa construction,
Allen, Melinda (Bisbop Museum) and Kevin Jobnson (Bisbop Museum)
16] PATTERNS OF INTERACTION IN THE SOUTHERN COOK ISLANDS
Recent research on Aitutaki and other islands in the southern Cook Islands indicate that despite significant
tter-isiand distances, communication was maintained between island communities over roughly a five
hundred year period (A.D. 1000 to 1500). Subsequently, interaction became less frequent and certain exotic
materials arc no longer widely distributed. This paper considers the extent, direction, and timing of this
prehistoric interaction based on the distribution of two raw materials, pearl-shell (Pinctada margaritifera )
and fine-grain basalts, Conditions fostering carly interaction and subs@yuent changes in the frequency of
mitcraction are also explored.
Allison, M. (see Aufderbeide, A.) {22}
Allison, Marvin J. (Medical College of Virginia) af
[22] PROBLEMS RELATED WITH PREGNANCY AND PARTURITION IN EARLY INHABITANTS OF
PERU AND CHILE
This is a review of our findings rclated with pregnancy in carly female inhabitants of the Arica, Chile area.
The unusual conditions of preservation enable us to visualize theic problems directly and identify individuals :
pregnant or recently delivered at the time of death. Chemical analysis of their bones suggests that a rib/
femur iron ratio would be useful to identify similar conditions in females from random skeletal material
with no soft tissue. ‘
Altschul, J. (see Van West, C.) (98)
Altschul, Jeffrey (Statistical Research) and Josepb A. Ezzo (Statistical Research)
{86] THE EXPRESSION OF CEREMONIAL SPACE ALONG THE LOWER COLORADO RIVER
Although Pilot Knob has been described as a site of the keruk, or mourning ceremony, no attempt has
been made to correlate the archacological record with the ceremony. In this study we seck to determine
the ceremonial nature of Pilot Knob, Ripley, and Senator Wash through the integration of ethnographic and
archacological data. Material correlates of the keruk, such as anthropomorphic intaglios, symbols of sacred
places, circular features, and rock art panels, arranged in particular spatial associations, are evident at Pilot
Knob and Ripley. Senator Wash was a locus of ceremonial activity, but on a smaller, more localized scale.
, 16 Ambrose, Butler, Hanson, Hunter-Anderson, & Krueger
Ambrose, Stanley H. (Illinois), Brian M. Butler (Southern [linots Universtty-Carbondale),
Douglas B. Hanson (Forsyth Dental Institute-Boston), Rosalind L. Hunter-Anderson
(Micronesian Archaeological Research Services-Guam), and Harold W. Krueger (Geocbron
Laboratories-Cambridge)
[54] STABLE ISOTOPIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN DIET VARIATION IN MICRONESIA
Proportions of marine versus terrestrial resources in prehistoric human diets on Rota, Guam, and Saipan
islands have been estimated with stable isotope ratios of carbon and nitrogen in bone collagen and carbon
in apatite, On Rota, marine food consumption ranged from 25% to 55%; on Guam and Saipan, from 30-
45% and 25-30%, respectively, Apatite carbon lsotopes of Saipan humans suggest significant reliance on C,
plants, but none are known to be prehistoric staples. Low nitrogen isotope ratios confirm their predominately
terrestrial plant dict. Local food resources are being analyzed to identify isotopically enriched plants.
Ames, Kenneth M. (Portland State)
[47] THE EVOLUTIONARY SCALE OF HUNTER-GATHERER SEDENTISM
Sedentism is widely regarded as one of the water-shed events in human history. Current explanations for
its evolution among bunter-gatherers focus on the ecological costs and benefits of sedentism for local
groups scen in isolation. While this approach may explain instances of short-term local sedentism, it cannot
completely explain permanent shifts to sedentary settlement patterns. A successful shift in residential patterns
to long-term sedentism (at least several generations) may require that the change occur over a large region,
among a large number of socially interacting people. This hypothesis accounts for the spatial scale of
sedentism in Northwest North America.
Amick, Daniel (Desert Research Institute)
[97] FOLSOM DIET BREADTH AND LAND USE IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
Site survey and private artifact data are used to evaluate patterns of Folsom subsistence and setilement
in the American Southwest. Faunal assemblages suggest many nonbison species are taken in inverse propor-
tion to body size. Also the important role of canids requires greater attention. Site locations generally
correspond with edible plant richness while isolated points are associated with faunal richness. Patterns of
toolstone distribution imply large regional hunting territories. These patterns show limited connections
berween the Basin and Range and Southern Plains. Regional contrasts of residential and logistical land use
are indicated by variation in the weaponry assemblages.
Amorosi, Thomas (Hunter College-CUNY), Jon Sadler (Durbam), Jim Woollett (CUNY Grad
Center), and Jon H, Ingimundarsson (School of American Research-Santa Fe)
[79] THE SCANDINAVIAN NORTH ATLANTIC COLONIES
Beginning ca. A.D. 800, Scandinavian maritime agriculturalists colonized the offshore islands of the North
Auantic. By A.D. 1000, an initially uniform culture and economy extended from Norway to Newfoundland.
By 1500, the Scandinavian North Auantic developed into a diverse set of island societies. Vinland failed
: within a generation, Greenland’s Norse population died out after 500 years, Iceland suffered major population
loss while communities in the eastern North Adantic experienced economic expansion. Local and regional
‘ politics, different island environments, distance from core markets, and Norse environmental impact all
played roles in these different outcomes.
Amundson, R.G. (see Jabren, H.) {25|
Anderson, David (National Park Service) |Discussant 88]
Anderson, T. (see Storck, P.) (|74|
Anschuetz, Kurt F. (Michigan)
[58] FLOODS, FROSTS, HOT ROCKS, AND SYSTEMS OF WATER MANAGEMENT: RECONSIDERING
CLASSIC PERIOD ANASAZI AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES IN THE NORTHERN RIO GRANDE
Archaeologists have traditionally suggested that the aggregated Pueblo Indian populations living in the
northern Rio Grande during the Classic period necessarily supported themselves through large-scale canal
irrigation, As investigators began to formally recognize the widespread distribution of cobble-bordered and
gravel-mulched fields, they reasoned that these facilities constituted a crucial technological strategy for
coping with periodic drought and unpredictable frost. Recent research indicates Anasazi farmers made their
livelihood through the extensive modification of the natural landscape and the use of diverse planting
practices. Where locally feasible, these efforts formed coherent systems of water management for agricultural
production in cool, high desert settings.
Anslinger, C. (see Stafford, R.) |97|
Anthony, David W. (Hartwick College)
[64] PREHISTORIC MIGRATION AS SOCIAL PROCESS: MATERIAL AND SOCIAL CONSTRAINTS.
Migration has for too long been demonized and mystified in archaeology. It has been demonized as 2
weak simplification taken seriously only by normative culture historians—an accusation that is manifestly
, Athens, J. Stephen 17
untruc among contemporary economists and demographers; and it has been mystified as a chaotic and
unpredictable activity—whereas it is in fact one of the more regular and rule-bound human behaviors. A
brief review of materialist economic and demographic migration models is followed by a consideration of
social and ideological constraints on migration. Some recent archacological applications of migration models
indicate directions that might be successfully pursucd.
Anuskiewicz, Ricbard J. (Minerals Management Service), Philip R. Gerrell (Ecology and
Environments), James S. Dunbar (Bureau of Archaeological Research, Florida Department
of State), and Joseph F. Donoghue (Florida State)
[41] EVIDENCE OF PREHISTORIC MAN ON THE NORTH AMERICAN CONTINENTAL SHELF FROM
A SINKHOLE LOCATED 32 KM OFFSHORE IN 12 M SEAWATER
This paper will discuss a cooperative research effort between academic, State, and Federal agencies which
researched and found cvidence of prehistoric activity at a submerged sinkhole 32 km offshore. This drowned
karst feature is located in Apalachee Bay, Florida, in the Gulf of Mexico, about 32 km (21 mi) offshore in
12 m of water. Evidence presented will focus on analysis of Carbon dates from organic samples, and recovered
Uthic debitage collected at the site.
Arnold, Dean (Wheaton College)
[71] CERAMIC THEORY AND MOLD-MADE CERAMIC PRODUCTION: IMPLICATIONS FOR CRAFT
ORGANIZATION
Ceramic production using vertical half molding is sometimes regarded as the result of an evolved, efficient
technigue to create uniform product. Ethnoarchacological observations from Ticul, Yucatan, Mexico, also
suggest that a molding technology requires little skill, and more space and capital than traditional technologies
and is paste, shape and size dependent. Molding results from increased demand for ceramic products in
which increased tools and space replace traditional knowledge and skill and a decreased amount of labor.
The implications of these observations for the cvolution and identification of craft organization in antiquity
are briefly explored.
Aronsen, G. (see Bray, T.) |19}|
Arriaza, B. (see Cassman, V.) | 22)
Arriaza, Bernardo (Nevada-Las Vegas)
[22] CHINCHORRO BLACK PERIOD: SERIATION AND SOCIAL COMPLEXITY
The seriation of the Chinchorro mummies reveals several kinds of artificial mummification techniques
which changed through time. This paper will concentrate on one of them, the Black Mummies. Of all the
Chinchorro mummies with artificial mummification, the Black Mummies were the most complex and the
oldest, dating from 5,000 B.C. to 3,000 B.C. This “black” practice appears to have been concentrated around
the present city of Arica, from where it spread south about 200 km.
Arsenault, Daniel (Laval University)
115) THE “SACRED FEMALE WEAVER" IN A oe ae CONTEXT: A REAPPRAISAL OF
SOME IMAGES OF HUMAN SACRIFICE IN ICONOGRAPHY
A comparison between recent archacological findings (from Sipan and San José de Moro) and images of
a Moche sacrificial ritual has allowed some scholars (Donnan and Castillo 1992) to show that individuals
could have personificd some major figures (A, B and C) of this sacrificial iconography. This paper aims to
show that some burial remains found at Huaca de la Cruz (Strong and Evans 1952) could also be related
to these images. In particular, a woman, buried with weaving tools, could have typified one of the two figures
£. collectors of the sacred blood. This interpretation will help to better understand gender relationships in
2 Moche sacrificial context.
Ashmore, W. (see Leventhal, R.) (60) ’
Aswant, Shankar (Hawai'i)
{100] SOCIAL COMPLEXITY AND TONGAN MARITIME EXPANSION
In this paper we outline an cvolutionary model for the origins of socio-political hierarchy and maritime
expansion in the Tongan Islands from the twelfth century A.D. Drawing on ethnohistoric and archacological
evidence, we examine the role of within and between group resource competition. Changes in population
density, territoriality, military balance, and opportunitics with migration play significant parts in an environ-
ment of variable productivity.
Atbens, J. Stepben (International Archaeological)
[94] LANDSCAPE ARCHAEOLOGY ON A MICRONESIAN HIGH ISLAND: PREHISTORIC
SETTLEMENT AND AGRICULTURE IN KOSRAE
| A landscape archaeology orientation to field and laboratory investigations has provided a wealth of new
iw¥formation concerning initial settlement and the development of agriculture on Kosrae, a small high
, 18 Aufderheide, Arthur C. and Marvin J. Allison
island of central Micronesia. investigations emphasized the development of coastal landforms and included
excavations in non-site locations, volumetric control of midden recovery and fine screening, quantification
of charcoal in sediments, wetland sediment coring, pollen and charcoal particle analyses, and wood species
identificati on of charcoal. Although more often associated with continental areas, the Kosrac case shows
that landscape archacology can be an especially productive approach for small tropical Pacific islands.
Aufderbeide, Arthur C, (Minnesota) and Marvin J. Allison (Medical College of Virginia)
[22] BIOANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES OF SPONTANEOUSLY MUMMIFIED BODIES OF A LATE
PHASE CHINCHORRO SITE (MORRO 1-6) IN NORTHERN CHILE

Reconstruction of health, subsistence strategies and cultural features of a northern Chile maritime, Archaic
period population (the Chinchorros) was carried out by examination of 69 spontancously mummified
hodies from the Morro 1-6 site near Arica, Chile. Bioanthropological studies included chemical dictary
reconstruction, radioimmunological detection of cocaine in mummy hair, coprolite analysis and anatomical
studies.
Awe, J. (see Healy, P.) |44|
Ayers, William S. (Oregon) and Goles, Gordon G. (Oregon)
[6] GEOCHEMICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF LITHIC MATERIALS IN MICRONESIA

A review of lithic material distributions from archacological contexts in Micronesia shows significant
evidence of long distance movement of stone raw materials and finished products. However, the lack of
systematic geochemical characterization research limits detail regarding provenance, given the far reaching
inter-island contacts known historically it should be possible to identify archacological signatures in stone
artifacts, even in atolls, with further study. The restricted range of stone material as a component of the
technology suggests that in some areas ccramics may provide a more useful indicator of trade links. Specific
evidence from the Pohnpei area is discussed.
Aylesworth, Grant R. (Tulane)
[60] RECONSIDERING CHULTUNS IN THE SOUTHERN MAYA LOWLANDS

Chultuns are small chambers excavated into limestone bedrock by the ancient Maya. This review and
critique of past chultun research along with recent archacological findings in Belize form the basis of a
reconsideration of chultun function, form, and distribution in the Southern Maya Lowlands. Discussion
includes a consideration of variance in chultun morphology, micro and macro distribution patterns, and
linguistic evidence. In particular, the debate over food storage and the distinction between primary and
secondary chultun functions is evaluated and questioned.

Baenziger, Marsha S, (Missouri), Tom Dillebay (Kentucky)
[25] METHODS FOR IDENTIFYING OPAL PHYTOLITHS: MONTE VERDE, A CASE STUDY OF
PANICOIDS..

Methods for determining phytoliths within the warm-season photosynthetic pathway are discussed. Both
warm-geason and cool-season panicoids are analyzed using macroremains and comparative material Prelimi-
nary findings indicate the phytoliths are differentiated even within the warm-season pathway based on their
chemical components. Using this determination, residue from soils, feces, and tools from the 13,000 year
old Monte Verde, Chill, occupation is discussed and compared to an earlier level
Ball, Terry B. (Brigham Young University), Michael D. Standing (Brigham Young University),
and Wilford M. Hess (Brigham Young University)

[25] 3-D MICROSCOPY AND IMAGE ANALYSIS OF PHYTOLITHS

Study of phytolith three-dimensional structure may lead to improved phytolith systematics. Ln this study
the porential of using confocal microscopy and computer-assisted image processing to create and manipulate
3-D images of individual phytoliths was evaluated. Optical serial sections of fluorescent stained maize
phytoliths were made using a laser confocal microscope. The sections were reconstructed into 3-D images
of the phytoliths using computer-assisted surface rendering algorithms. The 3-D images were manipulated
to view and measure the phytoliths in all possible orientations. This procedure appears to have excellent
potential for the study of phytolith 3-D typology and morphometrics.

Bamforth, Douglas B. (Colorado-Boulder)
[66] THE WINDY RIDGE QUARTZITE QUARRY: HUNTER-GATHERER MINING ON THE
CONTINENTAL DIVIDE
Windy Ridge is a quarry/camping site south of Steamboat Springs in the Colorado Rocky Mountains which
was exploited at least from the Late Paleoindian through Late Prehistoric periods. Intensive survey located
182 “quarry pits” on the site, but excavation of one “pit” revealed a network of trenches cut at least five
feet down through solid rock. Despite the enormous labor investment evident at the site, Windy Ridge
quartzite is not widely distributed in Colorado. These data illuminate aboriginal adaptations in the Colorado
, Bar-Yosef, Ofer 19
Mountains and imply that bunter-gatherer lithic procurement can be far more labor-intensive than many
archacologists have thought.
Bamforth, Douglas B. (Colorado-Boulder) | Discussant 49]
Bangs, Eric W. (Larson Anthropological/Archaeological Services) and Dennis E. Lewarch
(Larson Antbropological/Archaeological Services)
[18] SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL ORGANIZATION OF LITHIC MANUFACTURING AND TOOL USE AT
WEST POINT
Analysis of lithic debitage and tool spatial organization provides a clue to long-term land use patterns and
activity area placement at West Point. Debitage is classified by lithic material type and place in a core
reduction sequence while tools are coded using a paradigmatic classification based on pattern and distribution
of use-wear attributes. Analysis of lithic patterns by component demonstrates some change in tool manufactur-
ing techniques and types of lithic material exploited through time. Non-local lithic material, projectile point
styles, and decorative artifacts demonstrate linkages with British Columbia, the Columbia Plateau, and
southern Oregon.
Banks, William (Kansas)
[105] PREHISTORIC ACTIVITIES AND LITHICS OF FARRA CANYON: THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF A
SMALL CATCHMENT BASIN
Farra canyon is a small catchment basin in Blaine County, Oklahoma. This canyon has experienced
dramatic Holocene erosion, especially in the last two decades, which has uncovered lithic materials from
the Paleoindian period through the Late Prehistoric. A wide range of material types are present in the
assemblage, By analyzing lithic artifacts and material types, conclusions on changes in the occupational
penern and utilization of the canyon are provided Because both the canyon and the assemblage are so
@iverse, activities pertain to the catchment as a whole.
Barbour, Warren T. D. (SUNY-Buffalo)
[34] CHILDHOOD'S LEGACY: THE INHERITORS OF URBAN CIVILIZATION
Children have been largely ignored in the archacology of ancient civilizations. While appearing in burials
and sacrifices, children are mostly hidden from the archaeological record by their passage into adulthood
end an urban world of art, architecture and artifacts that express a broader horizon. As an example of
weaving children into the fabric of early urban society I have taken a new look at ceramic figurines from
ancient Teotihuacan, Mexico that were most likely toys. As such they are not superfluous but important
clees to the world and role of children who became the farmers, craftspersons, soldiers, bureaucrats, priests,
ead rulers.
Barnett, P. (see Storck, P.) |74)
Barton, C. Michael (Arizona State) and Geoffrey A. Clark (Arizona State)
(27] SYMPOSIUM INTRODUCTION: EVOLUTIONARY THEORY IN ANGLO/AMERICAN
ARCHAEOLOGY
The widely perceived lack of general theory has long been scen as a shortcoming of archacology, and
mere gencrally of anthropology. We suggest, however, that i bheadhy coticad ie has operated for
several decades under a general theory of culture change that is broadly in biases and operation
to Neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory. This paradigm is seldom made explicit, partly because of the history
of the discipline and partly because of the lack of in-depth understanding of biological evolution by many
archacologists. As excmplificd here, evolutionary theory can provide a unifying conceptual framework,
diverse archacological programs and further the explanation of long-term socialfprocess questions.
Bartram, Jr., Laurence E. (South Carolina)
14] A COMPARISON OF KUA (BOTSWANA) AND HADZA (TANZANIA) BOW AND ARROW
HUNTING
Bow and arrow hunting among two groups of contemporary African foragers, the Kua of the cast-central }
_ Kalsferri in Botswana and the Hadza of northern Tanzania, is compared. Bow and arrow hunting is an
economically significant activity among both groups. This paper describes the technological, organizational,
and environmental factors thal influence the design, manufacture, and use of bow hunting equipment by
each group. Similarities and contrasts between the two in terms of these factors are explored. Habitat type
and complexity are identified as key elements conditioning ¢quipment design, usc, and hunting style.
Bar-Yosef, O. (see Belfer-Coben, A.) |47|
Sar-Yosef, O. (see Stiner, M.) (19)
Bar-Yosef, Ofer (Harvard University)
}45) THE [IMPACT OF LATE PLEISTOCENE-EARLY HOLOCENE CLIMATIC CHANGES IN
SOUTHWEST ASIA
The climatic fluctuations during the Terminal Pleistocene and Early Holocene in the Near East are recorded
@ Geep sea cores in the Eastern Mediterranean, pollen cores in lakes and geomorphic modifications. The
, 20 Baryshnikov, G.
trends toward increasing temperatures and precipitation effected first the lowlands and the southern parts
of the region. Their impact on human groups were filtered through the dynamic or conservative social
mechanisms that characterize hunter-gatherers and carly farmers. The shifts to sedentism, incipient cultiva-
tion and animal husbandry, although not appearing simultaneously, are interpreted as the results of processes
that were initiated as socio-economic reactions to environmental changes.
Baryshnikov, G. (see Hoffecker, J.) |94|
Barnes, M. (see Fleming, D.) | 15}
Barnes, M. (see Sheets, P.) |48|
Baybam, Frank (California State-Chico) and Jack Broughton (Washington)
[65] RODENT AND LAGOMORPH REMAINS AS INDICATORS OF RESOURCE STRESS: AN EXAMPLE
FROM THE PITHOUSE PERIOD IN WEST TEXAS
The importance of rodent and lagomorph utilization to prehistoric subsistence in the desert Southwest
has been well-documented. Yet, energetic return rates for these taxa can be quite low decreasing their rank
as preferred food items. Additionally, intense and continuing use of these prey items can alter the age profile
of the exploited population. We use these relationships and some exploitative correlates to identify an
extreme case of resource stress occurring during the late Pithouse Period in the Hucco Bolson region of
west Texas.
Bayman, J. (see Fish, P.) (26|
Bayman, James (Arizona State)
[23] THE ROLE OF SITE SURFACE DATA IN INTERPRETING A HOHOKAM PLATFORM MOUND
COMMUNITY CENTER
This paper evaluates the utility of surface archacological data and the substantive contributions that such
data have made to a long-term research program in the northern Tucson Basin in Arizona. Patterning in
surface data provide a framework for defining regional land-use, multi-site community organization, and
intra-site spatial structure in the prehistoric Sonoran Desert. Surface archaeological data are also useful for
interpreting political economy and organization of craft production at these multiple scales. The inferential
potential of surface artifact distributions at a Classic period platform mound community center is explored
and illustrated.
Beauchamp, Renee (Tennessee)
[78] AGING WHITE-TAILED DEER IN NORTH AMERICA: INVESTIGATIONS OF THE DENTAL
CROWN HEIGHT MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUE
This study of aging techniques for high-crowned ungulates determined that dental crown height measure-
ments were the most accurate, non-destructive technique. Dental crown height measures were derived
from a population of known-age white-tailed deer. The measurements were applied to an archaeological
& white-tailed deer population from the Hayes site in Middle Tennessce. Mortality profiles for the archacological
specimens were established and used to determine prehistoric hunting practices at Hayes.
Beaudry, M. (See Murpby, L.) |38|
Beaudry-Corbett, Marilyn P. (California-Los Angeles) and Jobn S. Henderson (Cornell)
[71] REGIONAL APPROACH TO POTTERY CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS: A HONDURAN CASE
Recent comparative analysis and other collaborative work have resulted in the identification of regional
patterns of variability in ceramic shape and decoration. Ceramic systems are useful for summarizing these
patterns and their spatial and temporal distributions. This paper reviews some of the specific classificatory
advances made through this cooperative research, identibes potentially productive directions for future
research, and considers the methodological and theoretical implications of approaching ceramics at a regional .
level.
Beck, Charlotte (Hamilton College) and George Jones (Hamilton College)
[96] DIFFUSION AND TYPOLOGICAL VARIATION
Almost nowhere have assessments of projectile point typology been taken further than in the Great Basin.
But archacologists have continually experienced inconsistencies in chronological inferences derived from the
Great Basin projectile point typology. These inconsistencies have stimulated numerous debates concerning
chronological positions of particular types in different parts of the Basin. Some of this confusion may be
attributed to differential diffusion of attributes across space—that is, lag time or recombination of attributes
in different areas. Here we examine the histories of different attributes and attribute combinations to assess
the effects of their differential diffusion on typological variation in the archacological record.
, Bennett-Rogers, Ann, John Fagan, and Anthony Farqué 21
Beck, Colleen M. (Desert Research Institute)
[75] THE NTS CAVE SITE
in 1992, an undisturbed cave site was discovered on the Nevada Test Site in southern Nevada. The artifacts
imdicate that this cave was last occupied by Native Americans no more than 100 years ago. This paper
@scusses possible interpretations of the distribution of the cultural materials and presents the procedures
developed for the management of the site.
Beekman, Christopber (Vanderbilt University)
[30] A CLASSIC PERIOD POLITICAL BOUNDARY IN THE SIERRA LA PRIMAVERA REGION,
JALISCO, MEXICO
During the Mesoamerican Classic Period, the Sicrra La Primavera in west-central Jalisco is hypothesized
t have been a cultural and/or political boundary between the Teuchitlan Tradition of west Mexico and
potity(s) closely allied with central Mexican groups, especially Teotihuacan. Ongoing research, drawing on
settlement and artifact distributions, now allows us to make preliminary conclusions about the reality of
the boundary, its nature, and the structural complexity of the polities on either side of it.
Begay, Richard (Navajo Nation) |Forum Participant 95}
Belfer-Coben, Anna (Hebrew University) and Ofer Bar-Yosef (Harvard University)
[47] TOWARDS VILLAGE LIFE IN THE NATUFIAN
The combined effects of climatic shifts and changing socio-economic strategies resulted in the emergence
of small sedentary hamicts during the Natufian period in the southern and central Levant. However, the
tallicdged villages, with public sacred facilities are archacologically evidenced only since the Early Neolithic
and have developed rapidly during the 10th and the 9th millennia B.P. (uncalibrated). With the diffusion
of agricultural techniques and herding into Anatolia and the Zagros mountains, large villages with claborate
eachange networks, mixed cconomy and hicrarchical social structure emerged, while groups of hunter-
gatherers continued to survive in their immediate vicinity for another two millennia.
Beil, Ellen (Pennsylvania) and Patricia Urban (Kenyon College)
[19] CONSTRUCTING AN IMAGE: FIGURINE, WHISTLE, AND OCARINA MANUFACTURE IN THE
NACO VALLEY, NW HONDURAS, AND ITS POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS
Ceramic figurines, whistles, and ocarinas (FWO) are commonly found throughout Late Classic period
(AD. 600-950) southern Mesoamerica. Relatively little is known about FWO manufacturing processes,
however. This gap frustrates reconstructions of ancient political economics as skill and matcrial requirements
cannot be specified. Research in the Naco valicy, NW Honduras, has yielded a wealth of material of Late
(CAassic age relevant to this topic (2,573 FWO fragments and 74 ceramic molds). This poster session outlines
@e production steps by which Naco figurines, whistles, and ocarinas were fashioned and their role(s) within
@e Late Classic political economy.
Senallie, Larry (Navajo Nation Archaeology Department) and Anthony L. Klesert (Navajo
Nation Archaeology Department) a
(93) NATIVE AMERICANS AS PROFESSIONAL COLLEAGUES
A sure sign of the continued colonialistic nature of American archacology is the percentage of Native
Aseericans involved as professionals. There are many reasons for the dearth of native colleagues, but these
mest be surmounted if the profession is to transcend its past and flourish. The profession must recruit from
the ranks of those it studies, and must be willing to broaden its definitions of normal science in the process.
The experiences of a number of tribal and university programs are offered as models for the profession, as
@ begins to accept its responsibility for this effort.
Benfer, R. (see Pearsall, D.) {25} '
Sennett, S. (see Hanson, C.) {76| ;
Bennett-Rogers, Ann (US Forest Service, Willamette National Forest), Jobn Fagan
(Archaeological Investigations Northwest), and Anthony Farqué (US Forest Service,
Willametie National Forest)
(55) FROM QUARRY TO CACHE—OBSIDIAN PROCUREMENT IN THE CENTRAL CASCADES OF
OREGON
The discovery of a biface cache consisting of numerous whole and fragmentary pieces precipitated a
seedy of obsidian procurement and transport. The cache recovered from the western slopes of the Cascade
Mountains in the Santiam River drainage was sourced to Obsidian Cliffs. Individual comparable biface artifacts
teve been recovered from archacological sites in the area. This paper will describe the cache site and a
seedy of the quarry site in relationship to a known trail system.
, 22 Benz, Bruce F. and Karen Laitner Benz
Benz, Bruce F. and Karen Laitner Benz (Instituto Manantian de Ecolgia)
[36] ADDITIONS TO THE TUXCACUESCO CERAMIC COMPLEX IN SOUTHERN JALISCO
Isabel Kelly’s work in southern Jalisco characterized a highly polished and incised red ware ceramic
complex that she attributed to the latter half of the frst millennium B.C. Test excavations in a small site in
the El Grullo valley of southwestern Jalisco uncovered additions to this ceramic complex including resist
painted and iridescent forms. An apparently carlier though associated ceramic complex was also encountered.
This ceramic complex is characterized by polychrome—purple, orange and white on red—decoration on
jars, ollas and plates where incision is absent. Figurines associated with this polychrome complex exhibit
forms similar to those of the Tuxcacuesco complex but also include hollow forms that are finished in red
and white or fugitive yellow paint.
Benz, Karen Laitner (see Benz, B.) |36|
Berg, Caryn (SWCA, Inc.)
[72] MICROWEAR ANALYSIS AND THE INFORMAL TOOL KIT AT ELDEN PUEBLO
The purpose of this study was to examine the informal tool kit from Elden Pucblo using high power
microwear analysis. The primary objective was to determine tool use in relation to subsistence activities
at the pueblo, Key findings indicate that the informal tools at Elden Pucblo were primarily used in a way
that represents a hunting and gathering lifestyle in addition to agriculture. It has also been determined that
high power microwear analysis is successful for determining use of informal tools and should be applied
more often to assemblages in the Southwest.
Bergman, Christopber (Northern Kentucky University)
[84] SINEW REINFORCED AND COMPOSITE BOWS: TECHNOLOGY, FUNCTION, AND SOCIAL
IMPLICATIONS
Sinew reinforcement or “backing” of a bow involves applying high tensile strength sinew to the weapon's
outside curve. Thus applied, sinew allows for a shorter bow length without an increased risk of breakage.
A shortened bow provides greater maneuverability, particularly on horseback. However, bows of this type ©
were not always manufactured by people using equid transport. From a historical perspective, composite
bows represent a further developmental trend in which materials of different properties are combined, —
producing a mechanically efficient weapon. Generally speaking, the complicated nature of composite bow
production usually implies the presence of specialized craftspersons within a socicty, .
Bernstein, David J. (SUNY-Stony Brook), Robert M. Cerrato (SUNY-Stony Brook), and Heather |
V.E. Wallace (SUNY-Stony Brook)
[92] LATE WOODLAND USE OF COASTAL RESOURCES AT MOUNT SINAI HARBOR, LONG ISLAND, —
NEW YORK
Seasonality, taphonomic, and faunal data are used to examine the use of coastal resources at Mount Sinai
Harbor on the north shore of Long Island. Seasonal growth studies of multiple species of shellfish are
employed to reconstruct the occupational history at one intensively excavated site (van der Kolk). Results”
suggest a very short occupation and provide interesting methodological data useful in the analysis of similar!
* sites. Faunal and taphonomic information afford insights into both the structure of the yan der Kolk site”
and the use of vertebrate species by the late prehistoric inhabitants on Long Island's north shore. |
Bettinger, R. (see Eerkens, J.) |27|
Bettinger, Robert L. (California-Davis) {Discussant 90}
Bettinger, Robert L. (California-Davis)
[47] THE EMERGENCE OF SEDENTISM IN THE INYO-MONO REGION, EASTERN CALIFORNIA |
At the time of Euroamerican contact, the Inyo-Mono region of eastern California was more densely and
permanently settled than any other part of the Great Basin. Archacological data suggest this reflects a
term competition for scarce resources in a productive but crowded environment, Competition is expressed
initially in the formation of a well-defined seasonal round between 3500 and 1400 B.P., prior to which
annual peregrinations were erratic. Subsequent responses to Competition include sharply diminished cae
movement culminating in the appearance of permanent villages and more intensive use of resources naturally)
available in bulk (¢.g., pinenuts and ricegrass) and marginal resource patches (¢.g., alpine environments). —
Bey, George (Millsaps College), Craig Hanson (Tulane), and Jennifer Sandlin (New Mexico) |
[60] EXCAVATIONS IN THE SACRIFICIOS GROUP, LATE CLASSIC LIFE IN EK BALAM
The Sacrificios Group consists of a number of structures loosely centered around a central plaza just
outside the walled ceremonial center of Ek Balam. The aaa eacadalbarwahon wicicmuatavaieie
the 1989 and 1992 field seasons are presented. These excavations, which tested six structures as well as
the plaza and off-structure areas, produced data used in a preliminary reconstruction of Late Classic Maya
life within this group. Questions approached through interpretation of the data include “what was the nature
i
, Black, Andrew 23
aee duration of the occupation?”, “how were the various structures and intervening spaces used?”, and
“what was the Sacrificios Group?"
Bicho, Nuno (Drew University)
[16] LITHIC RAW MATERIAL ECONOMY AND HUNTER-GATHERER MOBILITY IN THE LATE
GLACIAL AND EARLY POSTGLACIAL PORTUGUESE PREHISTORY
The Portuguese Final Upper Paleolithic and Epipaleolithic were marked by knowledge of the landscape
that guided scasonal movements of the population. These followed inland-coastal routes, possibly between
the Atlantic coast and inland river valicys. Although the data are still limited, they suggest that these routes
targeted certain points on the landscape such as regional sources of lithic raw materials. Chert, quartz, and
quartzite, the desired resources, were characterized by different reduction strategies, Apparently, the diver-
Sty in reduction sequences and in raw materials promoted the mobility of these hunter-gatherer groups.
Billman, Brian (California-Santa Barbara)
P71 POLITICAL INTEGRATION AND DISINTEGRATION DURING THE EARLY INTERMEDIATE
PERIOD IN THE MOCHE VALLEY, PERU
The Early Intermediate Period in the Moche Valley begins with the formation of the Moche State and
emci with the decline of this polity. Although perhaps the first multi-valicy state to have evolved in the
Aedes, the origin and demise of this polity is poorly understood. This paper presents the results of a
setiiement pattern study of the Moche Valley. Analysis indicates that intrusions of highland groups into the
waiidle valicy played a critical role in the formation of the Moche State. Although the decline of this polity
remains an cnigma, analysis indicates that the collapse occurred during a period of intense warfare.
Siening, Jeanne Day (California-Riverside)
61) BIPOLAR FLAKED-STONE REDUCTION IN PREHISTORIC AND PROTOHISTORIC SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA
‘There are many statements in the anthropological literature regarding the use of bipolar reduction by
Semeers and gatherers. After examining more than fifty prehistoric and protohistoric flaked-stone assemblages
Sem southern California, several conclusions regarding the identification of bipolar debitage and the role
@ Solar reduction in hunter and gatherer manufacturing behavior became apparent. Replicative experi-
genes and replicated debitage were instrumental to the analysis. Several of the long-standing conclusions
| @ the literature regarding bipolar reduction are questioned.
 Btrete, Robert (Soil Systems Inc.)
72) PUEBLO I OCCUPATION, SITE STRUCTURE, AND ARCHITECTURAL VARIABILITY ON THE
| UTE MOUNTAIN UTE RESERVATION, SOUTHWESTERN COLORADO
_ ‘The Ute Mountain Ute Tribe is developing 7634 acres in southwestern Colorado. Twenty-four Pucblo II
i are located in the project area, nine of which will be impacted by development. Data recovery has
| ee= compicted on six sites and testing at three sites. See ied eee eee 1030-
9960 occupation and the remaining sites date from A.D. 1050-1150. A assemblages are similar in terms
@ she ceramic and lithic artifact structure and architectural styles. This paper discusses this variability and
@uakes regional comparisons.
Bisbouski, Martin (California-Los Angeles)
138) SOCIOECONOMIC DIFFERENTIATION IN MAIZE-GRINDING AT THOTTHUACAN
| Measuring the significance of utilitarian craft products to the growth of complex societies is difficult
Seceuse few kinds of craft goods provide adequate information about contexts of production, exchange,
a ese In Mesoamerica, the study of long-ignored maize-grinding tools can help fill this void. Data describing}
“Seet form and stone material properties can indicate diferences in methods of food preparation, in the
secesebility of various subsistence resources, and in the means by which households obtained grinding
| equipment, At Teotihuacan, such data help characterize the nature of low-to-middle status sociocconomic
@ferentiation.
Bieck, Andrew (SUNY-Bingbamton)
_ 84) SOCIAL ASPECTS OF FAUNAL EXPLOITATION: AN EXAMPLE FROM CENTRAL GHANA
Zovarchacologists have explored many factors that influence people's use of animals, such as herd manage-
ene, hunting technology, and resource abundance. Yet few studies have taken into account the enormous
| @ifeesce of social structure and cosmology on economic decision making. Using ethnographic and archaco-
| Spool data from the Banda Traditional Area of Ghana, this paper explores how social structure and cosmology
_@ifeemece mcan consumption in one rural community, and how much non-functional decision making creates
|S @seencture between the perceived living assemblage, and the archacological one.
|
, 24 Black, Stephen L., Kevin Jolly, and Daniel R. Potter
Black, Stepben L. (Texas-Austin), Kevin Jolly (Texas-Austin), and Daniel R. Potter (Texas-
Austin)
[19] THE HIGGINS EXPERIMENT: AN ELECTRONIC APPROACH TO EXCAVATION DATA
MANAGEMENT
A recent excavation in south-central Texas coupled total data stations with laptop computers fo manage
block excavation. The system virtually eliminated the need for paper forms, and allowed the entry of over
30,000 plotted artifacts, 1500 formal tools, and 150 pages of field notes during a ten-weck field season. The
total stations provided three dimensional artifact and fearure provenience, allowing excavators to work in —
natural layers, instead of the imposed bounds of a metric univ/ievel. Electronic field data collection reduced
errors, redundancy, and lab processing time, bringing useful analysis much closer to the excavation than is”
possible with traditional methods.
Blake, Michael (British Columbia) and Jobn E. Clark (Brigham Young University)
[59] EARLY FORMATIVE MOKAYA VILLAGES OF SOUTHEASTERN MEXICO
ir has long been known that the coastal lowlands were home to some of Mesoamerica’s earliest sedentary
villages. Until recently, however, we knew much more about early village life in the highland regions of
Mexico than in the lowlands, Based on archaeological work from 1985 to 1993 we summarize and update
the patterns of early village life among the "Mokaya” who inhabited the Pacific coast of Chiapas, Mexico,
from 1550 B.C. to 1000 B.C. The Mokaya sites we examine provide new information about changes in
society, polity, and economy after the Late Archaic period, and help us explore the processes of emerging
inequities and complexities of village life.
Blanco V., Aida (National University of Costa Rica)
[32] ANALYSIS OF PLANT REMAINS FROM THE RIVAS SITE
Plant remains from the Rivas site consist almost entirely of carbonized seeds, husks, and other parts.”
Analysis of them indicates the presence of maize, a variety of palm fruits, and other cultivated and collected
resources. In addition to providing information on subsistence, these materials provide insights into thé”
prehistoric environment and possible regional exchange of plant products, These topics will be discussed.
in light of ongoing studies. |
Bleed, P. (see Hitchcock, R.) |84)| .
Bleed, Peter (Nebraska-Lincoln) | Discussant 84]
Blinman, Eric (Museum of New Mexico), Clint Swink, Lawrence R. Sitney (Museum of New
Mexico), David S, Phillips (LANL Ceramic Science and Technology), and Joel M. Brisbin
(Mesa Verde National Park)
[19] THE FIRING OF ANASAZI POTTERY |
| Anasazi pottery technology involves a complex interaction between shale clays and # carefully controlled
firing regime. The recognition of hundreds of prehistoric trench kilns in the Four Corners area of the
: American Southwest has prompted 10 years of replication firing experiments, bringing together a consortium
of potters, archaeologists, and materials scientists. Recent experiments have duplicated both the stratigraphy
of kilns at Mesa Verde National Park and the qualities of Anasazi pottery, These successes have also focused
laboratory research on the sintering of shale clays, enhancing both the practical and scientific understanding
of this prehistoric technology. .
Blitz, Jennifer (Wisconsin-Madison)
[104] DIETARY RECONSTRUCTION AND SOCIAL STRATIFICATION: A CROSS-CULTURAL
PERSPECTIVE
‘The use of bone chemistry in reconstructing ancient diet and human behavior has been applied to many
New World civilizations. Whereas gross dietary differences (marine versus terrestrial) can be easily detected,
the use of bone chemistry to observe finer, intra-population differences (social differentiation ) may require
more work. Chemical studies done on presumably socially stratified cultures, including the Zapotec, Maya,
inca. and chiefdoms of North America suggest almost no relationship between dict and social status. The
lack of a relationship may be due to slight dietary differences that we do not recognize or cannot detect
with our current analytical procedures.
Blitz, Jobn (Bowdoin College)
[78] MOUND REOCCUPATION AND CO-OPTION OF SACRED AUTHORITY
Periodic addition of mound construction stages is a well-known characteristic of late prehistoric earthen
platforms in the American Southeast. However, those exceptional mounds that exhibit radical temporal
discontinuities in sequential mound-building episodes have received scant attention. Discontinuity in individ:
ual mound construction for intervals of 200 to 900 years, followed by reoccupation and the addition of
new stages, is documented at numerous sites. Examples are presented and discussed. Mound reoccupation
, Boucher, Sylviane 25
% interpreted as a political strategy to fabricate mythic histories through co-option of older monuments,
and so Icgitimate new social orders with appeals to sacred authority.
Bodu, P. (see Julien, M_.) [16]
Bolen, Kathleen M. (California-Berkeley)
[34] CHANGING PERSPECTIVES: SOCIETAL CONSTRUCTION THROUGH CHILDREN
This paper explores children as producers of prehistory, and the role of children as agents in past socicties.
Drawing from the contributions of engendering past societies, our perspectives broaden further if we
consider children. Children are the conduit for social reproduction of groups, and they contribute to the
continuity or change interpreted in matcrial culture. Relying on Linearbandkeramik settlement sites which
represent colonization and implantation of the carliest villages in western Europe, this paper seeks to make
the past visible from the perspective of children and thus better understand the construction of these past
‘oti
Bonbage-Freund, Mary T. (Pennsylvania State)
[50] THE ETOWAH SITE (9BR1): A PALEOETHNOBOTANICAL ANALYSIS OF WILBANKS PHASE
CORN-COB FEATURES
This paleoethnobotanical evaluation of a pair of corn-cob dominated pits represents the first archacobotani-
cal investigation emerging from excavations at Etowah. Although Etowah is one of the best-known Mississip-
pian sites in the American Southeast, it has been inadequately documented. These maize-filled basins are
associated with an clite structure on a Wilbanks phase Mound B extension. A. R. Kelly identified this as a
@omicile in part based on proximity to these features. This study neither supports nor falsifies that classifica-
tion. My experimentation and analysis demonstrate that corn-cob pits filled a universal need at Etowah and
throughout the Southeast.
Bonnichsen, R. (see Frison, G.) | 56)
Soone, James L. (New Mexico) [Discussant 100]
Boone, James L, (New Mexico)
(27) IS IT EVOLUTION YET? A CRITIQUE OF SELECTIONIST PROGRAMS IN ARCHAEOLOGY
Over the past decade, two distinct theoretical programs based in contemporary Darwinian theory have
@eined prominence in archacology: 1) an evolutionary approach originally developed by Robert Dunnell and
2)evolutionary ecology. Somewhat confusingly, while both programs describe themselves as “selectionist” in
orentation, they differ considerably in what they are trying to explain and how they go about explaining
® This paper outlines the aims and tencts of cach program, shows how and why they differ, and offers
Some suggestions for a reconciliation between two approaches.
Borrero, Luis Alberto (Programa de Estudios Prebistoricos)
156] THE PLEISTOCENE-HOLOCENE TRANSITION IN SOUTHERN SOUTH AMERICA
By the end of the Pleistocene human populations were widely distributed in the Southern Cone, although
NRA ead Gisibabiby ety kine iae “Scamalsion period wil ctewacteriasdl by este ceuaniesd tescibaan
that included expansion of glaciers, explosive volcanic activity, and the opening of water barriers (Le.
Magellan Strait, Beagle Channel). Under those conditions populations were probably isolated enough to
Gevelop different histories, whose trajectories are traced for the period 13-8 ka B.P. using archacological
Gama from three regions. ‘
Bostwick, Todd W. (Pueblo Grande Museum) and Christian E, Downum (Northern Arizona)
[26] PUEBLO GRANDE: A CASE STUDY IN HOHOKAM SOCIO-POLITICAL ORGANIZATION
This paper examines the origins, growth, function, and abandonment of the Pucblo Grande platform
mound and its surrounding community. Drawing on a four-year archival analysis of past ieieaicsisuce
we provide architectural and artifactual details that document important changes in the mound’s function
from Soho to Civano phases, and again from Civano to Polvorén phases. Inferred activities on the mound
tp and in its surrounding compound are used to assess competing models of Hohokam socio-political
organization, particularly as these relate to Classic period phase transitions and collapse.
Soucher, Sylviane (Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Centro Regional de
Yucatan)
[29] THE IMPLICATIONS OF ELITE CERAMICS: CORRESPONDENCES BETWEEN CHICHEN ITZA
AND TULA
The wealth of impressive imported goods at Chichén Itza attests to this site's participation in a vigorous
system of extra-regional connections during the Early Postclassic. To date, however, the function of ceramics
® pan-Mesoamerican exchange has been poorly understood. This paper examines the role of imported
texury ceramics and homologous, locally produced copies in establishing symbolic correspondences among
, 26 Bouey, P.
politically independent entities across Mesoamerica. Examination of new ceramic data from recent CRY-
INAH field seasons at Chichén, compared with recently published information on Tula ceramics, presents
fresh empirical evidence on past-regional interaction.
Bouey, P. (see Hildebrandt, W.) (83)
Bousman, C. (see Lanata, Jose) |97|
Bove, Frederick (California-Santa Barbara)
[48] NEW CHRONOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE PACIFIC COAST OF
GUATEMALA
The juxtaposition of radiocarbon and archacomagnetic dates with a large obsidian hydration sample from
stratigraphic contexts has clarified key chronological periods within the Los Chatos-Manantial nuclear zone
of the Guatemala lower coast. These new dates have produced the first clear evidence for a distinctive
Middle Classic ceramic phase. Ramifications of these new data are discussed specifically in connection with
the regional state evolutionary developments, problems associated with the Teotihuacn chronology, and
the relation of the Los Chatos-Manantial polity with the Cotzumalguapa complex to the north.
Bowen, Jonathan (Obio Historical Society)
[35] NOTCHED BUTTERFLY BANNERSTONE DISTRIBUTIONS
Notched Butterfly Bannerstones of banded slate were used as atlat! components about 2000 B.C. They
are distributed throughout a 150,000 square km area centered in northwestern Ohio. Ninety per cent of
the preforms have been recovered from four production centers, which are located 70 km apart in the
midst of this area. None of these production centers is located near a concentration of the raw material,
Although attached to atlatls, Notched Butterfly Bannerstones served primarily as symbols.
Boyd, Carolyn E, (Texas AGM University) and J. Pbil Dering
[103] MEDICINAL AND HALLUCINOGENIC PLANTS IDENTIFIED IN THE SEDIMENTS AND
PICTOGRAPHS OF THE LOWER PECOS, TEXAS ARCHAIC
Medicinal and hallucinogenic plants excavated from rockshelters in the Lower Pecos Region of southwest
Texas are identified in the Pecos River Style rock art. These plants were recovered from general midden
contexts, hampering interpretation of their utilization by the Lower Pecos people. A review of the ethno-
graphic and ethnobotanical literature provides an explanation for the presence of these plants in the
archacological record. By providing textual clues to the use of hallucinogenic and medical plants, the
pictographs are demonstrated to be a vital part of the archacological record, a window into the socio-
cultural system of Archaic hunters and gatherers.
Brace, C. Loring (Michigan) | Discussant 27]
Bradford, Katherine (California State University, Northridge)
[19] ECOLOGICAL SUCCESSION IN KELP FOREST COMMUNITIES AND IMPLICATIONS FOR
INTERPRETING THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORD
<The impact of Holocene sea temperature fluctuation on prehistoric subsistence is the subject of much
debate. These shifts affected kelp forest communities on which many prehistoric coastal populations were
dependent for a portion of their food resources. Recent biological studies have documented the effects of
climatic shifts due to El Nifo-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events. A computer simulation model, based on
recent data, aids in illustrating changes that may have occurred as a result of ENSO and other conditions.
Bradley, Bruce (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center)
[89] PITCHERS TO MUGS: CHACOAN REVIVAL AND THE DEMISE OF THE MESA VERDE
TRADITION
By the end of the thirteenth century, the Mesa Verde region of the American Southwest was permanently
depopulated by ancestral Pucbloan peoples. The mid 1200s was a time of dramatic change in setticment
pattern, social organization, and control of natural resources. Evidence is presented that these changes are
associated with a revitalization movement based on aspects of the defunct Chacoan system. The relationship
of this revitalization movement to concurrent cultural changes to the south and its role in the ultimate
abandonment of the region are also discussed.
Brady, James (Dumbarton Oaks)
[44] SETTLEMENT, ARCHITECTURE, AND IDEOLOGY IN THE PETEXBATUN REGION,
GUATEMALA
The location and configuration of settlements are matters of first importance in any group's cultural
geography. There is abundant evidence that caves were considered to be so sacred by the Maya that they
were frequently incorporated into the structure of sites. The Petexbarun Regional Cave Survey has discovered
a pronounced pattern of constructing architecture in relation to caves which suggests that caves may have
, Broughton, J. 27
tefeenced the choice of site location and structured the layout of architecture. Enough examples exist to
raise the possibility that caves may have been considered an essential feature for validating site location.
Bray, Tamara L. (Smithsonian Institution), Javier Urcid (Smithsonian Institution) and Gary
P. Aronsen (Smithsonian Institution)
119] COMPLEX ISSUES IN THE DETERMINATION OF THE CULTURAL AFFILIATION OF HUMAN
REMAINS
A recent repatriation involving the Warm Springs Tribes and the Smithsonian Institution illustrates the
| @Sculty of determining cultural affiliations of human remains in muscums. The remains were recovered
toe burial islands near the Dalles, Oregon, a convergence point for coastal, plateau, and basin cultures.
‘Though coastal groups traditionally engaged in cranial reshaping, the trait did not prove culturally diagnostic
ven that it also marked intra-group status. Within a context of multi-ethnic use areas, stratified societies,
 @ed mixed, multiple burials, precise cultural identifications proved impossible, even for historic period
remains. This case highlights the necessity of engaging all potentially affiliated tribes in discussions about
the disposition of specific remains.
Brennan, Sheila C. (Massachusetts-Amberst), Blytbe E. Roveland (Massacbusetts-Amberst),
and H. Martin Wobst (Massachusetts-Amberst)
(34! PREHISTORY'S CHILDREN AND CHILDREN’S PREHISTORIES
Why is it that children’s lives in the past have been underrepresented by archacology and archacologists?
Wiest messages do contemporary children receive about prehistory and prehistory’s children? This paper
@ereduces an overview of how children, both as consumers and producers of material culture in the past
tere been and might be researched by archacologists. It questions some of the perceived and assumed
herriers to an organized inclusion of children in legitimate research agendas. We also examine some of the
wars in which children learn about prehistory and the extent to which children are present in these
pecoestructions of the past.
Brenton, B. (see Levine, M.) |44|
Sreternitz, Cory (Soil Systems, Inc.), Michael S. Foster (Soil Systems, Inc.), and Christine K.
Rodinson (Soll Systems, Inc.)
l] HOHOKAM REGIONAL EXCHANGE DURING THE CLASSIC PERIOD AS VIEWED FROM
PUEBLO GRANDE
Sixteen months of excavation at the large Hohokam site of Pueblo Grande in the Phoenix Basin in central
Setmona has resulted in recovery of information that broadens current knowledge of Hohokam regional
exchange during the Classic period. New information on obsidian, intrusive ceramics, lithic raw material,
aed shell indicates that some procurement networks were more extensive than previously thought while
thers appear to have become more restricted, The data are summarized and existing models and interpreta-
Sees of Classic period Hohokam regional economics are evaluated as is the distribution of such items across
_ Geuseholds in the project area
| Srewington, R. (see Sbafer, H.) [87] 4
Brewington, Robbie L. (Texas AGM Untversity) and Harry J. Shafer (Texas AGM University)
$89] GENERATIONAL CYCLES AND RATES OF CHANGE IN MIMBRES BLACK-ON-WHITE POTTERY
Seylistic changes within Mimbres Black-on-white Styles |, U1, and Il are evidgnt in seriations of ceramic
_ wessels from the NAN Ruin, middle Mimbres Valley, Grant County, New Mexico. The rates of change are
| Geed using both stratigraphic and chronometric measures. An examination of these rates of change reveals
= cegularity that is thought to be related to generational cycles. These generational cycles are equated to
_ Secman’s “analytical individual” (1977:44). }
Brisbin, J. (see Blinman, E.) |19|
Brose, David (Royal Ontario Museum) :
ee] EXCAVATIONS AT 33ME274, A DATED IN SITU CLOVIS SITE IN NORTHEAST OHIO
[ The initial human occupation of post-glacial northeast Ohio occurred on soils washed from kame terraces
Serecen 13,100 and 11,700 B.P. (6 dates). Domestic activities between 11,060 and 10,800 B.P. (3 dates)
@e represented by four discrete 150 m/square zones of post-holes, hearths and pits of several forms,
| eeetaining Clovis/Gaincy points and a large assemblage of other worn and curated Paleoindian tools and
Sebitage, of which 60% are of exotic cherts and flints. The site is sealed by 9,230 + 80 B.P. (1 date) colluvial
. sediments from an Early Archaic occupation. Ancillary paleo-environmental data and cautious demographic
| (peculations are offered.
i
_ Broughton, J. (see Baybam, F.) |65|
:
b
, 28 Broughton, Jack

Broughton, Jack (Washington)

[61] AN EVOLUTIONARY ANALYSIS OF LATE HOLOCENE MAMMAL EXPLOITATION AROUND SAN
FRANCISCO BAY, CALIFORNIA

Late Holocene archacological mammal faunas from the San Francisco Bay shoreline document dramatic
linear declines through time in the abundance of artiodactyls relative to sea otters. Causes for this change
are evaluated through analyses of paleoenvironmental and other data from geological and archacological
sources, The changes in mammal exploitation do not correlate with changes in the estuarine and terrestrial
environments. Extant data suggest that the patterning in mammal exploitation may be related to over-
harvesting of artiodactyl prey. Preliminary results from analyses of the demographic structure of the artiodac-
tyl prey provide a test for this hypothesis.

Brown, David (Texas-El Paso)
[15] TOWN PLANNING IN INKA PROVINCIAL ADMINISTRATION AT PUMPU, CENTRAL PERUVIAN
HIGHLANDS

Investigations at the site of Pumpu in the Department of Pasco, Peru, have yielded new information
concerning the organization and utilization of space at Inka provincial capitals. Similar in many ways to
the nearby administrative center at Huanuco Pampa, Pumpu is nonetheless distinctive in certain aspects.
Excavations indicate that a large portion of the site may be devoted to workshops. Additionally, stratigraphic
separation of Inka components at the site suggest a series of changes through time, perhaps related to
historical changes in the Inka Empire itself.

Brown, J, (See Murpby, L.) | 58)

Brown, J. (see Rogers, A.) |35|

Brown, James A. (Northwestern University)

[96] TYPOLOGY FOR THE 90s—WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?

Although typology will always have a central role in the practice of archaeology, a legitimate question
to pose is whether the practice of typology has changed in response to a broadening of the discipline's
goals and purposes that we have seen in the last decade. Many of the expectations that we have of typology
have not changed all that much from the time of Montelius. But certain strengths and weaknesses of various
approaches have emerged that offer useful guides to future practice. Such advances have come mainly
through a clarification of ends as archaeology has emerged as a discipline with an agenda of its own,
Bruchez, Margaret (Texas AGM University) and Michelle Woodward (Texas A&M)

[10] PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF SURFACE SURVEYS, DEPARTMENT OF SOLOLA, SOUTHERN
MAYA HIGHLANDS, GUATEMALA

This report outlines preliminary findings of systematic extensive and intensive surface surveys, surface

collections and data analyses of cultural features of terrestrial surfaces of the high plateau and lake shore
portion of the northern end of the basin of Lake Atitlan in the southern Maya Highlands. A rather sparse

record of previous archacological work at this location has caused a basic outline of cultural development

to be unknown. The research strategy is explained which was developed to determine the nature and

sequence of Preclassic to colonial events in the area long characterized as a “frontier” between not only

Maya and pre-Maya peoples, but also Quiche, Cakchiquel, and Tzutujil speaking Maya.

Bruguier, L. (see Zimmerman, L.) |93|

Brumfiel, Elizabeth M. (Albion College)

[8] INTRODUCTION

Three seasons of survey and excavation at Xaltocan, Mexico, have defined the resources available to the
occupants of the site and the changing patterns of resource utilization, A.D, 800-1500. This paper reviews
the problems that guided research at Xaltocan, describes ficidwork at the site, and discusses the C-14 dates
obtained for the various phases of prehispanic occupation.

Brunswig, Jr., Robert H. (Northern Colorado)
[66] TERMINAL PALEOINDIAN AND EARLY ARCHAIC CULTURE DYNAMICS AND PROCESS OF
NORTHEASTERN COLORADO'S HIGH PLAINS AND ROCKY MOUNTAINS

One model of Early Archaic culture dynamics in the Western High Plains suggests that hot, arid Altithermal
conditions effectively isolated regional populations in mountain and foothill “refugia.” Later “re-occupation”
of plains environments only occurred with amelioration of harsh Altithermal conditions after 4500 B.P.
University of Northern Colorado research data suggest that a “hybridized” Terminal Paleoindian/Early Archaic
cultural complex population may have exploited plains areas more than a hundred kilometers cast of
northeastern Colorado's foothills through much, if not all, of the Altithermal. Other evidence suggests that
increasingly intensive plains exploitation began more than a thousand years prior to the end of Altithermal
conditions, between 6000 and 5500 B.P.
, Burney, David A. 29
Brusb, Nigel (Akron)
(88) THE MARTINS MASTODON: A PALEOINDIAN BUTCHERY SITE IN HOLMES COUNTY,
OHIO
A mastodon was discovered in 1938 by a farmer cutting a shallow drainage ditch. Eight teeth and a thigh
bone were recovered. Further excavation was not attempted. In the summer of 1993 undisturbed portions
of the site were excavated by students from the University of Akron. Bones of the disarticulated skelcton
were scattered over an areca of 50 square meters. Among the bones were six medium-size flint flakes and
ewo crude flint cools.
Bryson, R. (see Bryson, R.U.) |83]|
Bryson, Robert U, (INFOTEC Research) and Reid A. Bryson (Wisconsin-Madison)
183] A COMPARISON OF CULTURAL EVIDENCE AND SIMULATED HOLOCENE CLIMATES OF THE
PACIFIC NORTHWEST
Hunter-gatherer land-use strategies represent the articulation of a cultural system with an ecosystem. The
wesource base upon which a particular strategy depends is strongly influenced by changes in local climate
Serough time and across geographic space. Local paleoclimates were simulated using a hierarchical macro-
physical model (extended to account for local topography) relying on calculated glacial area, insolation,
andi modulation of insolation. The archacological record for several well-documented sites is compared
with simulations of the local climate.
Suck, Paul E. (Desert Research Institute) and Anne DuBarton (Desert Research Institute)
175] A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE RESULTS OF THE 1963-64 FIELD SEASON AT PINTWATER
CAVE IN SOUTHERN NEVADA
Pintwater Cave, a large cave 50 miles northwest of Las Vegas containing dry stratified deposits and
s#undant organic artifacts, was tested in 1963/64 by archaeologists from the Nevada State Museum and
UCLA. A collection of approximately 2000 artifacts was made which has just been inventoried and analyzed,
The archacological materials have '*C dates ranging from 9200-3200 B.P. Points from the cave include
Minto, Elko, and Gypsum Cave varieties, some evidently reworked while still hafted. More than 100 arrow
and dart shaft fragments were recovered, some with decoration, fletching, or remnant stonc points. The
collection also includes packrat midden samples and faunal remains.
Buckland, P. (see McGovern, T.) | 46]
Suikstra, Jane (Chicago) | Discussant 106}
Sullock, Peter (Museum of New Mexico)
[19] IS OLD ALWAYS HISTORIC? THE GLENCOE INCINERATOR SITE
Early 20th century industrial sites present unique archacological problems. The sites are old cnough to
be considered historic, but young enough to be perceived as recent. The sites are readily demolished and
their related documents are readily discarded. These sites fit the 50 year rule, but are they actually worth
an excavation? is documentation enough? Should higtoric preservation laws be strictly applied to these sites?
One 20th century industrial site, the Glencoe Viti hactacsiaiy located near Chicago, Illinois, is examined.
Problems are described and solutions shared. Official cooperation and persistence in uncovering new sources
of documentation are considered top priorities.
Burger, R. (see Glascock, M.) |19| ‘
Burger, Richard (Yale University)
[15] INITIAL PERIOD COPPER METALLURGY ON THE CENTRAL COAST OF PERU
Recent excavations at the Initial Period site of Mina Perdida in the Lurin Vallcy ha yielded evidence
of small fragments of thin copper sheet dating to approximately FIG hese Sreabliats exenlaiie he
oldest known case of copper working in Peru. Preliminary SEM analyses suggest that the metal is probably
mative Copper and studies of the specimen's microstructure Be a eee ce ieee ae
was annealed. The antiquity and archaeological context of this have interesting implications for modeling
the early development of metallurgy in the Central Andes.
Burgess, R. (see Hoffecker, J.) |94|
Burney, David A. (Fordbam University)
[79] THE CONSEQUENCES OF HUMAN ARRIVAL IN MADAGASCAR, PUERTO RICO, AND THE
HAWAIIAN ISLANDS
inter-island paleoecological comparisons have provided useful information concerning the role of human
| vs. background-level disturbance in tropical ecosystems. Although prehuman vegetation changes and distur-
bance regimes are well-documented, major ecological changes have occurred since human arrival in Madagas-
car, Puerto Rico, and the Hawaiian Islands. Instructive inter-island differences have been detected in the
|
;
, 30 Burton, James .
chronology, distribution, and extent of human activities, vegetation changes, and biotic extinctions. The
decline of endemic faunas following human arrival appears to be a common feature of these and many other
tropical oceanic island histories, with habitat modification, over-hunting, and exotic species invasions as
likely Causes. .
Burton, James (Wisconsin)
[54] BARIUM AND STRONTIUM
Bone levels of barium and strontium reflect dictary Ba/Ca and Sr/Ca ratios, Barium levels reflect the dietary <
ratio of marine to terrestrial resources, and both elements exhibit trophic level effects. However, intrinsic
variability, environmental effects, post-depositional contamination, and other factors also significantly affect
bone levels of these elements. Barium and strontium data cannot be correlated with dict without an
assessment of these effects. Barium and strontium have problematic potential. but this is not the case
for other elements. The archacological literature notwithstanding. use of other clemental abundances as
paleodictary indicators should not be attempted.
Burton, J. (see Simon, A.) (42)
Burton, James H. (Wisconsin-Madison), Arleyn W. Simon (Artzona State), and David R.
Abbott (Arizona State)
[42] INTERREGIONAL CONNECTIONS IN THE DEVELOPMENT AND DISTRIBUTION OF SALADO
POLYCHROMES IN CENTRAL ARIZONA
Gila polychromes are associated with Salado sites across much of the Southwest, bur the distribution of
these decorated vessels is variable. Although multiple production centers are recognized for these vessels,
their roles in the interregional social networks are still open te interpretation Recent detailed compositional
studies provide a backdrop of locally produced wares against which the characterization of Gila Polychromes
can be compared. Data from several adjacent study regions are ased to assess the Gewelopment and distribu-
tions of Pinto, Gila, and Tonto Polychrome. The domestic and special soceal poles of these decorated vessels
as part of an interregional network of exchange and communication arc cxamuned
Butler, B. (see Ambrose, S.) |54| ;
Butler, Brian M. (Southern Ilinois)
[94] PALEOENVIRONMENT, EARLY SETTLEMENT, AND THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORD OF THE
MARIANA ISLANDS
Archaeologists in Micronesia have begun 10. mows beyoed time-space systematics and site description to
look at paleoenvironments and the complex relationships of those enviroments co human settlement in
these islands. Recent work on the west coast of Saipan prowides cuampics of the complexities of the
archacological record of early settlement in the Mariana Islands from 3500)5000 BLP. This work documents
significant changes in coastal land form and cmvironments since inital human settlement and makes clear
that the-record of the earliest occupations om the island bas bees greatly impacted by shorcline changes.
Butler, Virginia (Colorado) and James C Chatters (Nort American Paleascience)
* [17] ON THE IMPORTANCE OF BONE DENSITY DN STREDCTUREING PREHISTORIC SALMON BONE
ASSEMBLAGES (1993 Winning Poster, Professional Non-stademt Category)
Archacologists working in the Pacific Nortinwest afer saggeest the flow frogecacy of salmon cranial elements
and abundance of vertebrae in prehistoric deposits reflects the celteral exe of toced & While empirical
documentation of salmon storage is Certainly Gmportant, analysts seas comsider Mic role of bone density in
accounting for body part frequencies Bome demsities of repecseumstive coamtal and postcranial clements
from ten chinook salmon ( Oncorhynchus tshawp techs jakictons wert mezsered eng X-c2y absorptiometry.
The role of bone density in structuring preheserc samen aeembiges & captered thevugh compurisons
of density measures with clement survivoctep obtained hom several coastal and qutand Piatcau sites.
Butler, Virginia L. (Colorado) and Christopber F. Gaythowaas (0S. Geodagtcel Surrey)
[97] RECENT FIELD INVESTIGATIONS AT THE DALLES BOADCEUT. COLL MEBL4 RIVER, OREGON
Originally excavated in the 1950s_ the SS) 700 peer oft scmoeed eomeees Seen The Dalles Roadcut
site have provided the most compelling cudcece fe cecty Sotecese Steg @ Ge Paceic Northwest
Questions about the cultural origins of the Ssh roumaees otra’ Geetber GeSt Greet: May-June 1993.
Sedimentological attributes (deposit shape, partacke emee anal shame) eather cer processes largely are
responsible for the sediments cocasag the Ssh remaie & Ghee aqper vers begpcesers of these findings
to the question of fish bone origin are capleced.
Butzer, Karl W. (Texas-Austin)
[39] PEOPLE AND THE LAND: BOOULOGY 0' THE LONG IES
Recent limnological work in Central Mexico seers Get eeigeeees Geel ee poeweted episodes of soil -
erosion as early as 1900 B.C_ and Ghat soll Gestemectiers peas Gaetng Gee § Qeeeemes preer co the Spanish
, Cameron, Judi 31
Conquest. Erosion did not increase during the first 250 years of the Colonial cra. This corroborates massive
archival evidence that initial Colonial land use did not lead to ecological deterioration, We must now move
from presupposition to empirical monitoring of long-term, land use histories: Latin Americanists have casually
oversimplified, even misrepresented the role of traditional agropastoral systems of Old World origin in the
New, introducing false assumptions into archacological models. To the contrary, some 3 dozen long-term
palynological records from around the Meditcrrancan Basin demonstrate that traditional agropastoral land
use across 8 millennia has generally been conservative and ecologically adaptive, with managed grazing, by
means of controlled use of fire, since 4000 B.C. Ecosystems are the product of millennia of co-evolution
between the environment and human activities. The complexity of ecological issues facing society today
demands expanded inter-disciplinary interaction, Archacologists are uniqucly equipped to document and
model long-term settlement and land-use historics.
Buyce, R. (see Adovasio, J.) (69
Buyce, R. (see Velichko, A.) |69|
Byland, Bruce (Lebman College & Graduate Center, CUNY)
[55] IDEOLOGY AND THE INTERREGIONAL DEFINITION OF POWER IN POSTCLASSIC OAXACA
The leaders of ancient Oaxacan polities were able to manipulate a complex ideological landscape to suit
their changing political motives. The compartmentalization of supernatural power among the independent
states of Postclassic Oaxaca made possible the justification of war as well as the building of enduring peace.
This paper will examine some iconographic evidence for religious compartmentalization as well as the
ideological basis for the definition of political relationships between polities of the Mixteca Alta and the
Valley of Oaxaca in the Postclassic.
Byram, R. Scott (Oregon) and Mark Tveskov (Oregon)
[35] WOOD STAKE FISHING WEIR SITES ON THE OREGON COAST
Ethnographic literature indicates salmon fishing was a key subsistence practice among southern Northwest
Coast cultures, but to date there have been few archacological correlates to this activity, Recent archacologi-
cal surveys of estuaries on the Oregon coast have located 15 wet sites containing remains of fishing weirs.
These sites are providing substantial data regarding subsistence and technology on the Oregon coast. The
fishing weirs are located on intertidal mud flats along the shores of estuaries. These features consist of linear
arrangements of vertical wooden stakes which are often accompanied by horizontal wooden clement, and
in some cases, stone net sinkers and woven lattice of wood and cedar bark cordage Limited radiocarbon
dating of these features indicates they were used during late prehistoric and early historic times, Three
basic weir configurations have been defined, and these are considered in terms of functional weir types
described in the cthnographic literature of the region.
Byrd, B. (see Collins, R_) |88)
Cabrera, Oralia (Escuela Nacional de Antbropologia)
[30] LAPIDARY ARTIFACT PRODUCTION AT TE CAN
Recent excavations at the Pyramid of the eae Wegaee Teotihuacan, have exposed a large number
of sacrificial burials, most associated with claborate offerings. An analysis of lapidary techniques employed
in the manufacture of artifacts of jadeite, serpentine, and other precious and non-local stone, as well as their
form and stylistic attributes, is currently underway. A comparison of these offerings with similar objects
produced by specialists working in other materials (prinfarily obsidian and ceramics) is providing new
insights into the narure of craft production at Teotihuacan.
Cachora, Lorey (Quechan Indian Tribe)
[86] LEGENDS OF THE YUMA-SPEAKING PEOPLES: LOWER COLORADO RIVER PETOREN
CALIFORNIA AND ARIZONA
Principal legends of the Quechan and Mojave peoples, such as the creation epic and the great migrations,
are associated with known localities along the lower Colorado Rives and neighboring deserts. Prominent
in all legends is the place of the Creation beginning at Spirit Mountain, or Avikwame, located north and
west of Laughling, Nevada. Reference is made to many sites where archaeological remains are present. This
discussion exemplifies the need for integrating ethnology and the archaeological record in the reconstruction
of past human adaptations in this region.
Cameron, Judi (Arizona State)
[98] DIFFERENCES IN FAUNAL UTILIZATION AT LARGE AND SMALL HABITATION SITES IN THE
TONTO BASIN, ARIZONA
Shifts in population from small dispersed communities to larger aggregated settlements have been docu-
mented throughout the North Amcrican Southwest. These shifts affected social and cconomic organization,
including subsistence strategies. Analyses of faunal remains from large and smal! habitation sites in the Tonto
>
, 32 Camilli, E.
Basin of Arizona show that faunal utilization in general, and artiodactyl use in particular, is greater at the
larger settlements. This implies a shift in procurement strategies as the primary habitat for artiodactyls is
in the uplands surrounding the basin. Economic, social, and ceremonial explanations for increased faunal
use at larger settlements are addressed in this paper.
Camilli, E. (see Cassell, M.) (35)
Canaday, T. (see Price, B.) |83}
Caneva, Isabella (University di Roma)
[4] EARLY SETTLEMENT SITES OF THE EASTERN TAURUS: A CONTRIBUTION FROM THE AREAS
OF CAYONU AND MERSIN
Recent research in the Ergani plain, at the southeastern fringes of the Taurus, has provided new data on
the ancient settlement pattern and cultural continuity of the region. Test excavations were made seeking
occupations that continued the cultural sequence of CayOnu. A continuation during the 6th millennium
B.C. is seen in a stratified contiguous site which shows links with the Levantine contemporary ceramic
cultures. A parallel sequence of early ceramic cultures at Mersin, south of the Taurus, is now being re-
examined. It shows features better related to central Anatolia and may provide a more articulated perspective
of these carly periods.
Cannon, Kenneth P. (Midwest Archaeological Center-National Park Service) and Richard E.
Hugbes (Geochemical Research Laboratory)
[105] EMERGING PATTERNS OF OBSIDIAN UTILIZATION IN YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK
Although obsidian characterization studies have been prosecuted in the Yellowstone vicinity for nearly
three decades the results, based on relatively small samples, indicated that only local sources were used.
Recent studies have increased the sample size and support a new view of past obsidian exploitation. Contrary
to previous work, our studies identified utilization of at least seven chemically distinct geologic sources
(some over 280 km from Yellowstone), the use of which varied in frequency over the past 10,000 years.
We discuss the patterning in these obsidian data insofar as they bear on models of regional settlement and
lithic resource utilization.
Cartyle, S. (see O'Rourke, D.) [90
Carpenter, Jobn (Arizona)
[7] THE CAHITAN CONNECTION: MODELING MESOAMERICAN INTERACTION IN THE GRAN
CHICHIMECA
Explaining the material and ideological components of Mesoamerican origin found within northern Mexico
and the American Southwest has long been the source of archacological intrigue and theoretical speculation.
A significant aspect of many of these models is concerned with bridging what is often characterized as an
intervening cultural “netherworld.” Linguistic, ethnographic and archacological data from Sinaloa and Sonora
suggest that prehispanic Cahitan-speaking peoples occupied both a spatially and culturally intermediate
position, and provided a continuous link between Mesoamerica/W est Mexico and the international border.
« Carr, Christopber (Arizona State)
[51] A CROSSCULTURAL SURVEY OF THE IDEATIONAL AND SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF
MORTUARY PRACTICES
A Human Relations Area Files survey of ideational, social organizational and other determinants of mortuary
practices was made for 31 societies, world-wide. Specific mortuary variables that are most useful for recon-
structing specific aspects of ideation and specific dimensions of social organization are identified. [deational
factors were observed as frequently as social factors to determine mortuary practices, generally, but shift
in balance with social complexity. Common hypotheses in mortuary archacology for reconstructing social
organization are tested. Strong support is found for Hertz’s hypothesis, that some mortuary practices are
social attempts to manipulate the state of the soul of the deceased
Carr, Kurt (Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission), CL. Pedler (Mercyburst
College), and D.C. Dirkmaat (Mercyburst College)
[69] MATERIAL CULTURE STUDIES AT MEZHIRICH, 1993
The material culture of the late Upper Pleistocene tnhabitamts of Mezhirich was rich in sheer numbers
of items, diverse in exploited raw materials, and quite distinctive both im terms of products as well as
manufacturing processes. This contribution explores the Gthic rechnology of the site in terms of reduction
strategies, tool categories, lithic procurement. and toof-ase. The use of non-local exotics (i.¢., amber and
“gagat”) and the manufacture of non-durable and rarely recovered items (¢.g., cordage ) are also discussed.
Carroll, Mary S. (CAP Repository) and Dale R. Gerken
[63] INFORMATION MANAGEMENT EN ARCHAEOLOGY: A BROADER PERSPECTIVE
Computerization of databases utilized in archecologscal Geld progects and repositorics is common-place
today. The design of ficld and lab databases can hewe long-term effects at the repository, both positive and
, Chambers, Karen and James R. Purdue 33
negative. The system used by the Central Arizona Project Repository will be discussed in terms of the
integration of the information needs of archaeological projects with those of archaeological repositories.
Some of the issues to be addressed in this paper include planning and design of computerized systems, data
standardization, data redundancy, long-term usability of data, and field/lab approaches to computerization
versus repository approaches to computerization.
Carter, Brinnen (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[35] THE EARLIEST HOLOCENE RECORD ON THE PAGE/LADSON SITE (8JE591), AUCILLA RIVER,
FLORIDA
The Bolen age strata of the Aucilla River, Florida, yield a rich variety of cultural and non-cultural organic
and inorganic remains. Ongoing work at the Page/Ladson site (8JE591) has yielded an inundated occupation
layer radiocarbon dated to circa 10,000 years B.P. The Bolen period stratum is characterized by a highly
compacted, organic soil that has chert, bone, and wooden artifacts perched on its upper surface. Wooden
stakes penetrate the entire layer. The presence of charcoal, grey limestone, and stakes with charred ends
suggests an occupation site. A site plan and an analysis of recovered artifacts will be presented.
Cassell, Mark §. (SUNY-Bingbamton) Albert A. Dekin, Jr. (SUNY-Bingbamton), Eileen Camilli,
and Janet Kerley
[35] THE EXXON VALDEZ OIL SPILL ARCHAEOLOGICAL DAMAGE ASSESSMENT PROJECT
in 1991, Binghamton University was contracted by the USDA-Forest Service to conduct investigations
into potential physical and chemical injuries to cultural resources which were attributable to the 1989
Exxon Valdez oil spill and subsequent cleanup efforts in the Gulf of Alaska. The research found no evidence
directly linking the oil spill with identified injuries to archacological resources at the locations examined
by the project. Nonetheless, the injury data gathered was invaluable for better understanding recognized
ongoing sources of natural disturbance (¢.g., crosion); previously unrecognized sources of human distur-
bances (¢.g., petroleum hydrocarbons from watercraft); and ongoing, long-term human land use at specific
resource-rich locales.
Cassman, Vicki (Arizona State) and Bernardo Arriaza (Nevada-Las Vegas)
: [22] TOWARD A DEFINITION OF CHINCHORRO
The Chinchorro culture is relatively unknown to most anthropologists and archacologists despite the
early dates, and their unique complex artificial mummification practices. This is partially duc to the sporadic
nature of past studies and the publication of findings and commentary in lesser known, or local South
American journals. International interest in the Chinchorro problem has increased substantially in the last
year as scholars from various disciplines have begun to piece together the role of the Chinchorro in Andean
. Prehistory.
Castillo, Luis Jaime (California-Los Angeles)
[77] THE MOCHE STATES OF NORTHERN PERU: SOCIO-POLITICAL STRUCTURES AND POWER
. STRATEGIES
The Moche of northern Peru did not constitute a ae unified political structure, but a number of
independent entities that followed different developmental sequences. In this paper | examine the social
and political structures of the different Moche states during the transition between the Early Intermediate
and the Middle Horizon Periods. Two aspects that will be central to my discussion are the emphasis given
by Moche elites in their power strategy to the ideological realm, and to exchange contacts with the Wari
derived societies of the central coast. 1 will argue that these Wo aspects contributed both to the demise
of the Moche, and to the origin of societies that follow in the north coast.
Cerrato, R. (see Bernstein, D.) {92}
. Chadwick, Tara ‘
[93] ARCHAEOLOGY: JUST ANOTHER FORM OF COLONIALISM? A LOOK AT ARCHAEOLOGY IN
BELIZE
. This paper will addreas the topic of archacology as‘a force of colonialism in the country of Belize, where
excavations are directed primarily by forcigners from Canada, England, or “The States.” Archacologists
digging up other peoples’ cultural remains must consider the effects of their presence in the modern
; community. We also need to continually re-examine the benefits of archacological investigation and weigh
these against the costs that our work incurs.
Chambers, Karen (Pennsylvania State) and James R. Purdue (Illinois State Museum)
[35] GENETICS OF PAST POPULATIONS: THE ANALYSIS OF mtDNA FROM ARCHAEOLOGICAL
BISON
= Bison herd size and distribution from the late Pleistocene throughout the Holocene are considered critical
factors in interpretations of early human subsistence strategies in the New World. We extracted DNA from
ee — — ———_———_— ee
, 34 Chartkoff, Joseph
both extant bison and from bison skeletal remains from bone bed sites of varying ages including Glenrock |
in Wyoming, Big Bone Lick in Kentucky and Hudson-Meng in Nebraska. Variation within the hypervariable
D-loop region of the mitochondrial genome is examined for evidence of population depiction or expansion.
Chartkoff, Joseph (Michigan State)

{11] EXCHANGE SYSTEMS AND SOCIOPOLITICAL COMPLEXITY IN THE CENTRAL SIERRAS: THE

IMPACT OF COASTAL COLONIZATION ON INLAND COMMUNITIES

Carrying capacity, in terms of population size, density and organizational complexity, is affected by flows
of matter and energy between systems as well as circulation within systems. For the Sierra Miwok, participa:
tion in regional exchange allowed them to out populate and competitively displace their Proto-Yurok
predecessors while achieving degrees of sociopolitical complexity that peaked by A.D. 1700. Later coloniza-
tion of the coast by Spain climinated some key Miwok exchange partners as well as their monetary system,
producing declines in complexity and density to ethnographically-known levels.

Chase, Diane (Central Florida)

[106] SOUTHERN LOWLAND MAYA ARCHAEOLOGY AND HUMAN SKELETAL REMAINS:
INTERPRETATIONS FROM CARACOL (BELIZE), TAYASAL (GUATEMALA), AND SANTA RITA
COROZAL (BELIZE)

Skeletal samples from Caracol, Santa Rita Corozal, and Tayasal permit the construction of separate palcode-
mographic reconstructions. These samples, when placed within their archaeological context, allow dia-
chronic comparison of the prehistoric Maya in three different locations—inland, coastal, and lacustrine.
This paper has three goals, First, it compares and contrasts paleodemographic patterns in different parts of
the Southern lowlands, Second, it examines the relationship between burial recovery and settlement pattern .
population density estimates. And third, it looks at the clustering of paleopathological traits and skeletal
modifications in terms of their archacological interpretation, particularly with regard to status and/or genetic
relationships.

Chatters, J.C. (see Butler, V.) |17|

Cheetbam, David (Belize Valley Archaeological Reconnaissance Project) |

[76] ANCIENT ROADWAYS, ELITE RITUAL AND SETTLEMENT PATTERNS OF THE MAYA: RECENT

EVIDENCE FROM CAHAL PECH, CAYO, BELIZE

Recent investigations within the periphery of Cahal Pech, Cayo, Belize have demonstrated Classic Period
ties between specialized ceremonial/architectural groupings and sociopolitical power as manifest in warfare
and elite ritual. Evidence includes two elaborate vaulted tombs (ca. 600 A.D.) within a pyramidal structure
at the terminus of a Causeway, or sacbe. Tomb contents include an elite burial with iconographic evidence
of warfare and a “stela tomb” containing a carved monument as the primary internment.

Childs, S. Terry (Smithsonian Institution)

[12] HAMMERING OUT THE SOCIO-POLITICAL DYNAMICS OF TRON-WORKING IN CENTRAL

AFRICA
* The relationships between the production of iron and the social, political, and religious contexts in which
it has developed over the last 1500 years in Central Africa are intimate and complex. This paper cxamines
these intricate relationships among the Luba peoples and their predecessors in southeastern Zaire by focusing
on the use and meaning of the anvil. This object is the most important tool for iron forging and a key symbol
of the political authority and spiritual power that affects all aspects of Luba social life.

Chilton, Elizabeth S. (Massachusetts-Amberst)

[96] CONFRONTING COMPLEXITY: MATERIAL CULTURE IN HISTORICAL CONTEXT

By imposing order on the infinitely complex material world, archacologists facilitate communication
between professionals and gain a sense of control over the past. However, the rigid utilization of nominal
variables, or types, can mask complexity and historical processes. In New England, Late Woodland cultures
(1000-1500 AD) are poorly understood; the typological approach seriously limits understanding of both
artifact and cultural variabiliry. An attribute analysis, utilizing continuous variables and category grading,
offers a more dynamic alternative. In this study, an attribute analysis on ceramics from the Middle Connecticut
River Valley provides a way to confront multiformity, and allows for a more active history of Native peoples.
Chimonas, Susan (Michigan)

[8] THE OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY OF PREHISPANIC XALTOCAN, MEXICO

Intensive surface collection at Xaltocan, Mexico, provides a strong base for the reconstruction of the
site's occupational history. Changes in ceramic frequency distributions from Early to Late Aztec times

~ indicate changes in Xaltocan's population size and internal organization as the town came under the control
of the Aztec state. This information, in turn, provides a basis for understanding the political, social, and
, Clark, Mary 35
| cconomic consequences of Aztec political unification upon this previously autonomous scttiement in the
northern Basin of Mexico.
Chippendale, Christopber (Cambridge University) and David Pendergast (Royal Ontario
Museum)
[38] ETHICS, KNOWLEDGE AND PUBLICATION
The Society's working groups has taken its view on ethics from the premiss that the archacological record
is a common good held in public trust. The same goes for the written and unwritten knowledge that
researchers develop from those physical materials, which again should be in the public domain. The special
cases are addressed where the public trust requires knowledge to be kept hidden (¢.g., locations of sites
at risk if their whereabouts is known). The special conditions are also addressed when private interests, of
the researcher or another, may for a time reserve knowledge from the public domain.
Cinquino, M. (see Hayward, M.) | 102}
Ciolek-Torrello, Richard (Statistical Research, Inc.) and Stephanie M. Whittlesey (Statistical
Research, Inc.)
[7] THE DEVELOPMENT OF FORMATIVE CULTURE IN SOUTHERN ARIZONA
Previously accepted views posit that the Hohokam, carly Mesoamerican migrants, were the source of
village life in this region. Within the last decade, however, the discovery of a series of sites dating to the
first centuries A.D. and a recent shortening of the Hohokam chronology reveal that sedentary, agricultural,
and ceramic-producing villages predated the appearance of the distinctive Hohokam culture, Comparison
of early subsistence patterns, architecture, and additional aspects of material culture with other regions of
| the Southwest suggest the existence of an early pan-Southwestern culture. This conception raises questions
about the ontogeny of later Formative cultures in the Southwest
Clark, G. (see Barton, C_) |27|
Clark, Geoffrey A. (Arizona State)
[2] CONCEPTUAL ISSUES BEARING ON MODERN HUMAN ORIGINS IN THE LEVANT AND
| WESTERN ASIA
Controversy surrounding the biological and cultural origins of modern humans in the Levant and western
Asia illustrates the effects of paradigm bias in our efforts to make sense of the human past. The debate
is re-examined by focusing on conceptual issucs in evolutionary biology. It is argued that, until paleo-
anthropologists confront the inferential bases for their knowledge claims, there is no prospect of resolving
any significant question in human origins research.
Clark, J. (see Blake, M.) |59|
Clark, J. (see Craig, D.) | 26)
Clark, J. (see Jabren, H.) |25)
Clark, Jeffrey (North Dakota State) and Elizabeth Writs (School of the Arts Institute-
Chicago)
[6] INTERACTIONS WITHIN AND BEYOND THE SAMOAN ARCHIPELAGO: EVIDENCE FROM
BASALT AND VOLCANIC GLASS GEOCHEMISTRY
The islands of Samoa are critically important for understanding the prehistory of the Central Pacific. It has
long been known that pre-historic Samoans had long-term socioecogomic interactions with the inhabitants of
Tonga and Fiji. Only recently, however, have studies of basalt and volcanic glass geochemistry begun to
reveal the antiquity, nature, and extent of those interactions, This paper summarizes the prehistoric interac-
tions within the Samoan group and between Samoa and other archipelagoes, as revealed through geochemical
studies. Special attention is given to the role of Tutuila, in American Samoa, as 4 source for basglt and
volcanic glass.
Clark, Jobn (Brigham Young University) and Rob Fergus (Brigham Young University)
[81] EARLY FORMATIVE COMMUNITIES AT PASO DE LA AMADA, CHIAPAS, MEXICO
A cross-cultural study of buildings in non-stratified communitics suggests a range of critcria for identifying
the function(s ) of special buildings, thereby providing a key for interpreting ancient community organization.
These criteria are used to evaluate especially large structures at the Early Formative community of Paso de
la Amada, Chiapas, Mexico, and to determine probable community organization at different periods of time,
Diachronic analysis demonstrates increasing integration through time.
Clark, Mary (Southern Methodist University)
[73] PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS OF LATE STONE AGE AND METALLURGIC SITES ALONG
. SUB SAHARAN PALAEOCHANNELS IN SENEGAL AND MALI
Sub Saharan palacochannels served as important corridors for movement between the Senegal and Niger
River valicys during historic times. Of interest is their role in Late Stone Age ( LSA) adaptations—specilfically,
, 36 Clarkson, Persis
whether they served as periodic migratory routes for LSA populations shifting north and south in response
to climatic oscillations during the 2nd millennium B.C., or as continuously occupied landscapes reflecting
an ongoing flux of populations central to state formation in the middle and late 1st millennium A.D. A survey
was conducted along these unexplored palacochannels to ascertain the nature and distribution of LSA and
Metallurgic sites allowing for a preliminary test of ideas concerning their role in LSA adaptations.
Clarkson, Persis (Winnipeg) (Discussant 86]

Close, Angela E. (Southern Methodist University)

[45] ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE PLEISTOCENE-HOLOCENE TRANSITION IN NORTHEASTERN
AFRICA.

At the end of the Pleistocene, the Nile ceased aggrading and downcut into a deep channel. The reduction
in the floodplain disrupted earlier, broad-based subsistence patterns, which focused upon wetland plants
(especially tubers) and seasonal fish-harvests. Early Holocene Nilotic sites are much smaller and rarer than
those of the Late Pleistocene. Simultancously, the monsoon-belt moved northward and, after some time-
lag, the Sahara was colonized by gatherer-hunters, herding cattle as a dictary failsafe and supplement (milk ).
By 8000 B.P., Saharan groups were intensively collecting a wide range of Sahelian plants, including sorghum
and millets later domesticated in Africa.

Cobos, Rafael (Tulane University)

[29] CHICHEN ITZA AND SOUTHEASTERN MESOAMERICA BETWEEN A.D. 900-A.D. 1200: A VIEW
FROM EL SALVADOR

A review of non-local archacological materials found at Chichén Itza is presented before considering the
contacts that Chichén had with Southeastern Mesoamerica during the Terminal Classic period, The region
of El Salvador is seen as an intermediate point between Central America and the Maya Lowlands.
Cogswell, James (Missouri University Research Reactor), Michael J, O'Brien (Missouri),
Robert C. Mainfort, Jr. (Mempbis State), Hector Neff (Missouri), and Michael D. Glascock
(Missouri)

[78] NEUTRON-ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CAMPBELL APPLIQUED POTTERY FROM
SOUTHEASTERN MISSOURI AND WESTERN TENNESSEE: IMPLICATIONS FOR LATE
MISSISSIPPIAN INTER-SITE RELATIONS

Campbell appliquéd pottery is a late Mississippian-period marker type for archacological sites in southeast-
ern Missouri. Recent discoveries of this type in western Tennessee have raised the question of whether
production centers of Campbell appliquéd were geographically limited or were dispersed across the central
Mississippi River valicy areca. Stylistic and metrical analyses to date have not found consistent interassemblage
variation. Chemical analyses based on neutron-activation analysis conducted at the Missouri University
Research Reactor will provide evidence on the nature of pottery-related contact among these sites,
Coinman, Nancy (lowa State)

[20] WORKED BONE IN THE LEVANTINE UPPER PALEOLITHIC: RARE EXAMPLES FROM THE
WADI HASA, JORDAN

Although worked bone is common and typical of the material culture of the European Upper Paleolithic,
it is extremely rare in Upper Paleolithic sites in the Levant. Four examples of worked bone were recovered
from the late Ahmarian component of site WHS 618 in the Wadi Hasa, west-central Jordan, dated at ca.
20,300 B.P. Two examples are identical to those recovered in Upper Paleolithic deposits at Ksar Aki! in
Lebanon. The bone artifacts are illustrated and discussed in terms of preservation factors, the technology
they represent, and the potential role of such rare items in the Levantine Upper Paleolithic.

Collins, Ronald (Kent State) and Bill Byrd (Kent State)

[88] MORPHOLOGY, FUNCTION, AND USE LIFE: AN EVALUATION OF THE PALEO CROSSING
ENDSCRAPER ASSEMBLAGE

An assemblage of complete Paleoindian endscrapers (n= 122) from the Paleo Crossing Site (35Me274),
Medina County, Ohio is examined. A suite of linear, angular and polar metrics quantifies attributes of
morphology, function and macroscopic use wear. A principle components analysis is utilized to describe
the variation within the assemblage. Cluster analysis is used to partition variation to create a functional
typology based on geometric distances within and between attribute clusters. Bchavioral explanations which
account for variation and attribute clustering in this assemblage are advanced.

Colten, Roger (Fowler Museum)

[61] ANIMAL RESOURCES, EMERGENT COMPLEXITY, AND THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORD

This paper is an exploration of changing patterns of animal procurement, processing and distribution in

a prehistoric hunting, gathering and fishing society at the emergence of complexity on Santa Cruz Island,

California. The importance of fish increased while the importance of shellfish and marine mammals decreased
, Conyers, Lawrence 37
through time. Exchange in seal meat, sea otter hides, deer bonc, and dogs increased through time, The
density of anima! procurement artifacts decreased while the density of craft production debris increased
implying an inverse relationship between craft activities and animal procurement.

Coltrain, Joan Brenner (Utab)

[90] THE GREAT SALT LAKE WETLANDS: A STUDY IN PREHISTORIC DIET

Great Basin archacologists have long debated the role of corn agriculture in prehistoric economies. The
importance of corn in eastern Basin wetlands habitats has been of particular interest. Although traditional
approaches to dietary reconstruction have been unable to resolve this issuc, stable carbon isotope analysis
of human bone collagen is ideally suited to assessing the role of corn versus native resources, Here I report
results from a stable isotope study of Great Salt Wetlands burials. Data obtained suggest that both the
importance and timing of corn agriculture in the study area may have been incorrectly estimated and
warrant further study.

Coltrain, Joan Brenner (Utab) and Thomas W. Stafford, Jr. (Colorado-Boulder)
[54] AMINO ACID STABLE ISOTOPES AND ANCIENT DIET: A PRELIMINARY REPORT

Despite wide use of stable carbon isotope analysis of total bone collagen, its utility is limited to distinguish.
ing between two broad categories of resources, those that employ a C, versus a C, photosynthetic pathway.
The dictary contribution of resources using the same photosynthetic pathway cannot be determined with
conventional procedures. Recent research indicates that molecular level isotope analysis holds promise for
identifying and quantifying consumption of resources with common photosynthetic regimes. Here we report
preliminary results from stable isotope analysis of selected amino acids isolated from human skeletal remains.
We also assess the potential of this procedure for furthering our understanding of prehistoric subsistence
practices.

Conkey, Margaret (California-Berkeley) {Forum Participant 13]
Conkey, Margaret (California-Berkeley)
[40] BEYOND DECONSTRUCTION: WHAT DO WE WANT IN OUR VISUAL IMAGERY?

While the study of the visual language of archacology is quite new, the work so far has revealed that
much imagery embodies a variety of social, political, and historical positionings and biases that are deeply
problematic. The deconstructions of our visual discourse have not been simplistic but the inevitable question
arises as to what the alternatives are and how do we effect them, especially without merely reproducing
our own contemporary positions. This paper explores the alternatives for the visual language and re-
constructions that center on the doubly visual topic of Paleolithic art.

Conkey, Margaret (California-Berkeley)
[2] COMING TO TERMS WITH SYMBOLISM: RE-VISIONING LATE PLEISTOCENE ARCHAEOLOGY

Paleo-archacology continues to be concerned with the evolution of human symbolic behavior but the
precise terms and concepts employed are not often dealt with explicitly. We are now able to review critically
not just the terms we use but the kinds of analyses and ipterpretations that such terms implicate. As well,
there are now interesting new ideas about the “timing” die appearances of anatomically-modern humans
in different parts of the globe as well as about the evidence(s) for visual culture (“art”), which implies that
a certain re-visioning of late Pleistocene times is at hand.

Connolly, Robert P. (IMinois-Urbana) and Sue Ellen Tooa (Gray and Pape, Inc.)
[23] MIDDLE WOODLAND EARTHWORKS ECONOMICS, TECHNOLOGY AND SETTLEMENTS:
EVIDENCE FROM SURFACE COLLECTIONS

Surface collections of lithic artifacts from the periphery of the Fort Ancient Site, a Middle Woodland (200
B.C.—A.D. 400) hilltop enclosure in Warren Country, Ohio, demonstrate the inferential poe surface
archacological data. The results of research from a 20 hectare area provide evidence for the ence of
discrete prehistoric activities, including areas of habitation, lithic reduction, and ritual or specialized activity,
In addition, inferences related to economic organization, technology and raw material exploitation are
advanced. The validity of conclusions drawn from the surface collections is assessed and compared to those
based on material excavated from Fort Ancient itself.

Conte, E. (see Rolett, B.) (|

Conte, P. (see Sweeney, M.) {100}

Conyers, Lawrence (Colorado-Boulder)

[32] GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS OF THE RIVAS SITE, COSTA RICA

Monumental architecture at the Rivas Site consists of large stone circles, semi-circles and causeways
constructed from boulders and cobbles originally deposited as debris flow units within Holocene-age terrace
fill deposits. Remnant ridge and swale topography preserved on the upper surface of the terrace deposits
, 38 Cook, D.

was highly modified during construction. Two buried soil horizons 15-25 cm thick at the site are associated

with two distinct periods of habitation, The earliest soil contains scattered ceramics but is not associated

with stone architecture. The upper soil unit contains abundant ceramics associated with the monumental

architecture. This upper soil unit is bifurcated within some stone circles by a distinct reddish-orange

anthropogenic fill deposit.

Cook, D. (see Havill, L.) | 106|

Cook, Lauren J. obn Milner Associates)

[62] “WHO'S WATCHING THE WATCHERS?” OR, SURVEILLANCE, DISCOURSE, FOUCAULT AND
INDUSTRIAL ARCHAEOLOGY

Foucault's “archaeology” of surveillance is vital to the sociology and historical archacology of institutions,
including industrial enterprises. At first glance, surveillance appears as a class-based system of control But
if the frame of analysis is shifted, surveillance is visible among the coping strategies of all classes. Foucault's
explication of discourse is also relevant. Historical and industrial archaeology may profit from treating
matcrial culture as an active clement in social discourse, rather than as an end in itself, or as an encrustation
of ideology. The intersection of surveillance and discourse is a fertile area of archaeological study, as
examples illustrate,

Cook, Patricia (Arizona)
[10] LOWER LEVEL ELITE SPECIALIZATION AT CHAU HITX

Recent excavations in a Terminal Classic/Postclassic residence group at Chau Hiix, Belize, indicate possible
specialization in shell manufacture. The location of the Platform 25 group on the periphery of the main
platform, which is dominated by the site’s ceremonial center raises questions regarding the nature of elite
specialization and the controversy over the existence of attached specialists. This paper will summarize
preliminary excavation data, as well as discuss the presence and function of what are herein termed “lower
level elites”.

Cooke, Richard G. (Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute) | Discussant 32|
Cooper, Doreen (National Park Service)
[70] INTERPRETING ARCHAEOLOGY LIN THE KLONDIKE

Klondike Gold Rush National Historic Park is restoring the Moore House, the first Euroamerican settlement
in Skagway, as an interpretive center for the 1997 Klondike centennial. The planning process for the exhibits
is well underway. Because this was the site of previously-published archacological ficldwork, received
additional fieldwork in 1993 and will be mitigated in 1994, results from archacological testing are included
in the public interpretation of this site, This paper discusses the opportunities, as well as the trials and
tribulations, of including archaeology as part of the interpretation of this site for the thousands of visitors
to the Park_cach year.

Cooper, Laurel M. (Arizona)
[36] SPATIAL SYNTAX OF CHACOESQUE “GREAT HOUSES”

Pueblo de Arroyo, Aztec Ruins, and other Chacoesque sites are analyzed with the space syntax model
developed by Hillier to examine the interactive relationships between space and society. Buildings channel
human activity, and they serve to facilitate encounter and privacy in varying proportions. Access graphs,
derived from floor plans and site maps, can be used in cross-temporal and cross-geographical comparisons.
Together with previous work on the pithouse-pueblo transitions, Chetro Ketl, and Pueblo Alto, the poster
considers whether “great houses” in and outside of Chaco Canyon have spatial as well as stylistic similarities.
Corbett, Debra (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service), Douglas Siegel-Causey (Nebraska), and
Christine LeFevre (French National Museum of Natural History-Paris)

[79] THE WESTERN ALEUTIANS: REEVALUATING THE ISOLATION HYPOTHESIS

Most American researchers view the Alcutian Islands as a cul-de-sac or appendix. After the ancestors of
the Aleuts entered the Chain, they became isolated from outside influences, though some are admitted from
the cast, and the culture developed in isolation. This view holds that the western islands were even more
isolated and lacked influences from even the eastern Aleutians, This paper examines the archaeological and
historical evidence for inter-island contacts and western Aleut isolation. Recent excavations on Buldir Island
in the western Aleutians provide an excellent case for addressing questions of isolation and culture contact.
Though preliminary, our evidence suggests that people from different island groups were in regular, though
not constant contact with each other.

Corcoran, M. (see Nickens, P.) |35|
Cordell, Linda S. (Colorado) | Discussant 58]
, Craig, Douglas B. and Jeffery J. Clark 39
Cordy, Ross (Hawaii State Historic Preservation Division)
[100] HAWAIIAN SETTLEMENT PATTERNS IN TIMES OF CHANGING SOCIAL COMPLEXITY, 1770S-
1820S: IMPLICATIONS FOR PREHISTORY
The pinnacle of hierarchical social complexity in Polynesia developed prehistorically in Hawaii and Tonga.
In Hawaii, general models suggest the nature and trends of the organizational changes, dimensions (population
growth, agricultural intensification and expansion ) which covaried in some fashion with those changes, and
proposed causal sequences. However, without more accurate dating, it is difficult to evaluate the diachronic,
and thus causal, relations among the dimensions. This paper looks at major changes in complexity which
occurred at or just after European contact in Hawaii and associated seulement patterns—a case with
chronological control—to see what ramifications exist for prehistoric archacological research.
Cordy-Collins, Alana (San Diego)
[77] AN EXAMINATION OF THE LAMBAYEQUE CULTURAL TRADITION FROM THE VANTAGE OF
SAN JOSE DE MORO
Lambayeque culture (Sican) of the Peruvian northcoast has its temporal beginnings at the end of the
Middle Horizon. Traditionally, Lambayeque has been viewed either as a “country cousin” of the powerful
LIP Kingdom of Chimor, or as a cultural phenomenon primarily restricted to the valley of the same name.
However, the 1991-1992 excavation seasons at San José de Moro (Jequetepeque Valley) suggest another
interpretation: that Lambayeque is both a direct development of the older Moche culture, and—with specific
exceptions—a continuation of that cultural tradition. Focus here is on continuities and discontinuities with
the Moche culture.
Corrales U., Francisco (National Museum of Costa Rica)
[32] CURRE: ESTABLISHMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF AN AGRICULTURAL COMMUNITY IN
SOUTHERN COSTA RICA
Stratigraphic excavations at the Curré site provided data for the determination of a three phase occupation
sequence from 1500 B.C. to 1500 A.D. The recovered ceramics (including the oldest known for the region ),
lithics, and organic remains indicate the appearance of a small farming community, circa 1500 B.C., that
grew in size and internal complexity to become an important regional center, with an emphasis on maize
cultivation, during the Late Period (A.D. 800-1500), Curré thus provides rare and important information
on long term developmental processes as seen at a single site in Lower Central America.
Costin, Cathy (California State-Nortbridge)
[12] WEAVING TECHNOLOGY IN THE DOMESTIC AND POLITICAL ECONOMIES
Using cross-cultural data, this paper discusses the extent to which domestic skills were translated into
politically valued production in several state societies, and the implications of this relative ability for type
of participation in the political economy. I evaluate alternative technical means for distinguishing between
domestic and wealth items, specifically analyzing intensification of labor using “domestic” technology as
compared with the introduction of new, claborate and/or restricted technologies to produce valuables,
Cowgill, George L. (Arizona State) | Discussant 96] 4
Cowgill, George L. (Arizona State)
[49] HOW MUCH IS ENOUGH?: EMPIRICAL BAYES AND OTHER WAYS OF COPING WITH FEW OR
SMALL SURFACE COLLECTIONS
The Teotihuacan Mapping Project obtained about a million )bjects in 5000 surface collections. This
abundance makes possible some robust statistical conclusions, some of which are presented as secure
knowledge about associations among ceramic categories in the ancient city. The main topic, however, is
investigation of effects of using fewer and/or smaller collections. How numerous and how large must
collections be to achieve satisfactory accuracy, and how much does a simple kind of Empirigal Bayes
estimation help to offset small collection sizes? Results are useful for researchers who must deal with fewer
and/or smaller collections than at Teotihuacan. ;
Craig, Douglas B. (Northland Research, Inc.) and Jeffery J. Clark (Center for Desert
Archaeology)
(26) THE MEDDLER POINT PLATFORM MOUND COMPLEX: FUNCTIONAL AND SOCIAL
CONSIDERATIONS
Located in the Tonto Basin of central Arizona, the Meddiler Point platform mound complex is believed
to have served a largely ceremonial, integrative function. The mound complex is surrounded by 12 residential
compounds containing a total of about 45 rooms. It is estimated that a maximum of 100-150 people lived
at the site between A.D. 1280 and 1300 when the platform mound complex was built. Although there is
some evidence for social differentiation among the site's inhabitants, it is considered minimal at best. The
implications of this are discussed, and a preliminary model of social organization at the site is presented.
, 40 Creamer, Winifred and Lisa Renken
Creamer, Winifred (Northern Illinois University) and Lisa Renken (Field Museum of Natural
History)
[58] BIG SITES, SMALL POPULATION: CERAMICS AND CONTEMPORANEITY OF PROTOHISTORIC
PUEBLO VILLAGES IN THE NORTHERN RIO GRANDE
Analysis of stratigraphic samples of ceramics from protohistoric sites in the northern Rio Grande region
can help establish which Pueblo villages were contemporancously occupied during the fifteenth, sixteenth,
and seventeenth centuries. It has been assumed previously that most of the 65 known protohistoric Pucblo
villages were occupied continuously between approximately AD. 1450 and 1680. Detailed ceramic analysis
by the authors shows this is not the case. Cost effective methods of assessing the duration and extent of
protohistoric villages are discussed.
Crotty, Helen (California-Los Angeles)
[58] EAST MEETS WEST AT POTTERY MOUND: MURALS, CERAMICS, AND KIVA ARCHITECTURE
WITH A WESTERN FLAVOR IN A RIO GRANDE PUEBLO
Pottery Mound is one of several Rio Grande sites where Classic Period kiva murals have been found and
the most important in terms of the volume of material recovered. While all these sites share iconographic
and architectural characteristics generally typical of eastern Anasazi pucblos, each is also distinct. Pottery
Mound alone combines Rio Grande traits with western Pucblo influence; Hopi ceramics clearly served as
inspiration for Pottery Mound muralists and potters. Similarities and differences in the mural iconography
of Pottery Mound, the other Rio Grande sites, and the Hopi area illustrate the cultural diversity of the Pueblo
IV Anasazi.
Crown, Patricia (New Mexico) and Suzanne K. Fish (Arizona)
[85] GENDER AND POWER IN THE HOHOKAM PRECLASSIC TO CLASSIC TRANSITION
Archaeological research generally confirms increasing social differentiation during the Hohokam Classic
Period. However, scholars have not addressed the issue of who benefitted from this shift or how power
was distributed along gender lines. We explore the relative position of women in Hohokam society at the
PreClassic to Classic Transition by cxamining changes in the architecture of domestic spaces, access to
ritual spaces, time allocated to productive tasks, and status as reflected in mortuary data.
Cruz, S. (see McCafferty, G.) [30]
Cunnar, G. (see Taylor, R.) |97|
Curet, Antonio (Gettysburg College)
[48] MORTUARY PRACTICES, SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT, AND IDEOLOGY IN PUERTO RICAN
PREHISTORY
It is widely recognized by archaeologists that mortuary practices can provide information on the social
organization, ideology, religious beliefs and, to a certain degree, the political structure of a cultural group.
This-work reviews the evidence on mortuary practices among prehistoric groups of Puerto Rico, proposes
a possible sequence of changes through time, and presents alternative explanations for such changes.
‘ Although it is obvious that changes in these practices correlate with cultural developments, it is argued
here that they also reflect changes in the socio-political and ideological structure of the groups. More
specifically, these shifts are seen as the product of the development of social complexity and are discussed
here from the perspective of the economic and ideological structure developed to establish and maintain
the new political system.
Curtis, Ross (Western Cultural Resource Management) and Roger Walkenborst
[89] A COMPARATIVE VIEW OF SMALL HOUSE FORM AND FUNCTION IN THE CHACOAN
SYSTEM: INVESTIGATIONS AT THE CHACOAN OUTLIER OF WHIRLWIND LAKES
In modeling the Chacoan Anasazi Regional System a focus has been placed on defining the nature of
interactions between Chaco Canyon and communities defined as “outliers”, but a limited amount of data
has been available from the great houses and small houses that make up these communities. Recent excavation
of a 17 room small house and concurrent community pattern studies at the Whirlwind Lakes Outlier in
northwestern New Mexico as part of the El Paso Pipeline Project, provides comparative data that can be
used to address small house site function, dating, architecture, and interaction.
Dancey, William (Obio State)
[23] THE VALUE OF SURFACE ARCHAEOLOGICAL DATA IN EXPLORING THE DYNAMICS OF
COMMUNITY EVOLUTION IN THE MIDDLE OHIO VALLEY
Recent research in the Middic Ohio Valley has documented a pattern of change from a dispersed sedentary
community pattern during the Early and Middle Woodland periods to a nucleated pattern in the late
Woodland. Although identified through examination of excavation data, understanding the dynamics of this
shift requires regional scale data that an excavation strategy cannot supply. In this paper evidence is marshaled
, Delle, J. 4]
to show that surface data reflect the same pattern revealed by excavation and that a representative regional
sample of settlement debris sufficient for testing hypothesis of settlement pattern change can be acquired
through survey of plowzone surfaces.
D'Andrea, A. Catherine (Simon Fraser)
[94] LATER JOMON PLANT HUSBANDRY IN NORTHEASTERN JAPAN

Recent archacobotanical data from northeastern Japan demonstrate the presence of foxtail millet and
buckwheat by 2000 B.C. and rice by 787 B.C. Direct evidence of the nature of husbandry activities associated
with these domesticates is not yet available, although research is progressing on this problem. This paper
outlines the research and presents a model describing the prehistoric cultivation of these species based on
ecological and historical data on farming practices in northeastern Asia.
Danforth, Marie (Southern Mississippi)
[106] CHILDHOOD HEALTH PATTERNS IN THE LATE CLASSIC MAYA: EVIDENCE FROM ENAMEL

MICRODEFECTS

Childhood health patterns were investigated using patterns of enamel microdefect formation in mandibular
canines from 95 individuals from three Late Classic Maya populations ( Barton Ramie, Seibal, Tikal). Wilson
bands, striae of Retzius, and linear enamel hypoplasias, all non-specific growth arrest indicators, showed few
differences in frequencies and ages-at-formation in comparisons between the sexes, between juveniles and
adults, and among the three sites. Late Classic Maya, however, experienced significantly more growth
disruption between ages four and five compared to Colonial Maya, These findings, especially the apparent
homogeneity in health patterns, are discussed in light of the Collapse.
Dasovich, Steve J. (Florida State)
[41] THE EFFECTS OF SEA LEVEL TRANSGRESSION AND STORM DAMAGE ON COASTAL SITE

INTEGRITY: COASTAL DIXIE COUNTY, FLORIDA, AS AN EXAMPLE

The impact of transgressive scas on site integrity is largely undefined. While damage caused by normal
tidal flow and wave action can be measured under average weather conditions, damage caused by catastrophic
events is more difficult to measure. In February, 1993, the “Storm of the Century” struck the gulf coast of
Florida, interrupting archacological and geological work on Bird Island (8DI52), Florida. Sustained 160 kph
winds and sca surge caused dramatic destruction on the sitc. The strata of nearby sites on coastal islands
will be evaluated for storm damage. The role of storms in redistributing inundated sites will be discussed.
Davidson, Katherine (Arizona State)
[61] BEHAVIORAL SIGNIFICANCE OF VARIATIONS IN THE MORPHOLOGY OF THE MASTOID

PROCESS

Mastoid morphology of the California Chumash reveals evidence of tumpline use. Intensive use of taumplines
by Chumash women (Hudson and Blackburn, 1982) involved repeated use of the sternocicidomastoid
muscles which in turn, it is hypothesized, would cause hypertrophy of the mastoid and a reduction in the
sexual dimorphism of this feature. It appears that differential use of tumplines does result in a lack of mastoid
dimorphism. This study provides an occupational m@ker for tumpline use that can be applied to other
skeletal populations whose cultural practices are less well known. This study also provides an easily replicable
method of determining mastoid size.
Davis, S. (see Rowe, M.) | 103]
Day, D. (see Prentiss, W.) | 105] :
Deagan, K. (see Hoffman, K.) |101|
deFrance, Susan D. (Florida Museum of Natural History) \
[65] UNINVITED GUESTS: OLD WORLD RODENTS ON SPANISH COLONIAL SITES

Spanish importations of plants and animals to New World settlements included many unintentional species,
Two opportunistic species that accompanied Spaniards were Old World rats, both black (Rattus rattus)

; and brown (Rattus norvegicus) varictics. Introduced rats thrived in arcas of Spanish settlement. Rattus

remains in archaeological contexts provides temporal indicators of carly Spanish settlement and indicates
a potential disease vector. This paper reviews the occurrence of rats in Spanish colonial archaeological
contexts from sites in Florida, the Caribbean, and Peru and discusses how these remains have helped to
date sites and to provide insights on the destructive nature of unintentional animal imports.
Dethi, Richard | Discussant 14]
Dekin, A. (see Cassell, M.) |35|
Delle, J. (see Mullins, P.) |62|
, 42 Demarest, Arthur A. and Juan Antonio Valdes
Demarest, Arthur A. (Vanderbilt) and Juan Antonio Valdes (Universidad de San Carlos)
[76] WARFARE AND THE COLLAPSE OF CLASSIC MAYA CIVILIZATION

This paper presents the preliminary conclusions of the Peterbarun Regional Archacological Project. For
six years, this multi-disciplinary project has explored architecture, monuments, domestic arcas, settlement
patterns, ecology, nutrition, exchange systems, and fortifications of the Petexbatun region, Guatemala. Project
discoveries demonstrate that in the cighth century Petexbatun political systems disintegrated in endemic
warfare. Models are proposed for underlying causes of this warfare. We examine the implications of these
findings for general theories of the collapse of Classic Maya civilization.

Dendy, J. (see Reinbard, K.) |22}|

Dent, Richard J. (American University) and Harry Schuckel (American University)

[19] DEVELOPING AN INTEGRATED ARCHAEOLOGICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM: THE AMERICAN
UNIVERSITY EXPERIMENT

This poster display documents a computer-based archacological information system developed at American
University. Our goal in creating the system is to support both field and laboratory operations. The resulting
system is built around a TOPCON GTS-3B total station as well as an IBM PS/2 microcomputer. Imaging
hardware consists of a TARGA + board and JVC color video camera. System software all operatcs within a
WINDOWS environment. System operation is illustrated using data from the Shawnee Minisink Palcoindian
site.

Dering, J. (see Boyd, C.) |103|

Dering, Pbil (Texas A&M University)

[98] SAGUARO AS A FACTOR IN THE DISTRIBUTION OF CLASSIC PERIOD SALADO SITES IN THE
TONTO BASIN, ARIZONA

This paper presents an assessment of the productive potential of saguaro in the Tonto Basin. Saguaro is
chosen due to its importance within the belief/subsistence systems of the Sonoran Desert peopic. Because
the Tonto Basin is in a transition zone at the edge of the Sonoran Desert, saguaro is distributed unevenly
in favorable microhabitats in the uplands. Using field observations and a GIS database, areas of high productive
potential within the basin are identified and mapped in relation to Classic period Salado sites. Conclusions
are drawn regarding the role of saguaro as an upland resource in the Tonto Basin,

Derr, J, (see Rowe, M.) | 103)
Dewar, Robert (Connecticut)
[79] DOES If MATTER THAT MADAGASCAR IS AN ISLAND?

Madagascar is a very large island in the Indian Ocean. Two kinds of questions are posed: (1) What
consequences for its prehistory result from its insularity? Does it share specific resemblances with other
islands that are reflected archacologically? Alternatively, does its great size reduce the importance of being
an island? (2) Have prehistorians approached the study of Madagascar’s past in any special way because it

’ is an island? In other words, are there implicit biases in “island archacology?"
Diebl, Michael W. (University at Buffalo and Santa Fe Institute)
[99] SELF-AGGRANDIZERS AMONG MOGOLLON LATE PITHOUSE PERIOD VILLAGERS?

Recent diachronic comparisons of southwestern North American pithouse dwellers suggest that the
appearance of self-aggrandizing or “entreprencurial” individuals may have occurred by A.D. 1000, Their
appearance may be a consequence of the relaxation of social restrictions on prestige competition, that may
have resulted from changes in their subsistence economy.

Dietler, Michael (Yale) and Ingrid Herbich (California-Berkeley)
[51] ITS ABOUT TIME: AN ETHNOARCHAEOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE ON THE
CONCEPTUALIZATION OF TEMPORALITY AND HISTORY IN ANCIENT SOCIETIES

An ethnoarchacological perspective is offered on the evolving theoretical discussion about differences in
the ways that time is conceptualized by archacologists and by the subjects of archacological research in
ancient societies. The reckoning and representation of time, biography, and history in a rural African society
(the Luo of Kenya) are examined and ramifications for archaeological interpretation are explored. Luo time-
reckoning is shown to be a relational process in which cyclical and linear conceptions of time are articulated
to discern sequence and duration and to order personal experience and history in a temporal framework;
and temporality is shown to be a pervasive feature of representations of social relations and identity.
Dillebay, T. (see Baenziger, M.) |25|
Dirkmaat, D. (see Adovasio, J.) |69|
, Douglas, John E. 43
Dirkmaat, D. (see Carr, K.) |69|
Dishta, Joseph (Pueblo of Zuni) {Forum Participant 95]
Dobres, Marcia-Anne (California-Berkeley)
[12] ENGENDERING THE MAGDALENIAN: INTERPRETING OSSEOUS TECHNOLOGICAL
VARIABILITY IN THE PYRENEES
Following from structuralist principles, the tangible remains of prehistoric material production can be
studied to infer dynamic processes of social reproduction. At the microscale, production activities constitute
arenas within which social identities can provide guidelines for matcrial conduct. One universal dynamic
process central to technological praxis, regardless of its particular historical configuration, is gender, Adapting
principles from practice and gender theory this paper considers tentative models for the social organization
of osscous technology during the late Magdalenian in the Midi-Pyrénées, summarizing findings of the first
comparative and regionally-focused technical analysis conducted in the Ari¢ge and Haute-Garonne,
Doelle, William H. (Center for Desert Archaeology) and Henry Wallace (Center for Desert
Archaeology)
[7] REGIONAL VARIATION IN THE PLATFORM MOUNDS OF CENTRAL AND SOUTHERN
ARIZONA: COMPARISONS BEYOND THE PHOENIX BASIN
Although platform mounds occur throughout much of central and southern Arizona, the concentration
of platform mounds in the Phoenix Basin has historically been the focus of most research. Recent large-
scale excavations and intensive survey in the Tonto Basin, Tucson Basin, castern Papagueria, and the lower
San Pedro valley now provide a large dataset for regional comparison with the existing Phoenix Basin data.
In this paper we examine variation in time of construction and use, construction methods, site structure,
demographic scale, and regional interaction. The implications of these data for regional social development
models are outlined.
Dolukbanov, Pavel (Newcastle)
[45] THE PLEISTOCENE/HOLOCENE TRANSITION IN NORTH-EASTERN EUROPE:
ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE AND SOCIAL ADAPTATION.
Three consecutive waves may be distinguished in the initial settlement of the North-East European plains:
1) 13.2-12.0; 2) 12,0-11.0; 3) 11.0-10.0 ka B_P. The first two occurred during the AllerOd-Bolling; the last
one-during the Younger Dryas. All three waves resulted from the overflow of the surplus population in the
Palaeolithic core areas: 1) The Atlantic (Western) Europe; 2) The periglacial Bastern/Central Europe. The
subsequent socio-economic development in the North-Eastern Europe proceeded as a gradual adaptation
to the increasingly forested environment of Early Holocene.
Donoghue, J. (see Anuskiewicz, R.) |41|
Donogbue, J. (see Faugbt, M.) |41|
Doran, James (Essex)
{99] THE EOS PROJECT: INTEGRATING TWO MODELS OF PALEOLITHIC SOCIAL CHANGE
The EOS model and testbed now to be reported Sddresses two key questions prompted by our earlier
work. How can social hierarchies come into being without individual resource acquisition tasks of parallel
complexity? How can two competing views of Upper Paleolithic social change (Mellars’ emphasizing the
. growth of decision hierarchies vs. Gamble's emphasizing the intensification of alliance negotiation) be
incorporated into a unified framework? These eee | require a deep consideration of the relationship
between group dynamics, agents’ social models, and characteristics of the resource environment,
Dorn, R. (see Lincoln, T_) |50|
Dorn, Ronald L. (Arizona State), David §. Whitley (California-Los Angeles), and Joseph M.
Simon (W and S Consultants) ,
[103] ROCK ART AND PRE-CLOVIS COLONIZATION OF THE AMERICAS
Geomorphological research demonstrates that a major change in crosion and deposition, thus site preserva-
tion, occurred at the Pleistocenc-Holocene interface. The sudden &ppearance of Clovis sites correlates with
the change to favorable preservation conditions. Instead of looking for elusive, preserved and stratified Pre-
Clovis sites, our research focuses on exposed rock art on stable cliff faces. We obtained chronometric Pre-
Clovis ages on six petroglyphs, using AMS '*C and cation-ratio dating, corroborated by replicate and correla-
tive dating, thus supporting the Pre-Clovis hypothesis. Second, we also consider the Clovis-first hypothesis,
showing that it cannot be reconciled with its own Paleoindian data.
Douglas, Jobn E. (Montana)
[7] THE WESTERN EDGE OF THE CASAS GRANDES REGION: PIECING TOGETHER ECOLOGY,
POWER, AND SOCIAL BOUNDARIES
Interaction between the late prehistoric settlement of Paquime (Casas Grandes) and the surrounding
region has been examined mainly in Chihuahua and New Mexico. In Sonora and Arizona, the eastern portion
i — — — ———
, 44 Douglass, Amy A.
of the Yaqui River watershed often is scen as a part of the Casas Grandes region. Yet this western edge
remains little-known and enigmatic. As a first step, relevant survey and excavation data from Sonora and
Arizona are examined. Hypotheses are developed concerning interaction along the western edge, including
issues of settlement hierarchies, social boundaries, the effects of distance, and the role of ecological variability.
Douglass, Amy A. (Tempe Historical Museum)

[42] MOVING POTS OVER LONG DISTANCES: PRIVILEGE OR NECESSITY?

Long-distance exchange is regarded as a key factor in the sociopolitical development of the prehistoric
plateau Southwest. Yet many questions remain concerning the structure of regional exchange systems and
the role of exchange in culture change, This paper documents the production-distribution system of Little
Colorado White Ware as a case study of a long-distance cxchange system. Compositional analyses and a
distance decay study are employed in order to document the production-distribution system of this ware.
The results demonstrate that regional distribution patterns that have been cited as evidence for prestige
exchange can result from other types of exchange systems.

Downum, C. (see Bostwick, T.) |26|

Downum, Christian (Northern Arizona University)

[23] THE RELIABILITY OF SURFACE ARTIFACT ASSEMBLAGES AS PREDICTORS OF SUBSURFACE
REMAINS: A CASE STUDY FROM SOUTHERN ARIZONA

This paper attempts a direct test of the reliability of surface artifact data by comparing artifact assemblages
obtained through controlled surface collections with assemblages subsequently recovered from the same
site through excavation. The sample of sites used in this comparison comprises a varicty of Hohokam limited
activity and habitation sites in southern Arizona. General conclusions are presented about the reliability of
surface artifact data, especially with respect to how well surface data can be used to model subsurface ratios
of major artifact categories, and how well such data can predict the type and location of subsurface features.
Doyel, David E. (Estrella Cultural Research) | Discussant 80}

Doyel, David E. (Estrella Cultural Research)
[7] PRODUCTION AND EXCHANGE OF OBSIDIAN ARTIFACTS FROM THE GATLIN SITE,
SOUTHERN ARIZONA

Analysis of obsidian artifacts from the Gatlin Site (Arizona Z:2:1) using X-ray fluorescence (EDXRF)
determined that most are from the nearby Sauceda source. While 15 percent of the total sample (n=75)
is made of non-local obsidian, 27 percent of the projectile points are of non-local materials, suggesting trade
in finished points. Mobilization of resources through exchange may be indicated.

Drake, D. (see Hill, ME.) (74|
Drayer, F. (see Walker, P.) |5A|
Drolet, Robert P. (Ogden Environmental and Energy Services)
‘ [32] SITIO MURCIELAGO: A LATE PERIOD AGRICULTURAL VILLAGE IN SOUTHERN COSTA RICA

The focus of discussion is Sitio Murciélago, an interior vallcy habitation site located along the Térraba
River in southern Costa Rica. In the 1980s, intensive investigations conducted here resulted in mapping
the complex, dating the site, and analyzing its internal features. The village was a late period domestic
center associated with several cemeterics sites, residential compounds containing large diameter house
foundations, and an extensive area of alluvial farmland. Murciélago appears to represent a typical agriculrural
community that developed during this time in the interior valley zone of the Térraba River Basin. The
discussion about this late period village center on its overall size, internal complexity, and regional importance
within the multi-village network that developed in the Diquis Region during the Chiriqui Phase (A.D. 1000-
1500).

Drollinger, H. (see Jones, R.)| 437}

DuBarton, A. (see Buck, P.) 75) '
Dubrovsky, Gertrude W. (Princeton)

[81] A SMALL WORLD: A COMMUNITY OF JEWISH FARMERS

it is on the community level that it is possible to investigate the social, economic, political, cultural, and
even the religious acculturation of the Jewish immigrant. Early Jewish immigrants from Europe who settled
on farms in Farmingdale, New Jersey, knew little about farming and less about the life-style and language
of their neighbors. The settlers created new social institutions to live viable Jewish and economic lives.
Their organizations and self-help networks were modeled after those in the smiail villages they had left
behind. Ideology shifted from religion to social reform, which ultimately created conflict between the :

is Ln, ll
, Ehrenreich, Robert M. 45
community members. This intracommunity conflict produced a dynamic tension among the farmers, resulting
in a vibrant creative community.

Duff, Andrew I. (Arizona State)

[42] POST-CHACOAN COMMUNITY DYNAMICS AS REVEALED BY HOUSEHOLD INTERACTION.

How do we get from sherds to social organization? One technique for revealing social relationships is
the analysis of localized exchange. With this idea in mind, | examine ceramic compositional data from
several post-Chacoan (A.D. 1175-1275 ) roomblocks in west-central New Mexico, Analysis reveals information
about the scale of ceramic production, localized exchange, the spatial extent of community and the role
of community centers. This is used to bridge the gap between ceramics and behavior, and | conclude with
a discussion of community dynamics in light of these results.

Dugmore, A. (see McGovern, T.) {46|

Dunbar, J. (see Anuskiewicz, R.) |41)|

Dunbar, James S. (Bureau of Archaeological Research)

[41] THE STRATIGRAPHY OF SUBMERGED LATE PLEISTOCENE SITES FROM THE UPPER
SUWANNEE RIVER TO APALACHEE BAY

This paper will identify and discuss the major stratigraphic regimes known to contain Clovis and Suwannee
age Paleo Indian artifacts in wetland and submerged environments. Clovis and Suwannee point Paleo Indian
sites are concentrated in north and central Florida from the Ocala Ridge in the central peninsular westward
to the gulf coast between Tampa and Apalachee Bays. Because inland water tables and sea level rose with
the retreat of the last Wisconsin ice-sheet, many Palco Indian sites are now located in wetland or submerged
environments. Research on submerged sites such as the Page/Ladson (8J¢591) in the Aucilla River has
revealed deep and complex stratigraphic sequence rich in preserved organic material.

Dunnell, Robert C. (Washington) | Discussant 27|

Dunnell, Robert C. (Washington) | Discussant 3}

Dunnell, Robert C. (Washington)

[49] THE IMPACT OF “STATISTICAL TECHNIQUES FOR THE DISCOVERY OF ARTIFACT TYPES”
ON ARCHAEOLOGY

Albert Spaulding’s influence on contemporary archacology is quite substantial. Much of that influence can
be traced to his seminal paper “Statistical Techniques for the Discovery of Artifact Types,” published in
1953. This paper examines the specific impacts, both intended and unintended, of that paper on the nascent
New Archacology of the 1960s and beyond.

Earle, Timothy K. (California-Los Angeles) | Discussant 81|

Easton, Norman Alexander (Yukon College and Northern Research Institute)

[41] METHODS OF EXCAVATION AND ANALYSIS OF THE MONTAGUE HARBOUR UNDERWATER
SITE, BRITISH COLUMBIA (1989-1993)

This paper will present the development and application of locating, excavating, and analyzing prehistoric
archacological remains recovered from submarine sediments dating to circa 7000 years ago in Montague
Harbour, British Columbia. Excavation in a tidal and subtidal environment will be discussed, along with the
potential for further work along the coast of British Columbia.

Ebert, J. (see Cassell, M.) |35) '

Edwards, S. (see Winslow, D.) |37|

Eerkens, Jelmer (California-Santa Barbara) and Robert L. Bettinger OSCR Eee
[27] VARIATION IN GREAT BASIN PROJECTILE POINTS

The neo-Darwinist program cannot succeed in archaeology without detailed empirical studies. We cannot
understand how selection acts on material culture, for example, until we first understand the source and
nature of the empirical variation in material culture on which it acts, which is poorly studied, Statistical
analysis of several thousand Great Basin projectile points demonstrates that 80% of the variation in linear
attributes is determined by the mean of the attribute, which implies production guided by relative, not
absolute, error tolerances, Variability substantially greater or less than this suggests corresponding variations
in group or individual production goals.

Ebrenreich, Robert M. (National Research Council)
[12] CRAFT SPECIALIZATION WITHIN A HETERARCHICAL SOCIAL STRUCTURE: A
METALLURGICAL PERSPECTIVE

The sociopolitical structure of a society affects the level of craft specialization that can be realized. A

societal means of controlling resources or technologies is required if high levels of craft specialization are
, 46 Elera, Carlos
to be achieved. This presentation will examine the societal structure of central-southern Britain during the
Middle and Late [ron Ages (550-10 B.C.) and discuss how the heterarchical structure of that period affected
the level of craft specialization attained. The ironworking community of this period will be used as an
cxample.
Elera, Carlos (Calgary)
[77] THE CUPISNIQUE CULTURAL COMPLEX AND ITS ROLE IN THE ORIGIN OF MOCHE, NORTH
COAST OF PERU
In the published Andcan archacological literature, the origin and coalescence of Moche (culture, society,
state ) is almost unknown, Many scholars have thought that “Chavin" was the initial antecedent of Moche.
However, the archacological record ( including data from my recent fieldwork ) indicates that the Cupisnique
Cultural Complex, in its late phase and with its religious ideology, played a crucial role in the origin of
Moche and it must be understood.
Elia, Ricardo J. (Boston University) | Discussant 38}
Elia, Ricardo J. (Boston University)
[70] CONTRACT DILEMMAS IN PUBLIC ARCHAEOLOGY
Despite the fact that archacology by contract predominates in public archacology, there has been surpris-
ingly lite discussion of contractual issucs within the discipline. This paper highlights several important
contract dilemmas that are increasingly challenging the practice of public archaeology, including the issues
of ownership and use of data, confidentiality; and publication restrictions. It is argued that many of the
contractual conditions that are imposed upon archacologists violate basic principles of public archacology,
especially the concepts of public interest and public rights to information. Coping with these dilemmas
poses an cthical and professional challenge to archacologists working in a Competitive business environment.
Eling, H. (see Turpin, S$.) | 103)
Ellis, Christopber J. (Western Ontario)
[84] FACTORS GOVERNING THE USE OF STONE PROJECTILE TIPS: THE ETHNOGRAPHIC DATA
Stone projectile points have figured prominently in stylistic, technological, and functional archaeological
analyses. Yet, the basic question of why points on stone as opposed to other materials should be employed
at all is rarely addressed. | report here on a pilot survey of world-wide ethnographic and ethnobistorical
literature designed to generate answers to this question. Major factors isolated as important fo stone tip
use or non-use include: the size of the game, the “danger” of the game to the hunter, use of poisons, whether
the projectile is “thrust” or “thrown” at the prey, and climatic considerations.
Ellwood, B. (see Harrold, F.) |9|
Ellwood, Brooks B. (Texas-Arlington), Francis B. Harrold (Texas-Arlington), and Karl M.
Petruso (Texas-Arlington)
[70] MAGNETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY AND ITS ANISOTROPY AS A TOOL FOR DETERMINING INTRA-
~-SITE CORRELATIONS AND SITE EVOLUTION: AN EXAMPLE FROM KONISPOL CAVE, SW
ALBANIA
‘ Magnetic susceptibility, an indicator of iron mineral concentration, was measured for 585 samples from
Konispol Cave, SW Albania. Comparisons between magnetic susceptibility profiles from three excavations
within the cave show distinctive patterns which allow direct correlation between excavations. These data
provide a quick and inexpensive means for investigators to correlate between and within sites, without
resorting to other more time consuming and expensive methods, Anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility data,
measured for 208 of these samples, provide information on tectonic and stratigraphic changes which have
affected the site during occupation from the Late Paleolithic to Late Neolithic time.
Elson, Mark (Center for Desert Archaeology)
[26] THE PYRAMID POINT PLATFORM MOUND: INTEGRATION IN THE TONTO BASIN
The Pyramid Point platform mound is one of the smallest mounds in the greater Southwest, measuring
less than 75 square meters. It may have functioned as a type of signal tower to convey information to |
integrate separate subsystems in the surrounding settlement system. Unlike some of the larger platform
mounds, which appear to have been restricted areas and areas for immediate public viewing, the Pyramid |
Point mound appears to have been designed for viewing from a distance. It is clearly visible from the tops
of five other platform mounds. Furthermore, data are presented that suggest that the mound was more of
a locus for ceremonial activities than actual habitation.
Eriksen, B. (see Juel Jensen, H.) | 16)
Eriksen, Berit Valentin (Aarbus)
[45] RESOURCE MANAGEMENT, SUBSISTENCE STRATEGIES AND ADAPTIVITY IN LATE
PLEISTOCENE-EARLY HOLOCENE NORTHWESTERN EUROPE
Late Pleistocene hunters of northwestern Europe had the choice of a varicty of game animals. Especially
reindecr, horse and elk dominated the menu. The paper first examines the varying importance/dominance
|
, Falconer, Steven E. and Patricia L. Fall 47
throughout time of these species and asserts our possibilitics of making inferences from hunting strategies
to socio-economic structures (social group size, mobility, ctc.). In the early Holocene game resources
gencrally becomes more widespread and less diversified ... or do they? The second part of the paper re-
examines the data from northwestern Europe and discusses how Late Picistocene-Early Holocene hunters
adapted to the changing environment.
Erkelens, Conrad (International Archaeological Research Institute)
{19} LOW ALTITUDE AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHS FROM ROCKET LAUNCHED CAMERAS
Aerial photography is a remote sensing technique with methods and applications that are well understood.
Although interpretation of the results is uncomplicated, the cost is often prohibitive for small-scale research
projects. Hobby rocketry has been in existence for decades and has included the use of rockets equipped
with cameras as part of the ongoing experimentation of enthusiasts. The availability, low cost, and general
reliability of these rocket launched cameras has application for archacologists secking an affordable means
of photographing their archacological sites. The technique ts outlined and cxamples from recent research
in the Hawaiian Islands are displayed.
Erlandson, J. (see Moss, M.) |92)
Erlandson, Jon M. (Oregon) and Madonna L. Moss (Oregon)
[56] CULTURES AND ENVIRONMENTS OF THE PACIFIC COAST OF NORTH AMERICA BETWEEN
ABOUT 11,500 AND 8,000 YEARS AGO
Between 11,000 and 8,000 years ago, maritime peoples were in the carly stages of settling the diverse
coastal landscapes from southeast Alaska to Baja California, Relatively early evidence for coastal adaptations
has been found in the vast region, with coastal sites now dating between about 10,000 and 11,500 cybp in
the northern and southern areas. In this paper, we cxamine environmental changes, subsistence patterns,
and technological developments for this period, discuss different models for the origin of these early maritime
| peoples, and consider some explanations for the dearth of carly sites along the coastlines of northern
California, Oregon, and Washington.
| Esin, Ufuk (istanbul University)
[24] THE PROVINCIAL UBAID CULTURE OF DEGIRMENTEPE (MALATYA, EASTERN TURKEY)
The mound of Degirmentepe was located on the south bank of the Euphrates in Malatya Province of
eastern Turkey. In 1986 it was inundated by the lake behind the Karakaya dam. Layers 6-11 represent an
| Ubaid 1 culture of provincial character. The settlement pattern, mud-brick architecture, painted and unpain-
ted Ubaid-type pottery, other finds, together with the stamp-seals and clay sealings in layer 7, indicate that
a proto-urban, complex socicty inhabited Degirmentepe during the late fifth and early fourth Millennia B.C.
The economy of this society was mostly based on mixed farming and long distance exchange of trade goods.
Espejel, Claudia (Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia)
[8] DOMESTIC STRUCTURES AT XALTOCAN, MEXICO
Excavations at Xaltocan, NOTE Sos SU De SU an a ee ee nee
a kind of “cobble-clay” floor. This type of domestic re was associated with other features such as
pottery decorative motifs, which could help to distinguish regional differences in the Valley of Mexico
| during postclassic times.
| Ezzo, J. (see Altschul, J.) |36| ‘
Ezzo, Joseph (Statistical Research, Inc.)
[54] ZINC AS A PALEODIETARY INDICATOR: TWO DECADES OF UNSCIENTIFIC REASONING IN
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BONE CHEMISTRY ANALYSIS
The use of the concentrations of zinc in archacological bone as an indicator of past dictsjhas become
almost universally accepted in archacological analysis, despite the fact that there is no physiological or
biochemical basis for such usage. Many claims regarding zinc-—~such as trophic-level effects and the relation-
ship between dictary zinc intakes and bone zinc levels—represent either a misuse of or a disregard for
basic nutritional, physiological, and bone chemistry data. Until a sound physiological basis for such claims
is established, the use of zinc as a paleodietary indicator ts unscientific and invalid.
Fagan, J. (see Bennett-Rogers, A.) (35|
Falconer, Steven E. (Arizona State) and Patricia L. Fall (Arizona State)
[46] POPULATION GROWTH, AGRICULTURAL INTENSIFICATION, AND THEIR ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACTS AROUND THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN
The advent of agriculture initiated localized environmental degradation in Southwestern Asia. However,
regional impacts, especially widespread deforestation, resulted from population growth and agricultural
intensification beginning in the fourth millennium B.C. We combine palynological and settlement data to
’
, 48 Fall, P.
reveal episodes of increased settiement density and cultivation of foodstuffs for long distance exchange
(e.g, olives). These intermittent pressures led to long-term cumulative effects epitomized by the virtual
elimination of native woodlands. Regional impacts often are attributable to short-term demands by urban
markets. Rural subsistence patterns (including pastoralism) may be responses to, as well as causes of,
environmental degradation.
Fall, P. (see Falconer, S.) | 46)
Farqué, A. (see Bennett-Rogers, A.) | 35]
Farris, Glenn J. (California Park Service)
[11] FROM EPIDEMICS TO ACADEMICS, CHANGES IN NORTHERN CALIFORNIA INDIAN SOCIO-
GEOGRAPHIC ORGANIZATION DURING THE PAST THREE CENTURIES
For at least a century, study of socio-political organization of the California Indians has been based heavily
on ethnographic information derived from living Indians. Recently, this ethnographic data has been used
to project onto the archaeological finds for village placement and political organization. Ignored were the
dramatic changes that occurred in the living patterns of the California Indians duc to physical and cultural
impacts, among which were epidemic diseases and village concentration. Through use of ethnohistoric
material, archacological data may be re-evaluated to arrive at alternative projections of pre-contact culture
in California.
Faught, Michael (Arizona) and Josepb Donoghue (Florida State)
[41] INUNDATED ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND PALEORIVER CHANNELS IN THE APALACHEE
BAY OF NORTH-WEST FLORIDA
An exposition of the techniques and results of subbottom profiling in the Apalachee Bay of northwest
Florida is presented, including the reconstruction of paleoriver channels, karst geomorphological features,
and stratigraphic regularities. Computer graphic techniques are used to present the results. Evidence from
submerged archacological sites for the timing of sea level rise along the west coast of Florida will be
presented, including geoarchacological and geomorphological evidence for the inundation of the Apalachee
Bay, and models for future geological and archaeological discoveries.
Feddema, Vicki (British Columbia)
[10] EARLY FORMATIVE SUBSISTENCE AND AGRICULTURE ON THE PACIFIC COAST OF
CHIAPAS, MEXICO
Analysis of carbonized plant remains recovered from four sites in the Mazatan area of Chiapas indicates
that the cultivation of domesticated plants was well underway by the beginning of the Early Formative
period. Maize, beans and avocados are the most ubiquitous of the identified species. While it is difficult to
assess the actual dietary contributions of these taxa, the temporal and spatial consistency in their archacologi-
cal occurrence suggests that they were of some economic significance. This is discrepant with stable carbon
isotope data that suggest that maize, at least, was not a significant dietary component during the Early
4 Formative Period.
Fedick, S. (see Hovey, K.) |5|
Fedick, Scott (California-Riverside) and Karl A. Taube (California-Riverside)
[5] THE VIEW FROM YALAHAU: A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON THE NORTHERN MAYA LOWLANDS
The Yalahau Regional Human Ecology Project was initiated in 1993 to investigate ancient Maya settlement,
resource management, and monumental architecture within the wetland zone of northern Quintana Roo,
Mexico. This research has provided a fresh perspective on ancient Maya political organization of the northern
lowlands, particularly for the Early Classic period, when a standard architectural style, and possibly a regional
road system may signify a previously unrecognized political formation. The research orientation of the
project is discussed, initial findings are summarized, and new research questions are posed.
Feinman, Gary M. (Wisconsin-Madison) | Discussant 81 |
Feinman, Gary M. (Wisconsin-Madison) | Discussant 29]
Fergus, R. (see Clark, J.) |81|
Ferrell, R. (see Merriwetber, D.) | 106)
Few, J. (see Wheat, P.) |52|
Finlayson, Bill (Edinburgh) and Steven Mithen (Reading University)
[84] MICROLITHS AS PROJECTILE POINTS? A CASE STUDY FROM WESTERN ENGLAND
Microliths from Mesolithic assemblages in Britain have traditionally been assumed to be projectile points
used to hunt large terrestrial game, and to be associated with upland summer hunting camps. In northern
, Fitzhugh, Ben 49
Britain, and especially in Western Scotland, this assumed role of microliths becomes very questionable.
Mesolithic sites in this region typically have very large numbers of very small microliths, regardless of site
location. In this paper we consider the likely function of these microliths by examining recently excavated
material from sites on the island of Islay dating to between 7-8,000 B,P. Our approach attempts to integrate
various studies, including use-wear, spatial analysis, experiment, and raw material availability.

Finney, F. (see Lensink, S.) | 105}

Finsten, Laura (McMaster University)

[14] CORE-BOUNDARY TRANSFORMATIONS AT MONTE ALBAN’S MARGIN

The Classic-Postclassic transition in the southern Mesoamerican highlands saw the decline of large-scale
states and urban centers such as Monte Alban in the Valley of Oaxaca and Yucufudahui in the Nochixtlan
Valley, and the emergence of dozens of small-scale polities. To the west of Monte Alban, in the Mixtec Sierra
separating these valleys, the peripheral Pefoles region bore the veneer of a controlled boundary zone on
the frontier of Monte Alban’s Classic state. In the Late Postclassic, it was the heartland of an autonomous
petty kingdom. This paper examines the Classic-Postclassic transition in the Penoles region, focusing on
changing core-periphery relations and sociopolitical organization in the Pefoles periphery.

Fish, P. (see Fish, S.) |46|

Fish, Paul R. (Arizona) |Discussant 85]

Fish, Paul R. (Arizona) and James M. Bayman (Arizona State)

[26] THE SOCIAL CORRELATES OF PRODUCTION, CONSUMPTION, AND EXCHANGE AT THE
MARANA MOUND SITE

Specialized roles in manufacture and exchange are among the more common factors implicated in origins
of social differentiation. Centers with platform mounds have long been identified as localized foci of such
roles in Hohokam society because these sites yield a disproportionate share of the materials that circulate
in regional exchange. Distributional data pertaining to social units at the Marana Mound site are among the
most comprehensive for any Hohokam platform mound settlement and permit evaluation of differential
participation in production, consumption and exchange. A site-wide pattern of intensive and relatively
uniform participation is substantiated by multiple lines of evidence, but difficult to resolve with ethnographic
modcls.

Fish, S. (see Crown, P_) [85|

Fish, S. (see Stuart, G.) |98)|

Fish, Suzanne K. (Arizona) and Paul R. Fish (Arizona)

[46] IMPLICATIONS OF SCALE IN LAND SURFACE MANAGEMENT BY THE HOHOKAM

In the southern deserts of the Southwest, perceptions of arable land are often synonymous with opportuni-
ties for applying supplemental water by ee techniques. A compilation of records
for an agricultural site type supplied by ephemeral suggests that such uniquely prehistoric features
cover an suspected magnitude of territory throughout the Hohokam domain. This sample documents
agricultural micromanagement of land surfaces over tens of thousands of hectares on dry slopes in southern
Arizona and reveals an unrecognized scale of landscape modification. These findings underscore the extensive
nature of Hohokam agricultural systems and their environmbntal and economic implications.

Fisher, Lynn (Michigan)
[16] HUNTER-GATHERER MOBILITY AND MODELS OF LITHIC RESOURCE PROCUREMENT: A
CASE STUDY FROM THE UPPER DANUBE BASIN ;

Strategies of lithic raw material procurement are an important source of information about regional
organization of land use, This paper evaluates alternative explanations for changing patterns of lithic raw
material use and transport documented for Late Glacial and Early Postglacial times in the upper Danube
basin. Expectations are derived from proposed models of change in hunter-gatherer mobility strategies at
the Pleistocene/Holocene boundary. Effects of changing mobility on scheduling of tool production and
maintenance, costs of raw material acquisition, and tool needs and discard rates are considered. Implications
for long-term change in hunter-gatherer land use are discussed.

Fitzhugh, Ben (Michigan)
[79] ISLANDS IN THE MIDDLE: DYNAMIC INTERACTIONS IN THE NORTH PACIFIC

For decades, scholars have maintained that the northern Gulf of Alaska is segmented into relatively
bounded cultural groups whose evolution has largely resulted from isolation punctuated by periods of
cultural replacement. It is becoming increasingly clear that a more complex set of models are needed to
explain the sequence of cultural developments in Southwest Alaska. This paper examines the complex
, 50 Fitzhugh, William W.
interplay between geographic distance (relative isolation ) and social interaction in the evolution of relatively
complex hunter-gatherer-fisher socictics.

Fitzbugh, William W. (Smithsonian Institution)

[79] THE DORSET THULE TRANSITION: TAKE 2

The Eastern Arctic was not free of glacial ice and available for human occupation until ca. 4500 years
ago. In the succeeding period, a succession of cultures appeared, cach demonstrating greater efficiency in
adapting to rigorous (and changing ) environmental and climatic conditions, Using the Dorset-Thule transition
as a case study, this paper considers whether the culture history of the North American Arctic behaves like
an (isolated) “island” system in terms of biogeographic and evolutionary models. Are these models of any
use in describing or understanding Arctic cultures, or are they simply distractions?

Fleming, David (Columbia University) and Monica Barnes (Cornell)
[15] ARE THE PUQUIOS OF NAZCA PREHISTORIC?

At the 1993 SAA meeting “definitive proof” of first millennium A.D. dates for Nazca puquios was announced.
Evidence is two AMS dates of component stones. Basic principles of stratigraphy are ignored. In accepting
prehispanic dates we must disregard identical medieval works in Spain's Andarax Valicy. Although hispanic
engineers built similar water systems in Spain, the Canary and Balearic Islands, Mexico, and the Andes, we
are asked to believe that they did not build, or recognize those Nazca. We suggest the puquios may include
reused dressed masonry, and propose lines of rescarch to resolve the dating question,

Flemming, Nicholas (Institute of Ocean Sciences)
[41] PREHISTORIC SUBMARINE ARCHAEOLOGY: WHAT IS THE REAL RATE OF PROGRESS?

Prehistoric submarine archacology is a minority interest with important goals. The community of interested
researchers is below the critical mass for stcady intellectual growth in any one country, and is small
globally. OCS surveys and academic projects tend to be structured around predictive modelling and acoustic
technology New sites are gradually added to the inventory by repeated surveys by divers, or by further
chance finds. The progress in excavating submarine prehistoric sites and artifacts is slow but very cncouraging,
with lithic artifacts found as deep as 145m below present sea ievel in a core taken tens of kilometers
offshore. Over 100 submarine prehistoric sites are known world wide, Proposals are made for improving
communications, news, highlighting objectives, and project support.

Fletcher, Laraine (Adelphi University) and Silvia Salgado (SUNY-Albany)
[32] MACROREGIONAL RELATIONS BETWEEN NICARAGUA AND THE SOUTHERN PERIPHERY OF
MESOAMERICA, 300-800 A.D.

Data from recent research projects in northcentral and southern Pacific Nicaragua suggest that these
regions were cngaged in strong interaction with regions of Honduras and El Salvador, especially central
Honduras and eastern El Salvador, between A.D, 300-800, The paper explores the impact that this interaction
had in the emergence of complex socictics in Nicaragua and how these socicties were part of a macroregional
system that cOUld be characterized as a periphery to the Mesoamerican world-system.

Floss, Harald (Universitat Kéin)
[16] CLIMATE AND RAW MATERIAL BEHAVIOR: A CASE STUDY FROM LATE PLEISTOCENE
HUNTER-GATHERERS OF THE MIDDLE RHINE AREA OF GERMANY

In a project continuing over the last five years, lithic raw materials from 40 Palcolithic sites in the Middle
Rhine area of Germany dating from lower to final Pleistocene have been analyzed. The first evidence for
longer-distance transport of exogene materials is in the Middle Paleolithic. During the Upper Paleolithic
there is a Constant increase of exogene materials with its climax in the Magdalenian. As primary factors
determining raw material procurement strategies we consider climate conditions, paleoenvironment and
hunter-gatherer mobility. This is illustrated by a comparison of raw material procurement of Magdalenian
and the following Azilian industrics.

Fogel, Hiedy
[15] GALLINAZO SETTLEMENT PATTERNS: SOME POSSIBLE SOCIAL AND POLITICAL
IMPLICATIONS

Gallinazo cultural materials date to ca. 100 B.C.-200 A.D,, and are found in the Casma, Nepena, Chao,
Viru, Moche, Chicama, and Jequctepeque Valleys. This paper will examine the social and political implications,
types and distribution of Gallinazo settlements in the Viru, Santa, and Moche Valleys. The hypothesis that
will be examined is that the patterns of settlement indicate that the Gallinazo polity was a well organized
and centralized carly state with an urban capital at the Gallinazo Group site in the Viru Valley.

Foradas, James (Obio State)
[19] NORMATIVE MINERAL COMPOSITIONS AS A MEANS OF DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN
MIDWESTERN CHERTS (FLINTS) USED BY SCIOTO HOPEWELL

Over three hundred samples of chert (flint) from outcrops associated with prehistoric quarries in the

chert-bearing Burlington, Upper Mercer, Zaleski, Vanport, Brush Creek, and other formations, were analyzed
, Fowler, Don D. and Catherine S. Fowler 51
using ICP and other methods. Concentrations of nine Common clements in the cherts were converted to
quantities of “Normative” minerals known to be in the cherts as a result of their geology. Variations in
normative mineral compositions proved useful in differentiating Scioto Hopewell chert artifacts. The method
and results of minimally destructive artifact tests will be discussed.
Ford, A. (see Olson, K.) |12]
Ford, Anabel (California-Santa Barbara)
[81] INTEGRATION AMONG COMMUNITIES, CENTERS, AND REGIONS: ORGANIZATION OF THE
MAYA OF THE BELIZE RIVER AREA
Complex societies depended on an hierarchical structure to organize and integrate constituent populations
and mobilize resources. Hierarchies are manifest in the arrangement of individual setuiements, the variability
within local communities, and the composition of regional centers. For carly civilizations, agriculture was
a fundamental component of the economy. Archacological examples of complex societies provide an
excellent testing ground for identifying the household, community, and regional mechanisms of organization
and integration because, ultimately, wealth in these societies must be tied to the production potential of
land and control of labor. This presentation examines the complex hierarchical relations of the ancient
Maya.
Ford, Pamela J. (Mt. San Antonio College)
[18] QUAKES AND CLAMS: GEOLOGICAL EVENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL REALITIES
What happens to the coastal subsistence system when the resource base is shaken by an earthquake and
inundated by a tsunami? The marine invertebrate assemblage from the West Point site complex documents
pre and post earthquake resource dependence on the Northwest Coast of North America over a 4,500 year
time span. These remains reflect changes in the locally available shellfish resource base instigated by
geological alterations to the intertidal zone.
Forsman, Leonard A. (Larson Antbropological/Archeological Services)
[70] TRADITIONAL CULTURAL PROPERTY EVALUATION IN URBAN CONSTRUCTION PROJECT
SETTINGS: A SEATTLE, WASHINGTON CASE
Evaluation of traditional cultural properties (TCPs) in an urban setting presents unique challenges to
archaeologists, Indian tribes, and project managers. The Municipality of Metropolitan Seattle (METRO)
retained Larson Anthropological/Archacological Services (LAAS) to evaluate TCPs within the construction
corridor of proposed sewage and stormwater project in Seattle, Washington. Landforms within the project
area are central to local aboriginal mythology and may have cultural importance to the Muckleshoot,
Suquamish, and Duwamish Tribes. METRO and LAAS are working with the Tribes to acquire information
from Indian communities in support of the TCP evaluation, which will be a model for future projects.
Foster, M, (See Breternitz, C.) |7|
Foster, M. (see Mitchell, D.) |80|
Foster, Michael (Soil Systems, Inc.) ‘
[30] THE MARISMAS NACIONALES BURIALS: DEATH, SOCIETY, AND WORLD VIEW IN COASTAL
WEST MEXICO
Two hundred and fifty burials were recovered during excavations nee hae lare Classic and Post Classic
sites in the Marismas Nacionales of coastal west Mexico. Burials occu in spatially discrete mounds and
comtained an array of burial goods. This study describes the results of a search for horizontal and vertical
differentiation within and between the burial groups. Evidence of membership in social units and non-kin
associations such as task groups is reviewed as is evidence for social ranking. Finally, world ow a ered
in the mortuary practices is discussed.
Fowler, C. (see Fowler, D.) |40| ;
Fowler, Don D. (Nevada-Reno) and Catherine S. Fowler (Nevada-Reno)
[40] FROM LOVELOCK CAVE TO PAQUIME: IMAGES OF THE PREHISTORIC AMERICAN WEST,
1846-1994
Interpretive ilustrations—drawings, paintings and photographs of archacological sites and imagined pre-
historic scenes or events in the Great Basin and the Greater Southwest—have been published since 1846.
These images, produced by archaeologists, artists, explorers, photographers and professional illustrators,
reflect changing conceptions of the culture histories of the regions and varying degrees of “Romantic” and
“scientific” interpretation of prehistoric sites and material culture. In this paper we discuss a number of
idustrations in relation to changing archaeological and popular conceptions of prehistory and Native Ameri-
can heritage.
, 52 Fowler, Don D. and Nancy Parezo
Fowler, Don D. (Nevada-Reno) and Nancy Parezo (Arizona State Museum)
[38] PRESERVING THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORD; AN ETHICAL OBLIGATION
Archaeologists have always pointed to careful scientific recording of research data as one of the characteris-
tics of professionalism. The records of archaeological research are an important part of the archacological
resource, and contain primary information needed for understanding the past. These materials are irreplace-
able and essential for future research and education. These materials are unique resources for studying the
history of archaeology and its contributions to the development of the sciences and humanities. Archacolo-
gists have a professional responsibility to serve as stewards for these research records, and insure they are
preserved for use by future generations.
Fowler, Peter J. (Newcastle Upon Tyne) |Respondent to Addyman 3]
Francis, Julie (Wyoming Transportation Department)
[103] ROCK ART TRADITIONS IN NORTHWESTERN WYOMING: CHRONOLOGY, SPATIAL
DISTRIBUTIONS, AND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE NUMIC SPREAD
Northwestern Wyoming contains two distinct aboriginal rock art styles: the pecked Dinwoody tradition
and a variety of incised motifs, Dinwoody rock art is the most ancient, with '*C and cation ratio dates of
over 6000 ycars B.P. Dinwoody and incised rock art exhibit almost no spatial overlap. Yet, the pwo traditions
are temporally coeval for at least the last 1000 years. It is argued that Dinwoody represents the indigenous
rock art of northwestern Wyoming and can be ascribed to Numic speaking groups who have occupied the
area for several thousand years.
Frangipane, Marcella (Universita di Roma)
[24] THE RISE OF A LOCAL CENTER AT ARSLANTEPE-MALATYA AND THE DYNAMICS OF EARLY
STATE DEVELOPMENT IN THE LATE URUK PERIOD
The 4th millennium levels at Arslantepe are important for understanding both the autonomy of the first
“urban” centers in eastern Anatolia and the importance of interregional relations in subsequent developments.
Continuity between the Local Late Chalcolithic and the Late Uruk is evidence for the formation of an
autochthonous centralized power at this site. However, the nature and extension of this power appear to
be profoundly changed in the Late Uruk period, when participation in new interregional exchange networks
likely put the elite in a position to exert administrative control over at least part of the primary economy.
Frat, L. (see Gregonis, L.) |52|
Fratt, Lee (Arizona)
[33] THE ROCKY ROAD OF GROUND STONE ANALYSIS IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST: A
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
This paper examines ground stone artifact analysis in relation to the major intellectual trends of Southwest-
ern archacology. Its purpose is to place in perspective the cfforts of pioneering researchers such as Richard
B..Woodbury and to suggest future orientations, problems, and goals. Considered an important part of
archaeological assemblages during the first half of the 20th century, ground stone artifact analysis was
. virtually ignored in the 1960s and 1970s. This trend is reversing as new approaches to identifying artifact
use, understanding grinding technology, and investigating artifact manufacture and tool design are producing
new insights into prehistoric economics and social organization.
Frederick, Charles D. (Texas-Austin)
[8] GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS IN THE NORTHERN BASIN OF MEXICO
Geoarchacological studies associated with excavations at Xaltocan explored two issues: the origins of the
island, and the types of resources available to the former inhabitants, Reconnaissance of the northern Basin
revealed geomorphic features, two beaches and a strand plain, on the northwest side of the basin which
suggest that the lakes of Xaltocan and Zumpango probably were more stable than previous studies have
suggested, Furthermore, stratigraphic and archacologic evidence suggest uhat the island of Xaltocan is a tell
constructed on the lakebed more than a kilometer from the western shore. Acrial photograph analysis and
additional fieldwork on the lakebed cast of Xaltocan located the remains of chinampas presumably con-
structed during the Early Aztec occupation of the site.
Fredrickson, David |Discussant 83]
Fredrickson, David (Sonoma State), Greg White (Sonoma State), and Michael Love (Sonoma
State)
[11] RESOURCE ADMINISTRATION AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF COMPLEX HUNTER-GATHERERS
IN THE NORTH COAST RANGES, CALIFORNIA
Application of optimal foraging models to archaeological data from California's North Coast Ranges ( NCRs )
support the occurrence of a marked organizational change in several localities between about 2000 and
3000 years ago. This change is presumed to mark a shift from Forager to Collector and has been attributed
, |
Gamble, Clive 53
| to resource intensification. Recent investigations in the NCRs, reported here, suggest that social processes
may contribute to such results and point out the need to study not only the development of Collector from
Forager but also the interaction between Collector and Forager-
. Freeman, A. (see Hajic, E.) |88|
Freeman, Andrea (Arizona)
[74] GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO PALEOINDIAN STUDIES: LIKE WATER FOR
CHOCOLATE?
| Prior to the Folsom discovery, geology was considered an integral part of what would become known
as Palcoindian archacology. Though an association has continued to the present day, “interdisciplinary”
work between archacologists and geologists often has separate goals. Developing a sound interdisciplinary
approach demands that archacologists and geologists work cooperatively in a milieu that addresses the
interests of both sciences. Paleoindian archacology operates at a geographic and temporal level that can
take advantage of new conceptual schemes and funding opportunities in the geological sciences, and that
can bring additional insight into the earliest human occupation of North America.
Frison, G. (see Sellet, F.) (74)
Frison, George C. (Wyoming) and Robson Bonnichsen (Oregon State)
{56] THE PLEISTOCENE-HOLOCENE TRANSITION ON THE PLAINS AND ROCKY MOUNTAINS OF
NORTH AMERICA
As the continental ice sheets and valley glaciers receded at the end of the Pleistocene, Clovis populations
occupied the Great Plains and river valicys well into the lower clevations of the Rocky Mountains. Climates
and vegetation were changing; several animal species were extinct or rapidly disappearing, After Clovis,
continually increasing numbers of more localized human groups with different subsistence strategies in
both plains and mountains continued until about 8,000 years ago when the continual trend toward drier
climatic conditions forced human groups into true hunting and gathering subsistence and exploitation of
different ecological niches.
Frost, R. (see Raymond, C.) |32)|
Fujita, H. (see Rosales-Lopez, A.) |57|
Fujita, Harumi (Centro Regional del Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia)
157] PREHISTORIC COASTAL ADAPTATIONS INFERRED FROM EXCAVATION DATA FROM THE
SITES OF EL MEDANO AND EL CONCHALITO, BAJA CALIFORNIA SUR, MEXICO
Results to date of an ongoing research project addressing prehistoric coastal adaptations in the Cape
Region of Baja California, Mexico are presented. The research area encompasses the littoral zone from La
Paz bay on the Gulf of California south to Cabo San Lucas. This represents the most systematic and extensive
survey program yet carried out in the Cape region, an area increasingly impacted by resort development.
Along with primary data on site type and distribution alng the coast, preliminary inferences regarding
changing patterns of shellfish exploitation over the last 4,000 years will be discussed.
Gaines, Sylvia (Arizona State) and Warren M. Gaines (Arizona State)
[37] COMPUTER SIMULATION OF A DIACHRONIC i PORTRAYING VILLAGE ADAPTIVE
BEHAVIOR UNDER ENVIRONMENTAL STRESS
The focus is a hypothetical prehistoric, small! farming community based on empirical data drawn heavily
from the Colorado Plateau of the American Southwest, The model tracks an extensive range of village
activities, kinship and population dynamics (by individuals), environment, food ee
sequences through five gencrations. Available resources, human biological attributes, clima ors and
behavioral rules are input variables to the model. Dynamic adjustments of village strategies are simulated,
using Al techniques of inference and Knowledge Base rules, to observe, on a year by year basis, the impact
of changes on village behavior relating to land use, allocation of resources, labor and energy budgeting. A
modular, table-driven approach provides great flexibility for either instructional or research applications.
Gaines, W. (see Gaines, S.) |37|
Gamble, Clive (Southampton)
[40] IMAGES AS THEORIES ABOUT CAVE MEN
Cave men have been portrayed in three main ways—heroic, comic, and scientific. This paper examines
the visual language employed by the three traditions and concludes that the central proposition of progress
is common to all. The association of dinosaurs and cave men is presented as an example of the Jurassic
tendency in contemporary palcolithic theory.
, 54 Gamble, Lynn

Gamble, Lynn (California-Los Angeles)

[11] THE EFFECTS OF SPANISH COLONIZATION ON CHUMASH SOCIOPOLITICAL
ORGANIZATION.

The Portola land expedition of 1769 marked the beginning of an ¢ra of intensified contact between the
Chumash Indians of the Santa Barbara Channel Coast region and the Spanish Journals from the 1769
expedition indicate that the settlement of Helo’ was the largest village observed at this time, with an
estimated population of approximately 800 individuals. By 1804 Helo’ was abandoned. Fluctuations in house
size, village size, exchange goods, and political organization at Helo’ during this critical 35 year period
refiect the complex impacts of Spanish colonization on the sociopolitical systems of the Chumash
Garber, James (Southwest Texas State)

[10] EXCAVATIONS AT THE CEREMONIAL CENTER OF ONTARIO VILLAGE, BELIZE: RESULTS OF
THE 1993 FIELD SEASON

During the summer of 1994 excavations were initiated by Southwest Texas State University at the medium
sized Maya ceremonial center of Ontario Village in Cayo District, Belize. Excavations on the main mound
revealed evidence of extensive ritual activity on the primary axis dating to the Late Classic period. Addition-
ally, an elite burial was encountered within the construction fill of the final construction phase. The presence
and character of this site provides important information in the reconstruction of the sociopolitical systems
of the Belize River Valley.

Gardner, K, (see Shaffer, B.) |72|

Gaybeart, H. (see Kardulias, P.) |74}

Gebauer, A. (see Price, T.) |47|

Geib, Phil R. (Navajo Nation Archaeology Department)

[97] CONTINUOUS OR NOT? ARCHAIC OCCUPATION OF THE CENTRAL COLORADO PLATEAU

Hunter-gatherer occupation of the Colorado Plateau during the Archaic Period has been traditionally
characterized as continuous, but marked by evolutionary changes. An alternative model contends the Archaic
period was punctuated by regional abandonments and reoccupations, resulting in a succession of new
lifeways and material culture. These two models are evaluated with regard to the radiocarbon record and
Archaic material culture of the Glen Canyon region. Long-term continuity in occupation throughout the
entire Archaic period is supported. Adaptive shifts involving increased residential mobility and changes in
settlement pattern partially account for previous gaps in the Colorado Plateau radiocarbon record.
Gerken, D. (see Carroll, M.) |63)

Gerlach, Craig (Alaska-Fairbanks)
[47] THE DYNAMICS OF SUBSISTENCE RESOURCE USE AND THE ORGANIZATION AND
DEVELOPMENT OF VILLAGE COMMUNITIES IN THE LATE PREHISTORIC NORTH ALASKA
This paper investigates the causes and consequences of shifting settlement patterns as a result of control
‘ over strategic resource locations on both the coast and in the interior of Alaska. Several cultural and
economic transition points are discussed wherein the relationship of mobility to sedentism is a function of
changing ecological relationships, the emergence of complex political systems, and patterns of cultural
integration, trade, and warfare.
Gerrell, P. (see Anuskiewicz, R.) | 41|
Gerry, Jobn (Harvard University)
[106] CLASSIC MAYA DIETARY PATTERNS: THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SOCIAL AND ECOLOGICAL
VARIABLES

This paper discusses dictary patterns among the Classic Maya as they are revealed by stable carbon and
nitrogen isotope ratios preserved in human bone. Skeletal samples are drawn from seven sites: Uaxactun,
Holmul, Baking Pot, Barton Ramie, Seibal, Altar de Sacrificios, and Copan. The isotopic results indicate that
Maya dietary behavior was not so much socially dictated as it was spatially determined; i.c., neither class nor
gender nor chronological context are significant factors of isotopic variation when compared to geographic
location. Micro-environmental factors are examined to account for regional groupings, but ultimately,
settlement density ts considered a more significant variable,

Gessler, Nicholas (California-Los Angeles)
[99] STEPS TOWARDS CREATING AN “ARTIFICIAL CULTURE;” THE EMERGENCE OF GLOBAL
CULTURAL PATTERNS FROM LOCAL PARTICIPANT RULES

Individual actors, operating under individual local rules, can automatically produce collective global
patterns of behavior that emerge solely through their mutual intcractions. Interestingly, these global patterns
of behavior are not programmed into the simulation. They have no existence within the individual actors.
, ¥
|
| Goldberg, Paul and John Jacob 55
| Rather, they come into being only as the entire system evolves, These dynamics of “The Science of Complex-
ity" are variously referred to as emergent, self-organizing, cybernetic, synergetic, dynamical, or non-linear
| systems. Paradigms have crystallized in conferences on “Artificial Life.” The time seems ripe to press
epistemological successes in some behavioral and social sciences into service in modeling cultural evolution
and change in anthropology.
Gettelman, K. (see Havill, L.) | 106)
Giesso, M. (see Glascock, M.) |19|
Gifford, Jobn A. (Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences) and Steve Koski
(Miami)
141] EARLY HOLOCENE DEPOSITIONAL ENVIRONMENTS IN LITTLE SALT SPRING
Little Salt Spring (LSS; 8S018), Florida, possesses an extensive funnel-shaped basin containing a terrestrial/
lacustrine sediment sequence from 1-4m thick Despite excavations from 1971 to 1979, a definitive strati-
graphic sequence was never published. New test excavations in the LSS basin and cores from the sediment
cone in the spring bottom have yiclded a sequence of subaqueous and subacrial deposits from the Late
Pieistocenc/Holocenc boundary. Eoilian quartz sands characterize the subacrial deposits. Intensive human
activity, represented by wood, bone, and antler implements, occurred between 8500-9500 C-14 y.B.P.
during a period of lowered spring levels. Organics predominate in later deposits, including the peats that
hold 1000+ Middle Archaic burials on the basin’s perimeter.
Gifford-Gonzalez, Diane (Californta-Santa Cruz)
[40] LE PLUS C'EST LE CHANGE. REPRESENTATIONS OF AGE AND GENDER IN ARTISTS’
PORTRAYALS OF HUMAN ANCESTORS
Artists’ depictions of human ancestors have recently been recognized to be powerful and semi-autonomous
discourses that actively form expert as well as popular understandings of the past. Analysis of over 500 such
images reveals strong patterning in representations of activity, placement in the frame, and posture relevant
to gender and age. Images drawn from the fine arts of bygone centurics imbuc many recent representations
with potent messages about gender and power in Paleolithic life. To disrupt our habits of viewing, post-
war Western representations of anatomically modern humans are explored for aspects of their social content.
Gilman, Antonio (California State-Nortbridge) | Discussant 12}
Glascock, M. (see Cogswell, J.) (78|
Glascock, M. (see Olson, K.) (12)
Glascock, Michael (Missouri), Martin Giesso (Chicago), Ricbard L. Burger (Yale), and
Ernesto Salazar (Universidad Catolica-Quito)
[19] SOUTH AMERICAN OBSIDIAN STUDIES AT THE MISSOURI UNIVERSITY RESEARCH
REACTOR
The Archacometry ee a ne Cereete ee tine Research Reactor is assembling a database of
obsidian source analyses for South America. Obsidian sources and archacological sites in the countries
of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Chile has been studied by neutron activation analysis. The complete
analysis, which yields 27 clements, differentiates chemically similar sources. Source determination of artifacts
is assisting archacologists in understanding the movement of obsidian throughout the Andean region.
Glass, C. (see Howard, J.) | 26) ‘
Glassow, Michael A. (California-Santa Barbara) | Discussant 92|
Goebel, Ted (Alaska-Fairbanks) \
[94] LATE PLEISTOCENE HUMAN SETTLEMENT OF SUBARCTIC SIBERIA
Joint Russian-American field research has begun on a series of subarctic Siberian Upper Paicolithic sites
preliminarily dated to 30,000-20,000 B.P. These sites include Alekseeysk and Shishkino-8 on the upper Lena
River, Nepa-1, Ineiskii Bor, and Kremennoe on the upper Nizhnaia Tunguska River, and Ust'-Kova on the
middle Angara River. To date, with the exception of Ust’-Kova (extensively excavated in the 1970s), these
sites have only been preliminarily studied. Each is well-stratified and thought to contain an Upper Paleolithic
component that, based on initial radiocarbon dates and/or stratigraphy, predates the last glacial maximum.
Goldberg, Paul (Texas-Austin) and Jobn Jacob (Texas AGM University)
[87] GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT OP. 4046, COLHA, BELIZE
Geoarchacological investigations at Op. 4046 focused on the delineation and documentation of site
Stratigraphy and the generation of hypotheses concerning site formation processes, Four stratigraphic units
consisting of calcareous and decalcified silty and sandy clays were found to overlie a weathered marly
substrate; these contain artifact material dated from 2500-1100 B.C. The two black uppermost units are
it ———
, 56 Goldstein, L.
noteworthy for anthropogenic inputs from nearby mound erosion. Micromorphological, grain size, carbonate
and organic matter analyses suggest low energy sedimentation, modified by pedoturbation and leaching.
Goldstein, L. (see Watkins, J.) |38)
Goldstein, Paul (Dumbarton Oaks and American Museum of Natural History)
[43] FORMATIVE AND TIWANAKU-CONTEMPORARY SETTLEMENT PATTERNS IN THE
MOQUEGUA VALLEY, PERU
Results of the first season of the Moquegua Archacological Survey suggest a more complex social landscape
than indicated by previous site-centered investigations. The distribution of Prehispanic sites discovered in
the 1993 season of systematic reconnaissance displays conspicuous differences in settlement choices and
agricultural pattern among Formative (Huaracane Phase ), Tiwanaku, Wari, and Late Intermediate occupations.
Ongoing settlement pattern survey will continue to shed light on the interaction of the first expansive states
and indigenous chiefdoms in the South Central Andes.
Goles, G. (see Ayers, W.) |6|
Goodby, Robert G, (Wheaton College)
[96] TYPOLOGY AND MEANING: PROBLEMS WITH IMPOSING ORDER ON CONTACT PERIOD
CERAMICS FROM SOUTHEASTERN NEW ENGLAND
Typology, with its emphasis on order, consensus, and hierarchy reproduces in prehistory the dominant
values of modern socicty. Typological frameworks mask diversity and individual expression in material
culture much as modern elites emphasize consensus to marginalize dissenting voices in political discourse.
The study of aboriginal ceramics in southern New England has relied on ceramic “types” as horizon markers
and as markers of discrete social groups. Contact period ceramics from Narragansett Bay are used to dispute
the existence of “types,” and to argue that diverse ceramic styles were actively used to symbolize Native
unity and autonomy in opposition to European colonialism.
Goodman, Dean (Miami, Japan Division), Yasushi Nishimura (Nara National Cultural
Properties), J. Daniel Rogers (Smithsonian Institution), Mark Lynott (National Park Service),
and James Price (Missouri)
[63] JOINT U.S/JAPAN RESEARCH PROJECT TO PROMOTE THE USE OF HI-TECH GROUND
PENETRATING RADAR EQUIPMENT AND ADVANCED DATA PROCESSING FOR THE STUDY
OF NATIVE AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
The results of a joint U.S. and Japan research project using non-destructive Ground Penetrating Radar
(GPR) at several native American Indian sites are presented. The application of advanced geophysical data
processes, which provide estimated archacological site plans based on gridded radar reflection data taken
from closely spaced paralle! profiles, are developed, The site plans made from the profiled data provide for
an estimation of the depth, shape, size and trend of buried archacological structures. The data are also
integrated into 3-D depth maps depicting the depth to buried archaeological features across the sites. The
‘ data show the locations and general shapes of Hopewellian and Mississippian habitation sites, and burial
tombs, as well as previously known and reburied excavation trenches,
Goodyear, Albert C. (South Carolina Institute of Archaeology & Anthropology) and Dan F.
Morse (Arkansas Archeological Survey)
[56] THE PLEISTOCENE-HOLOCENE BORDER IN THE EASTERN USA
The Eastern Woodlands from | 1,000 to 9,000 B.P. displays both uniformity and diversity from the northeast
to the Gulf of Mexico. After beginning with a very widespread Clovis culture, regionalization is readily
apparent by latitude. While fluted points persist until 10,000 B.P. in the north, resharpened fluted points
(Dalton) may be as carly as 10,500 B.P. in the Southeast. Hafted bifaces are the most sensitive to these
changes rather than fake tools. The Kirk horizon (9,500-9,000 B.P.) scems to represent a reunification of
the East during the carly Holocene.
Gould, Russell T. (Southern Metbodist) and Mark G. Plew (Boise State)
[61] OPTIMAL FORAGING APPROACHES TO PREHISTORIC SALMON FISHING IN THE NORTHERN
GREAT BASIN: THE ECOLOGICAL DYNAMICS OF TRADE-OFFS AND STRATEGIC RESPONSES
When viewed from an optimal foraging perspective, historic Northern Shoshone salmon fishing provided
an important alternative to camas root procurement and mammal hunting, even though the latter represented
o higher yield-lower cost resources. Salmon fishing and storage buffered camas and mammal shortfalls. Recent
archacological investigations in Southern Idaho address these resource trade-offs in a prehistoric setting
Analytical techniques which link ecological patterns to spatial structure at a variety of scales allow for an
empirical evaluation of optimality constructs. This approach allows for a mix of strategies, rather than
asserting that one, and only one, predominates.
, ;
Green, Roger C. 57
Graber, Robert Bates (Nortbeast Missouri State) and Michael T. Dunne (Northeast Missouri
State)
[99] CATASTROPHE THEORY, POPULATION PRESSURE, AND POLITICAL EVOLUTION
Viewing political evolution as a cusp Catastrophe precipitated by increasing population density yields
surprising retrodictions with definite archacological implications. Retrodictions overturning those of ordinary
population-pressure reasoning include the cxistence of (1 ) threshold densities triggering political evolution
that then would proceed without further density increase, and (2) ranges within which considerable density
decrease would fail to produce significant political devolution. That catastrophe theory can yield specific
predictions of future archaeological discoveries is demonstrated by application to the Powhatan chiefdom |
of Virginia.
Graffam, Gray (Trent University)
[14] BEYOND COLLAPSE: A VIEW FROM THE TIWANAKU HEARTLAND
Pre-Hispanic state regimes were never quite as totalitarian, in an economic sense, as some models predict,
and the issues surrounding state collapse and rural restructuring are fertile topics for the consideration of
cultural adaptation. At some point between A.D. 1000 and A.D. 1200, the Tiwanaku polity of the South
Andes collapsed. At issue is the degree to which rural peoples were dependent upon state-level institutions
for their survival, and ways in which they would have modified their economic activities in the wake of
political collapse. The case is presented that fcld agriculture and llama herding were never matters complctcly
under state “control” and that they present a degree of continuity that called for rural restructuring in the
wake of Tiwanaku collapse.
Grabam, Elizabeth (York University)
{14] THE MAYA COLLAPSE—CHAOS AND CONTINUUM
Having excavated sitcs with Postclassic and Historic components, | see bridges built as well as burnt over
the chasm of Classic collapse. Although environmental degradation is a popularly cited “cause” of collapse,
carly Postclassic florescence suggests that whatever “degradation” occurred was in the process of permutating
political structures. Whole or partial disassembling of supports for Classic power necessitated new frame-
works, and these came with new designs and hierarchies. An older view of collapse sees wider Mesoamerican
cultural forces at work; though material culture demonstrates population continuity, some changes suggest |
Significant shuffling of people and paraphernalia about the Yucatan peninsula.
Granger, Joseph E. (Louisville)
[78] ORGANIZING THE OBTAINABLE IN ORCHARD PARK: A RE-EXAMINATION OF EARLY |
WOODLAND EXTRACTIVE CAMPS IN WESTERN NEW YORK
Recent research conducted around the Petrie site in the town of Orchard Park in New York's Niagara |
Frontier yielded important information on the organization of catchment surrounding Meadowood Phase
extractive camps, These spring-summer settlement types were utilized by microband segments for the taking
and processing of fish and secondarily for chert acquisition and territorial control. Petrie Site activities
related to chert acquisition are now understood to display ee more dispersed and complex pattern
Gan heretofore defined. The “Petrie pattern" of Detached LMbic Activity Loci is described and applied to
other extractive camp logistical situations in the Niagara Frontier.
Graves, Michael W. (Hawat'i-Manoa) {Discussant 100}
Graves, Michael W. (Hawaii-Manoa) i
(81) KALINGA REGIONAL COMMUNITY BOUNDARIES: AN EVOLUTIONARY EXPLANATION OF |
STYLE AND TERRITORIALITY |
Ethnoarchacological research among the Kalinga of the Philippines has documented aspects of their
community organization, including: locations of regional boundaries, size of territory, agricultural lajd, intra-
community integration, and intercommunity economic relations. This study examines the relations among
m@ese variables within the context of environmental variability involving resource distribution and predict-
ability. An evolutionary explanation is offered for the development of differences in territoriality among
te Kalinga. This explanation is tied to evolutionary-ccological models involving risk reduction in highly
Competitive settings.
Green, Roger C. (Auckland) | Discussant 6|
Green, Roger C. (Auckland)
1100] ARCHAEOLOGICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF SOCIAL AND POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN
POLYNESIA
The development of Polynesian social and political complexity appears to have followed two trajectories,
ome centered in West and the other in East Polynesia. Sufficient societies within each region conform to
the pattern of the other, however, that it is evident actual historical developments were rather more
, 58 Greenlee, Diana M.
complicated than would be predicted solely from this fundamental geographic division. Rather, the added
complications are suggested to stem from how various social, political, and religious arrangements were
worked out among the different elites of each society, as refiected in the kinds of monumental structures
they build in the different island groups.
Greenlee, Diana M. (Washington)
[35] DOCUMENTING SUBSISTENCE VARIABILITY IN THE OHIO RIVER VALLEY, A.D, 400-1650
The period A.D. 400-1650 is recognized as a time of settlement and subsistence change associated with
the appearance of nucleated farming villages in the Ohio Valley. Because setticment and subsistence systems
have specific requirements regarding the spatial and temporal distribution of resources, the distribution
and particular manifestation of these phenomena will vary through time and across environments. This
research documents temporal and environmental variability in faunal remains, botanical remains, and stable
carbon isotope ratios from the central and upper Ohio River Valley as a basis for explaining subsistence
change.
Greenwald, David (SWCA, Inc.)
[80] PUEBLO SALADO AND BRADY WASH: A CASE STUDY OF SITES FROM RIVERINE AND NON-
RIVERINE SETTINGS
The Hohokam Classic to post-Classic transition is explored by comparing and contrasting two sites that
contain occupations attributed to the Civano and Polvorén phases. Pucblo Salado, located on the floodplain
of the Salt River in the Phoenix Basin, and Brady Wash, located on the bajada of the Picacho Mountains
south of the Gila River, are used in this case study as both contained continuous occupations from the
Civano phase through the Polvorén phase. Effects of the environmental settings upon these sites are examined
and explanations concerning changes in attributes between the Classic and post-Classic periods are offered.
Greenwald, Dawn (SWCA, Inc.)
= [33] TABULAR KNIVES: TECHNO-MORPHOLOGICAL VARIATION WITHIN A TOOL CLASS
Tabular knives have a long use history over a wide geographic area in the Southwest. They form a unique
component of both ground and flaked stone assemblages in Arizona by representing a tool of specialized
function that crosscuts multiple cultural boundaries. Morphological, technological, and contextual data from
these tools are examined from a variety of sites in the Southwest to derive intra- and interregional interpreta-
tions for tabular knife variability.
Greer, J. (see Greer, M.) (105)
Greer, Jobn (Missouri-Columbia) and Mavts Greer (Missourt-Columbia)
[15] ANTHROPOMORPHS IN PICTOGRAPHS OF SOUTHERN VENEZUELA
Human forms are diverse and appear to refer to a wide variety of activities. Many are thought to refer
back to creation time and to what may be mythological ancestors, while others may be tribally biographic
and refer to specific events, either mythological or real, which still are in the oral history of local indigenous
groups. Some portrayals may simply refer to specific activities, such as dances. What are interpreted as
shaman figures may refer cither to spirits or to actual persons, while auxiliary figures seem to represent
trance state while under the influence of hallucinogenic drugs. States of being (eg, pregnancy, death ) are
portrayed, as are such materialistic details as clothing and decoration.
Greer, M. (see Greer, J.) {\5|
Greer, Mavis (Missouri-Columbia) and Jobn Greer (Missouri-Columbia)
[105] AN OVERVIEW OF CENTRAL MONTANA ROCK ART
During the past rwo years a continuing study of Montana Rock Art has increased the number of recorded
pictograph sites in central Montana to over 125. Although paintings generally can be included in the “Central
Montana Abstract Tradition,” they display a wide variety of stylistic categories that can be differentiated by
technological, artistic, and thematic characteristics with perceived temporal and ethnic differences. Some
styles portray a public orientation, while others suggest private ritual. All appear to be associated with
shamanistic activities.
Gregonis, Linda M. (Tucson Unified School District) and Lee Fratt (Tucson Unified School
District)
(52] MULTICULTURALISM AND CITIZENSHIP: EVALUATING TUCSON UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT'S ARCHAEOLOGY PROGRAM AT CAMP COOPER
Archacology is an effective method for creating cultural awareness while developing citizenship skills
and self-esteem. In 1992-1993, a middie school with a high Yaqui population participated in a program
focusing on Native American perspectives on archacology. During the 1993-1994 school year, an inner-city
middle school will take seventh grade classes through an interdisciplinary unit. The teacher team will pre-
test and post-test students to determine (1) the effectiveness of student-centered teaching for that age
, Habicht-Mauche, Judith A. 59
group, (2) the impact on attitudes toward other cultures, and (3) the impact of the program on citizenship
skills.
Gregory, David (Archaeological Consulting Services) {Discussant 26]
Gregory, David (Archaeological Consulting Services)
[80] EL POLVERGN PHASE IN A REGIONAL PERSPECTIVE
El Polverén phase is reviewed from a regional perspective, including reasons for widespread changes that
occurred in the late 1300s. Brief consideration is also given to the taxonomic status and general validity of
the phase, based upon the various materials that have been grouped under it.
Grube, N. (see Hammond, N.) |60|
Guderjan, Thomas (St. Mary's University), Helen R. Haines (York University), Michael
Lindeman (Soil Systems, Inc.), Ellen Ruble (Northern Arizona University), and Pamela Weiss
(Montreal)
[60] THE BLUE CREEK RUIN, BELIZE: AT THE EDGE OF THE PETEN
The Blue Creck ruin is the largest of a series of Maya sites on top of the Bravo Escarpment in NW Belize.
This escarpment delineates the eastern boundary of the Peten physiographic region as well as the Late
Classic period boundary of the Peten and Northern Belize spheres. Chronological architectural data support
the idea that it may have been a “daughter site” of the regional center of La Milpa. The archaization seen
in iconography and pottery may reflect attempts to link the rulers to their ancestral lincage and home.
Gumerman, George J. (Santa Fe Institute) and Timothy A. Kobler (Wasbington State)
(99] ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE SCIENCES OF COMPLEXITY
Archacologists have a long tradition of exploring the development of complexity, however, their use of
the term is only partially consistent with the concept as used by the various developing sciences of
complexity. Computational experimentation in artificial biological, physical, and cultural worlds may aid in
understanding simple rules that result in complex behavior. Archacologists could profit from the utilization
of one of the major strengths of anthropology, the comparative approach, not only by comparing the
evolutionary trajectories of diverse cultures, but through a broader comparison of culture with biological
and physical complex adaptive complex systems.
Gustafson, Alice A. (Colorado-Denver)
[72] THE DUNCAN RANCH SITE 1: A LATE WOODLAND/INCIPIENT ANTELOPE CREEK PHASE
SITE
The origin of the Antelope Creek village manifestation on the Canadian River in the Texas Panhandle has
been attributed to migration from another cultural area or the acculturation of a local Woodland group
based on diffusion of traits and ideas. Research and excavations on the Duncan Ranch Site 1, 41HC124,
near the main aggregations of Antelope Creek sites support indigenous development. Contact and trade
with groups traversing the Canadian River and innovation resulted in a continuum of traits and processes
between an earlier Woodland group and the Antelope Creek village c@mmunities.
Gutiérrez, M. (see Hyland, J.) (57|
Gutiérrez, Maria de la Luz (Centro Regional del Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e
Historia, La Paz, Baja California Sur, Mexico) and Justin R. rane (California, Berkeley)
(57] FIRST REPORT ON THE PROYECTO ARTE RUPESTRE SIERRA DE SAN FRANCISCO, BAJA
: CALIFORNIA SUR, MEXICO
The Proyecto Arte Rupestre Sierra de San Francisco, Baja California Sur, Mexico, one of the twelve
Proyectos Especiales now being carried out by the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia ¢ Historia, represents )
the largest archacological project ever undertaken in Baja California. The goals of this two-year project are
(1) the archaeological investigation of the famous Sierra de San Francisco painted murals and (2) the
development of conservation strategies for the mural sites. Project accomplishments to date are reported,
including: first AMS dates for the murals, the discovery of a new obsidian source, and evidence for Clovis
occupation of central Baja California.
| Habicht-Mauche, Judith A, (California-Santa Cruz)
[$8] CERAMIC PRODUCTION AND SOCIOPOLITICAL CHANGE IN THE NORTHERN RIO GRANDE
This paper examines evidence for the organization of ceramic production and trade in the northern Rio
Grande Valley of New Mexico within the context of shifting sociopolitical alliances in the region during
the fifteenth century. Preliminary results of attribute and materials analyses of pottery collections from the
Galisteo Basin sites of Pucbio Blanco (LA40) and San Marcos (LA98) are presented, This area is generally
considered to have been a major center for the production of glaze-painted ceramics during the fifteenth
, 60 Habu, Junko
century, making it the ideal locality from which to explore processes of sociopolitical interaction and change
among the Eastern Pucblos.

Habu, Junko (McGill)

[47] JOMON, HUNTER-GATHERERS, HOW SEDENTARY WERE THEY?

Despite the common assumption of Jomon people as fully sedentary, living in permanent residential bases
year-round, in reality, Jomon settlement systems are poorly understood. In this paper, settlement data from
the Moroiso phase (ca. 5,000 B.P.) are used to interpret Early Jomon subsistence-settlement systems. The
results suggest that the Moroiso phase people were relatively sedentary, but not necessarily remaining in
the same settlement throughout the year. These results are then used to address the question of the
development of sedentism from the Initial through to the Final Jomon periods.

Hackbarth, Mark (Northland Research, Inc.)
[80] CLASSIC PERIOD HOHOKAM MORTUARY PATTERNS FROM THE SANTA CRUZ FLATS

Excavations at three Classic Period Hohokam sites in south-central Arizona have identified mortuary
patterns from the Sedentary Classic period transition and the Classic Period, including a Terminal Classic
component. Evidence of secondary cremations, primary and secondary inhumations, mass graves, and initial
processing in possible charnel features was found at two habitation villages and one farmstead. In conjunction
with an analysis of grave goods, a review of these patterns documents a changing mortuary behavior on
the Santa Cruz Flats, Modifications of Classic Period mortuary behavior are associated with the collapse and
disintegration of Hohokam cultural systems within the Santa Cruz Flats Hohokam.

Hager, Lori D. (Stanford University)
[40] FASHIONING THE “PRIMITIVE” IN HUMAN EVOLUTION: ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF
LOOKING AT NEANDERTHALS, LOOKING AT US

Since the first discovery of Neanderthal fossils more than 100 years ago, these carly humans have frequently
been represented in pictorial form as our “primitive” ancestors: brutish, bectic-browed, stooped over, and
dim witted. Our interpretations of who the Neanderthals are in human ancestry have been significantly
structured by the visual images presented in both public and scientific spheres. This paper examines how
the Neanderthals, more than any other group of hominids, have been used as a locus from which to negotiate
cultural, and especially racial, difference through the medium of visual imagery.

Hagstrum, M. (see Hildebrand, J.) (61)

Hagstrum, Melissa (Washington)

[12] COMMONER AND CRAFT: THE DOMESTIC CONTEXT OF THE PYROTECHNOLOGIES IN THE
INKA EMPIRE

The peasant houschold constituted the backbone of the Inka Empire's overall productivity, The family
group, moreover, composed the core of craft production for local, provincial, and state consumption.
Investigations in Peru and Argentina show the effectiveness of the peasant household for the multiple roles—
agricultural and artisanal-—that householders assumed in their economic lives. Archacological evidence
from domestic contexts reveals overlapping patterns in the pyrotechnologies, pottery-making, metal-working,

. and cooking as well. This paper discusses the character of the domestic pyrotechnic craft economy and
examines the form and functioning of the hinterland household as family farm and craft studio.
Haines, H. (see Guderjan, T.) (GO|
Hafic, Ed (IMinots State Museum) and Andrea Freeman (Artzona)
[88] STRATIGRAPHIC AND GEOMORPHIC CONTEXT AT THE PALEO CROSSING PALEOINDIAN
SITE, OHIO

Surface survey of the plowed surface of kamic topography yielded abundant Paleoindian debris but the
presence and context of potential intact sub-plowzone Paleoindian cultural deposits were in question.
Results of a coring program revealed three pedogenically altered lithostratigraphic units. A basal terminal
late Wisconsinan supraglacial and/or progiacial loam diamicton (1) consisting of various types of debris
flows underlies a silt loam and silt loam diamicton, (2) consisting of debris flows, loess-derived colluvium,
and possibly loess. The plow zone (3) differentially truncates these units depending on hillslope location,
Units 2 and 3 contain Palcoindian materials. The gcometry of Unit 2, deposited and preserved in footslope
and tocslope locations, and thickness of plow zone were used as guides of placement of cxcavation units.
Haley, S. (see Malinowski, L.) |72|
Hall, Barbara Ann (Riverside Community College)

[36] SPINDLE WHORLS AND THE COTTON TRADE IN MIDDLE CLASSIC MESOAMERICA-
PERSPECTIVES FROM THE GULF COAST

For the Aztecs, cotton cloth was a vital trade and tribute item that marked status and achievement. Spindle

whorls, a primary artifactual indicator of cloth production, appear during the Epiclassic/Early Postclassic in
a lt
, .

Hard, Robert J. 61
most of Mesoamerica, but only in scarce quantities. However, evidence from the Gulf Coast suggests that
cloth production became important beginning in the Middle Classic. A ratio of whorls to sherds, and other
evidence, suggests that spinning became vital to the economy of certain sites in south and central Veracruz
during the Middle Classic, driven at least partly by Teotihuacan interaction. Increased interregional interac-
tion would promote the need for status markers such as cotton, which, in turn, would enhance economic
growth and social differentiation in areas that supplied such goods. With the decline of Teotihuacan, cotton
production spread to other regions in Mesoamerica.
Hamilton, Christopber | Discussant 38}
Hammond, Norman (Boston University), Gair Tourtellot III (Boston University), Jobn R. Rose
(Pittsburgh), and Nikolai Grube (University of Bonn)
[60] THE CITY OF UCAY: SURVEY AND EXCAVATION AT LA MILPA, BELIZE, 1992-1994

The Classic Maya city of La Milpa in northwestern Belize was until recently one of the least-known major
centers in the castern lowlands. Mapping has now revealed a ceremonial precinct covering 0.5 square
kilometers, with a main plaza including two ballcourts and four large pyramids, and construction beginning
in the Late Preclassic. Seventeen stelac document clite occupation from before A.D, 450 to after 800, and
name two rulers. Monument repositioning may be several centuries later, with veneration arguably continuing
into the colonial period. The La Milpa community was extensive, and surveys document its settlement
pattern and resource procurement activity.
Haney, Jefferson (Sonoma State)
[33] BEDROCK MORTARS AS A REFLECTION OF TRANS-SIERRA SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC

INTERACTION

This paper examines hunter-gatherer adaptations through a study of bedrock mortars in the Mono Basin-
Long Valley region of the eastern Sierra Nevada. These milling features occur throughout California and are
commonly associated with acorn processing. Oak trees, abundant in the western Sierra, are absent in most
regions of the eastern Sierra. The distribution of the bedrock mortars in the latter region reflects a broad
interaction sphere which involved economic and social relations among populations of the castern and
western Sierra. The importance of these relationships with respect to local adaptive systems and to prehistoric
change in the region is investigated.
Hanson, C. (see Bey, G.) {60}
Hanson, Craig (Tulane University), William Ringle (Davidson College), and Sbaron Bennett
[76] THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY ENCOMIENDA VILLAGE FROM NORTHERN YUCATAN, MEXICO

Historical accounts from northern Yucatan concerning conquest-period Maya have been central to ethno-
graphic reconstructions of the Maya, yet independent archacological verification is as yet scarce. In 1991,
discovery of a sixteenth century ramada chapel near the center of the Terminal Classic site of Ek Balam,
Yucatan, led in 1992 to mapping and excavations of the church and a portion of the surrounding reduction
een aene Dente earnce Dene Se specie anes ea ee
earliest zones of encomicnda formation in Yucatan, Ek provides insight into initial colonial strategies
and indigenous responses.
Hanson, D. (see Ambrose, S.) |54|
Hanson, Diane K. (Puerto Rico) '
[10] ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION FROM SHELLFISH AT MONSERRATE, PUERTO RICO

A cultural break between the Cuevas and Ostiones traditions was identified in the 1930s at Monscrrate,
Puerto Rico, using shellfish associated with the distinctive ceramic styles. The shift in fauna associated with
the cultural transition in the Caribbean has been interpreted by various scholars as a result 4f increasing
demographic pressures, environmental changes, or cultural preferences. In 1992, shellfish were collected
to determine what the environmental conditions were at the site during this transition: if the associated
mangrove was present prehistorically, and what the characteristics were of the local intertidal zone which
is now primarily an extensive mudflat bordered by coral reefs.
Hard, Robert J. (Texas-San Antonio)
[72] AGRICULTURAL INTENSIFICATION IN THE SACRAMENTO MOUNTAINS OF SOUTHCENTRAL

NEW MEXICO

Excavations during the summer of 1993 by the University of Texas at San Antonio Field School provided
evidence regarding the role of cultigens at a site which dates to the Late Pithouse period. Located in the
pinyon-juniper zone in the Sacramento Mountains, this research can address issucs regarding the role
of ecological variabiliry in bringing about agricultural intensification, particularly when contrasted with
adaptations in the adjacent Chihuahua desert.
, 62 Hardy, Ellen
Hardy, Ellen (Museo Nacional de Costa Rica)
[32] PETROGLYPHS OF OROSI VOLCANO: GRAPHIC REPRESENTATIONS OF PREHISPANIC
SOCIAL ORGANIZATION, IDEOLOGY AND RELIGIOUS BELIEFS
Preliminary investigation of an extensive petroglyph field at Sitio Pedregal, Guanacaste National Park,
allows insights into prehispanic religious beliefs and social order, Hundreds of abstract and representational
elements, technically and iconographically elaborate and sophisticated, depict a complex belief system.
Stylistic variation suggests the rock art is the product of more than one cultural group. Comparison of some
of the petroglyph images to those found on ceramics indicate Bagaces and Sapoa Periods components ( 300/
500—800 A.D.; 800—1450 A.D.) although it is possible the site was used over more extended duration.
Hare, Alan (Marty Indian School) [Forum Participant 95|
Hare, Timotiry (State University of New York-Albany)
[10] LAPEDARY CRAFT SPECIALISTS AT OTUMBA: THE ORGANIZATION OF CRAFT PRODUCTION
IN LATE AZTEC MEXICO
1 address the organization of lapidary craft specialization in the Otumba city-state during the Late Aztec
period (A.D. 1350-1522). The Otumba Project directed by T. Chariton and D. Nichols identified lapidary
production areas at Otumba through surface collections and excavation. The focus of this project is the
obsidian, chert, basalt, ceramics, and figurines from a 100% surface collection associated with a lapidary
workshop. I integrate ethnohistoric records and archacological data to explain the organization of lapidary
production. | describe the unit of production, lapidary technology, and identify the connections between
lapidary craft specialists and clites, merchants and other craft producers.
Harrold, F. (see Ellwood, B.) |70|
Harrold, Francis B. (Texas-Arlington), Kari M. Petruso (Texas-Arlington) and Brooks 8.
Ellwood (Texas-Arlington)
[9] ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH AT KONISPOL CAVE, ALBANIA
in 1993 a joint Albanian-American team continued and expanded the excavation of Konispol Cave in the
Sarande District of southern Albania Components ranging from Hellenistic to at least Epipaleolithic age
have been documented in sediments over 4 meters deep. Data collection and analysis were undertaken by
project members specializing in ceramic and lithic artifacts, zooarchacology, palcoecthnobotany, geoarchacol-
ogy, and palynology. Preliminary results concerning radiocarbon chronology, environments, and human use
of the cave will be discussed.
Hartley, Ralph (National Park Service-Midwest Archeological Center) and Anne Wolley
Vawser (National Park Service)
[103] GOING NOWHERE: HOW TO KNOW WHERE YOU ARE IN THE DESERT WITHOUT A GPS
__Relationships between the content of prehistoric rock art panels and their position on the landscape is
the subject of both speculation and analyses. The mobility requirements of aboriginal groups using arid and
‘ semi-arid environments suggests that the location of some petroglyphs and pictographs may be a component
of the archeological record that allows for an assessment of routes of movement in southeastern Utah. Did
rock art contribute to spatial orientation in this environment? Did the content of rock art panels vary with
reference to accessibility? Geographic modeling using physiographic variables helps evaluate minimization
strategics in route-finding relative to the position of rock art panels.
Hartmann, Mark (Texas AGM University)
[78] THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF DUGOUT CANOES IN THE PREHISTORIC SOUTHEASTERN
UNITED STATES
Research conducted throughout the southeastern United States has yielded information on a longstanding
tradition of dugout canoe manufacture and use, Specifically, data on these craft from Florida, Georgia, South
Carolina, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas, which date from ca. 6,000 B.P. to ca. 500 B.P., indicate
that dugouts played a key role in transportation and trade throughout the region. This allowed for an increase
in the exchange of information and ideas and the diversification of diet and raw materials. Comparative
analyses also indicate general trends in construction methods and style both geographically and temporally.
Hartwell, William T. (Desert Research Institute)
[75] PREHISTORIC LAND USE PATTERNING AT THE YUCCA WASH QUARRY SITE
Archacological investigations at 26NY1011 provide evidence of prehistoric land use patterns near Yucca
Mountain on the Nevada Test Site. Variation in the spatial patterning and content of the assemblage is a
result of differential usage of the archaeological landscape, and is indicative of site functions beyond simple
raw material procurement. Evidence for residential use of this site is present, with outcrops of welded tuff
possibly acting as magnets for this and other functions. Three themes of land use are distinguished: (1) a
, Haynes, Gregory 63
pattern of exploitative quarrying of lithic resources, (2) a dominantly carly pattern of discard or loss of
items from a transported toolkit, and (3) short-term residential use.
Haskins, V. (see Powell, M.) (59|
Hastorf, Christine (California-Berkeley)
[93] LOCAL INTERACTIONS AND LOCAL HISTORY IN THE CENTRAL ANDES
The Upper Mantaro Archacological Research Project completed archacological, environmental, and ethno-
graphic research spanning ten years in and around the Hispanic district of Jauja, Peru in the central Andes.
Over the years, the primarily American team became more aware of the local people's interpretation of
their past as we became involved in a cooperative project to set up a local museum. Through this more
regular interaction with local politics we gained a different view of the local people and their history which
altered our own views of and writings on the ancestors of the ethnic group we were living among.
Hauptmann, Harald (Institut fir Ur and Frigeschichte Vorderasiatische Archdologie)
[4] NEVALI CORI
At the northern end of the “Levant corridor” and south of the Taurus Range, there are a number of carly
farming communities of the 8th millennium B.C. Until 1991, Heidelberg University excavated an example
of a regional PPNB center, Nevali Cori, which reflects a social complexity that is archaeologically represented
in three functions: |) magazines for the storage of surplus grains, 2) buildings for the primary production
of int tools, clay and stone figurines, as well as monumental sculptures, and 3) a sacred building with
monumental sculptures of human, animal and bird-human figures.
Havill, Lorena M. (Indiana University), Karen D. Gettelman (Indiana University), Diane M.
Warren (Indiana University), Keith P. Jacobi (Indiana University), and Della Collins Cook
(indiana University)
[106] POSTCLASSIC TOOTH FILING AT CHAU HIIX, A MAYAN CEREMONIAL CENTER IN BELIZE
1993 excavations at Chau Hiix yielded 30 human burials, four of which show a common pattern of tooth
filing. Upper lateral incisors and sometimes canines have mesial and distal corners removed, and central
incisors have lateral corners removed. The three individuals for whom sex can be determined are male.
SEM and light microscopy are used to compare our examples with Postclassic filed teeth from Tipu. Methods
of filing are discussed.
Hawkes, K. (see O'Connell, J.) |27|
Hawkins, Rebecca A. (Algonquin Consultants, Inc.)
[23] EXPECTATIONS AND INFERENCES: PLOWZONE ASSEMBLAGES IN THE OHIO VALLEY
Salvage excavations of a Fort Ancient village (ca. A.D. 1100) yielded valuable feature information, but
significant data deficits existed regarding artifact asscmblage formation processes. The only systematic
investigation of the village was an intensive surface collection conducted after chisel plowing but before
the plowzone was stripped and truncated features were excavated. This paper uses information derived
from surface distributions of lithic and ceramic arcing’ to supplement interpretations based on excavation
data and enhance, thereby, our ability to infer how site was formed. It also examines the uscfulness of
the surface assemblage as an independent database for models about Fort Ancient settlement organization.
Hayden, Brian (Simon Fraser University) | Discussant 59|
Hayden, Brian (Simon Fraser University) {
[99] AGGRANDIZERS AS SYSTEMS ORGANIZERS
Recent work has focused on aggrandizers as central figures in changes that occur from egalitarian hunter/
gatherer communitics to more complex hunter/gatherer and horticultural communities, The strong power-
seeking behavior of these individuals can account for many of the similarities of emergent gomplex socicti¢es
in disparate parts of the world, including the manipulation of wealth, the display of prestige and power,
and the inherent instability of these groups in rich resource environments, This analysis is predicated on
the high probability that at least some aggrandizive personality ‘types naturally occur in all tribal sized
populations.
Hayden, Julian | Discussant 86]
Haynes, Gregory (Desert Research Institute)
[75] THE DEFINITION OF ARTIFACT CONCENTRATIONS, LITHIC REDUCTION STRATEGIES AND
STONE TOOL DISTRIBUTIONS AT A WESTERN STEMMED SITE IN SOUTHERN NEVADA
26NY7920 is a 1.2 mile long Western Stemmed Tradition site chat is located on the top of a 50 foot high
terrace overlooking Fortymile Canyon, on the Nevada Test Site. In 1993, Desert Research Institute recorded
and performed an in-field analysis of lithic debitage and stone tools at this site. Spatial analysis of 30 randomly
chosen debitage sample units shows at least three artifact concentrations across the site, Debitage analysis
, 64 Hayward, Michele and Michael Cinquino
at 26NY7920 suggests that the primary reduction strategy at 26NY7920 was biface thinning, common in
many large Western Steramed sites. Spatial analysis of stone tool classes suggests differences in the activities
that produced cach artifact concentration.
Hayward, Michele (Panamerican Consultants, Inc.) and Michael Cinquino (Panamerican
Consultants, Inc.)
[102] EXCAVATIONS AT THE SAN JUAN NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE, 1993, SAN JUAN, PUERTO
RICO
Panamerican Consultants, Inc., for the US Army Corps of Engineers has recently completed a mitigation
level excavation at the San Juan National Historic Site of El Morro, in Puerto Rico. The project included
the excavation of two midden areas at the historic fort, administered by the National Park Service, as well
as the undertaking of several specialized studies. The results from the excavation, review of documentary
sources, and the stratigraphic/faunal/botanical analyses, are employed to synthesize and outline the nature
of fortress construction techniques, military life, socio-economic status and subsistence at El Morro during
the Spanish Colonial Period.
Headrich, Annabeth (Texas-Austin)
[30] ANIMALS CAUGHT IN THE NET: EVIDENCE OF NAGUALISM AND SHAMANISM IN THE ART
OF TEOTIHUACAN
The Teotihuacan preoccupation with imagery from nature has led to current theories of a state that
controlied its population through the use of allegories from nature. However, recent studies of other
Mesoamerican cultures have revealed the central importance of ritual shamanic transformation among the
ruling elite, Through comparison with other Mesoamerican cultures and ethnographic and ethnohistoric
sources, this paper will show that depictions of animals from nature were actually perceived as humans in
the midst of ritual. This identification of nagualism as an important aspect of Teotihuacan statecraft will
illuminate the murky image we now have of the city’s political activities.
Healy, Paul F. (Trent University), Jaime Awe (London), and Hermann Helmuth (Trent
University)
[44] PACBITUM (BELIZE) BURIAL 1-9: TOMB OF AN ANCIENT MAYA RULER?
Excavations of Structure 1, the largest temple-pyramid at the Maya center of Pacbitun, Belize, revealed
a deeply concealed, Late Classic period stone-lined tomb (Burial 1-9) with the human remains of an adult
male. The substantial tomb construction, the central site location, associated offerings, and sumptuous grave
goods collectively suggest not only high social status for the interred individual, but possible identification
as a Maya site ruler. Comparison of Burial 1-9 with elaborate burials of reputed site rulers from other lowland
centers is made.
_Heath-Smith, C. (see Smith, M.) (10)
Heidke, J. (see Miksa, E.) | 36)
; Heidke, James M. (Desert Archaeology) and Miriam T. Stark (Desert Archaeology)
[42] STANDARDIZED THEORIES AND SPECIALIZED PRODUCTION: A VIEW FROM THE TONTO
BASIN
Compositional analyses using quantitative petrography provides Desert Archaeology researchers with a
basin-wide perspective for examining ceramic production in the early Classic period (Roosevelt Phase).
Our research on local manufacturing traditions supports a model of intensive ceramic production during
the early Classic period. Three aspects of productive specialization are explored: (1) how petrologically-
based evidence for specialized production supports other compositional techniques; (2) whether extant
models used to explain the ceramic patterning are appropriate; and (3) what types of material correlates
are most useful for interpreting distributional patterning. Research directions regarding economic and social
organizational issues in the Tonto Basin are then discussed.
Helmuth, H. (see Heatly, P.) |44|
Hempbill, Brian (Vanderbilt University)
[90] WEAR AND TEAR: ANALYSES OF ARTHRITIS AND TRAUMA AMONG THE PREHISTORIC
INHABITANTS OF THE MALHEUR LAKE WETLANDS
Recent recovery of 53 burials from the shores of Malheur Lake permit assessment of biocultural adaptation
of prehistoric inhabitants from the northern Great Basin for the first time. Prevalence of osteoarthritis is
high and reflects a demanding lifestyle for both sexes, but consistently higher frequencies of affectation
among males for most joints may indicate less habitual stress and mobility among females. Although the
prehistoric inhabitants of Malheur Lake appeared to have enjoyed good health, traumatic injuries are common
, Hietala, Harold and Donald O. Henry 65
(44% ), and the majority of these injuries (64% ) are the result of malevolent insult rather than accidental
injury.

Henderson, J. (see Beaudry-Corbett, M.) |71|

Henderson, T. Kathleen (Northland Research)

(80) REFLECTIONS ON THE LATE CLASSIC PERIOD: A VIEW FROM THE SANTA CRUZ FLATS

During the A.D. 1300s, a number of Hohokam villages were established along the lower course of the
Santa Cruz River. The proliferation of population along the river not only reflects a shift from previous
settlement patterns, but also occurs at a time when communities to the south were abandoned. Morcover,
whereas much of the Hohokam region was depopulated during the A.D. 1400s, archaeological data indicate
that the Santa Cruz community continued to be occupied into the sixteenth century, if not later. This study
explores the implications of these findings for understanding the Classic to post-Classic transition.
Henry, D. (see Hietala, H.) |73}

Hensler, Kathy Niles (Arizona State)
142] SOCIAL BOUNDARIES SET IN CLAY: TRADE WARE PATTERNING IN THE TONTO BASIN OF
EAST-CENTRAL ARIZONA,

Ceramic exchange refiects the socioeconomic ties of the individuals and groups who are party to the
exchange. Distributions of trade wares are examined for the Classic Period in the Tonto Basin of central
Arizona. Initially all of Tonto Basin appears to have relatively equal access to distant trading partners. By
the 14th century, however, trade ware ceramics have differential distributions within the basin, suggesting
that sites in the eastern end of the basin traded with different arcas than sites on the western end of the
basin. These differences may represent boundarics between competing polities in the same basin.
Herbich, I. (see Dietler, M.) |51|
Herbabn, Cynthia L, (Arizona State)
fi7] FOURTEENTH CENTURY AGRICULTURAL DIVERSITY IN THE NORTHERN RIO GRANDE

VALLEY, NEW MEXICO (1993 Winning Poster, Student Category)

Agricultural intensification between A.D. 1315 and 1425 in the Rio Grande Valley is evident in the dry
feming features documented by the 1990 University of New Mexico field school. The features are located
on a basalt mesa above a | 4th century aggregated site and an area suitable for floodwater farming, suggesting
cheat two different agricultural strategies were in simultancous use by the community, The co-occurrence
of the two strategies suggests the existence of a diversified agricultural system not often recognized archaco-
hopically.

Bernandez, G. (see Urunuela, G.) [30]

Berscher, E. (see McManamon, F.) |38|

Hess, W. (see Bail, T.) |25|

Hester, Thomas (Texas-Austin)

(87] AN INTRODUCTION TO STUDIES OF THE CO PRECERAMIC

Off-mound testing in 1988 at the Maya site of Colha, Belize led to the discovery of buried preceramic
deposits. In 1990-1991, further testing, and studies of soils and pollen in Cobweb Swamp, confirmed the
presence of human activities and agriculture ca. Sere ae In 1993, NSF-funded excavations clarified
the stratigraphic and chronological contexts of these mat . The symposium reviews the ongoing research
tevolving the Colha preceramic, and considers the implications of these data for studying the origins of
jowland Maya culture.

Hicks, Frederic (Louisville) 1
{8] LATE PREHISPANIC XALTOCAN AND ITS EXTERNAL RELATIONS

Xaltocan figures frequently in the ethnohistorical sources on late prehispanic Mexico, although different
accounts are not always in agreement. In the 13th century it headed a large kingdom, but after its fall to
Azcapowalco was briefly abandoned, then resettled under Mexican auspices. Throughout its history, its
eulers and people entered into various kinds of relations with other polities; at different times they were
allies, enemies, lords, vassals, and refugees. Examination of this diversity of external relations, and how they
were constituted, helps us to understand the variety of forms that inter-polity relations in ancient Mexico
could take.

Sietala, Harold (Southern Methodist) and Donald O. Henry (Tulsa)
[73] A PRELIMINARY INTERPRETATION OF DIACHRONIC SPATIAL PATTERNING AT THE
MIDDLE PALEOLITHIC ROCKSHELTER OF TOR FARAJ, JORDAN

Comparisons of the spatial distributions of features, artifacts and other behavioral residue furnish insights

=s to the number of occupants, seasons of occupation and economic activities of the inhabitants of the
, 66 Hildebrand, John and Melissa Hagstrum
Middle Paleolithic rockshelter site of Tor Faraj in Jordan. Interpretations focus not only on temporally
redundant but also on occupationally specific behaviors through the stratigraphic comparison of intrasite
patterns between “living floors”. In addition, these patterns are compared to those at the neighboring
rockshelter of Tor Sabiha allowing a preliminary test of ideas concerning settlement/procurement patterns,
mobility, site organization, modern behaviors and transhumancy,
Hildebrand, Jobn (Scripps Inst. Oceanography) and Melissa Hagstrum (Washington)
[61] RESPONSES TO SUBSISTENCE STRESS IN LATE PREHISTORIC SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA

Responses to subsistence stress arc examined for the late prehistoric Kumeyaay hunter-gatherers of
interior southern California. Key subsistence stressors include the desiccation of Lake Cahuilla (post A.D.
1580), with subsequent loss of its lacustrine resources, and the permanent residency of Europeans (post
A.D. 1769), with subsequent resource loss and native population displacements. Archacological and ethno-
graphic data provide the basis to test five potential responses to the stressors: (1) alteration of foraging
practices, (2) increased storage, (3) increased sharing, (4) resource base cxpansion, and (5) exchange of
subsistence resources for durable goods.
Hildebrandt, William (Far Western Anthropological Research Group), Pat Mikkelsen (Far
Western Anthropological Research Group), and Paul Bouey (Far Western Anthropological
Research Group)
[83] LATITUDINAL VARIABILITY IN RESOURCE STRUCTURE: IMPLICATIONS FOR HUNTER-

GATHERER ADAPTATIONS IN NORTHERN CALIFORNIA

Several ethnographic models, covering a transect stretching from the California/Oregon border to the
lower Sacramento Valley, indicate that northern groups relied more heavily on hunting and fishing than
those in the south where plant resources comprised a larger percentage of the dict. The low frequency of
projectile points recovered in the south appears to support these models. However, the near absence of
toolstone in the region and a high degree of tool recycling are other factors affecting projectile point
frequency, the latter producing strong implications regarding inter-regional variability in the utility of
projectile points as chronological indicators.
Hill, Jr., Mattbew E. (Kansas), Matibew G. Hill (Wyoming), Jack L. Hofman (Kansas), and
Doug Drake (Texas-Austin)
[74] THE FAUNAL ASSEMBLAGE FROM THE MILNESAND SITE

In 1953, EH. Sellards directed excavations at the Milnesand site in Roosevelt County, New Mexico.
Sellards and later researchers have taken a multidisciplinary interest in the Milnesand site, examining
geomorphological, paleontological, and lithic artifact databases. Unfortunately, the analysis of the faunal
remains from the site has been minimal. The present study is based on a recent examination of the curated
bison remains from the Milnesand site. The primary focus of this study is the identification of skeictal
clement frequencies, herd composition, scasonality of occupation, and site formation processes. This research
forms a baseline for comparing the Milnesand site to other Paleoindian bonebeds from the Plains.

Hill, M. G. (see Hill, M. E.) |74|

Hill, Matthew G. (Wyoming)
[74] A NEW LOOK AT THE FOLSOM BISON BONEBED AT AGATE BASIN, WYOMING

Reexamination of the Folsom bison bonebed excavated during 1978 and 1979 by the University of
Wyoming at the Agate Basin locality is discussed employing contemporary methods of boncbed analysis.
Rapid burial and favorable soil conditions provided excellent documentation of Paleoindian butchery and
non-human modifications to the bison remains in the Folsom level. Cutmark and impact fracture locations
suggest bison carcasses were disarticulated, defieshed, and some limb bones subsequently processed for
marrow. Also, there are indications that hideworking may have been an important activity at the site, These
data are examined in the broader framework of Paleoindian bison hunting and subsistence and site formation
processes on the northern Plains.
Hilton, M, (Geovision Consultants) and D.E. Strong (Baron Archaeological Institute)
[69] CONDUCTIVITY STUDIES AT MEZHIRICH, 1993

During the 1993 ficld season at Mezhirich an extensive and intensive conductivity survey was conducted
at the site. The purpose of this non-invasive survey was to locate and establish the conductivity and in-
phase signature of deeply buried cultural features such as dwellings, pits, and bone accumulations of various
dimensions. The results of this work conclusively indicate the high potential of this method not only at
Mezhirich but also, by extrapolation, at other deeply buried locssic sites on the East European Plain. The
methodology and results of the 1993 conductivity survey are presented in graphic form using state-of-the-
art data processing and presentation techniques.
, Hoffman, Kathleen and Kathleen A. Deagan 67

Hitchcock, Robert (Nebraska-Lincoln) and Peter Bleed (Nebraska-Lincoln)

[84] EACH ACCORDING TO NEED AND FASHION; SPEAR AND ARROW USE AMONG IKUNG
HUNTERS OF THE KALAHARI

Advances in projectile point interpretation have made it easy to understand behavioral implications of
the alternatives represented by spears and arrows, their characteristic applications, and their associated
payoffs. This paper describes the hunting methods of Ju/“hoansi (!Kung ), Botswana. The advantages, disadvan-
tages, and success rates of spear and bow hunting are considered to show that decisions about the use of
different types of weapons depend on assessments of such factors as seasonality, prey type, the habitat to
be hunted, and the use of poison.

Hockett, Bryan (Bureau of Land Management)
161] THE LEPORID BONES FROM HOGUP CAVE, UTAH: IMPLICATIONS FOR UNDERSTANDING
PREHISTORIC HUMAN ECOLOGY IN THE EASTERN GREAT BASIN

A total of 18,208 provenienced leporid (cortontail and hare) bones recovered from Hogup Cave were
analyzed. Approximately 2% of the assemblage bore clear evidence of human modification, and approximately
8% bore clear evidence of nonhuman modification. Raptors probably modified the majority of the latter
bones. The culturally modified leporid bones were treated in a similar fashion throughout the depositional
history of the cave. These data possibly could be used to support models which argue that the ancestors
of the historic Numic-speaking peoples have occupied the Great Basin for many thousands of years.
Hodge, Mary G. (Houston-Clear Lake) and Hector Neff (Missouri)

[8] CERAMIC PRODUCTION, TRADE, AND POLITICAL RELATIONS IN POSTCLASSIC XALTOCAN

We explore the influence of political affiliation on Xaltocan’'s economy through a combination of ceramic
stylistic and compositional data, stratigraphic evidence, and C-14 dates. We have identified stages in Xaltocan’s
fecal production of Black-on-Orange, the most well-known Postclassic Basin of Mexico ceramic type, within
the context of the regional ceramic sequence and have investigated the effects of changes in political status
om Xaltocan's exchange patterns by correlating sources of imported ceramics with Xaltocan’s political and
dynastic history.

Hoffecker, J. (see Moeller, K.) (63)

Hoffecker, Jobn F. (Argonne National Laboratory), Robin L. Burgess (U.S. Air Force), and

Gennady Baryshnikov (Russian Academy of Sciences)

$94) GEOARCHAEOLOGY AND ZOOARCHAEOLOGY OF A MOUSTERIAN CAVE IN THE
NORTHWESTERN CAUCASUS (RUSSIA)

Mezmaiskaya Cave is a limestone solution cavern located at an elevation of 1350 m asl in the northwestern
Caucasus, Preliminary excavations by LV. Golovanova (who discovered the site in 1987) have uncovered
several Mousterian occupation layers dated (AMS radiocarbon) to 35,000-40,000 years B.P. and carlicr.
information derived from analysis of sediment samples, in conjunction with paleobiotic data (especially
rodent remains and pollen/spore samples ), permits int@gration of site geology with Late Pleistocene stratigra-
phy. Analysis of medium and large mammal remains (some of which exhibit stone tool cuts) indicates that
steppe bison, goats, and sheep were hunted by the Mousterian occupants of the cave.

Hoffman, B. (see Maschner, H.) | 47|

Hoffman, Christopber R. (California-Berkeley) '

[12] MAKING METAL, MAKING CULTURE: THE COPPER AND BRONZE AGES IN MALLORCA,
SPAIN

Between the Copper and Bronze Ages on the island of Mallorca (Spain), there are significant changes in
the procurement, production, distribution, use and deposition of metal artifacts. Evidence for these activities
from five neighboring sites is presented. The goal is to demonstrate how metallurgy was actively involved
is social organization at the site and regional levels. :

Hoffman, Kathleen (Florida Museum of Natural History) and Kathleen A. Deagan (Florida

Museum of Natural History)

[101] FRANCISCANS, THE SPANISH COMMUNITY, AND NATIVE AMERICANS IN 17TH CENTURY
ST. AUGUSTINE

The Convento de San Francisco, a Franciscan monastery located in St. Augustine, served as the headquarters
for the Franciscan mission effort in La Florida during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. It functioned
a5 a guest house for visiting officials, a training center for new friars, and as a hospice. The friary also played
2 Vital role as an intermediary between the outlying missions and the secular community of St. Augustine.
Excavations at the Convento de San Francisco are clarifying the interactions between the Franciscan commu-
nity, the presidio of St. Augustine, and the Native Americans.
, 68 Hoffman, Michael P.
Hoffman, Michael P. (Arkansas)
[78] ONEOTA CULTURE TIES TO THE HISTORIC QUAPAW TRIBE
. lf the Dhegiha Siouan speaking Quapaw tribe migrated from the Midwest to the mouth of the Arkansas
River in late Mississippi or protohistoric times as their oral traditions relate, then Midwestern Oneota
or Oneota-related manifestations should indicate the relationship. Brief examinations of collections and
archeological records from the Ut site, sites of the Bold Counselor phase and sites of the Caborn-Welborn
phase were made to discern the presence of Quapaw archeological correlates. The Utz site has the highest
degree of similarity.
Hoffman, T. (see Lincoln, T.) |50|
Hofman, J. (see Hill, M. E.) |74|
Hofman, Jack L. (Kansas)
[74] THE SIGNIFICANCE OF FOLSOM POINT VARIABILITY: EVIDENCE FROM THE FOLSOM AND
LIPSCOMB SITES
Stone tools commonly serve as “cultural markers” in Palcoindian research and are used as the “indepen-
dent" variable in making assemblage, stratigraphic, chronometric, ecological, and economic Comparisons
between Paleoindian sites. The pivotal role which Paleoindian projectile points hold in interdisciplinary
research (e.g. evaluation of radiometric dated, assemblage comparisons, and study of socio-economic
change) requires that we critically re-assess the meaning and uses of Paleoindian point types. Toward this
end, variability in the Folsom point type is addressed here and the significance of this variability for spatial
and diachronic comparative studies is emphasized.
Hobmann, B. (see Powis, T.) |60)
Hobmann, Jobn W. (Louis Berger & Associates)
[19] ARCHITECTURAL INSIGHTS FROM STABILIZATION PROGRAMS
in the American Southwest, the call for prehistoric stabilization programs is increasing. Therefore, a
secondary benefit is emerging: Additional detailed architectural information. The exposure of different
structural aspects of prehistoric sites by stabilization activities has yielded a substantial set of data regarding
architectural variability. This new source has the potential to yield significant new insights for issues of
structural configuration and prehistoric site growth. Recent work undertaken at the Homolovi Ruins, a series
of large, late prehistoric Southwestern Pueblos, will be used as an example of the type of architectural
information which can be gleaned from such stabilization programs.
Hole, Frank (Yale University) |Discussant 24]
Holland, J. (see Smith, K.) |88)
Hollinger, Eric R. (Loucks and Associates, Inc.)
[78] ONEOTA DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE AND THE SEARCH FOR RULES OF RESIDENCE
© Changes through time in the size of Oncota houses support the hypothesis that rules of post-marital
residence shifted from patrilocal/virilocal to matrilocal/uxorilocal during the prehistoric period and then
returned to patrilocal with the advent of European contact. The mean floor areas of Emergent, Developmental
and Historic horizon houses are small, corresponding to expectations generated from cross-cultural studies
of patrilocal societies. Floor areas during the Classic horizon were very large and compare favorably with
those of matrilocal societies. The identification of patterns of residence provides insights into prehistoric
social structure, the causes of social change and the sequence of those changes.
Holmes, Charles (Office of History and Archaeology, Alaska) and Richard VanderHoek
(linots-Urbana)
[30] SWAN POINT: A MULTICOMPONENT SITE IN THE TANANA VALLEY, CENTRAL ALASKA
Swan Point data are helping refine current archacological models for central Alaska. Occupations are
assignable to Northern Paleoindian and Northern Archaic complexes, ¢.g., Chindadn, Nenana, Tuktu, and
Denali. The basal cultural level, AMS dated to 11,600 B.P., contains blades, microblades, bifacial tools, and
dihedral burins associated with worked tusk (mammoth?) fragments. These data are among the carliest
stone tool assemblages known for castern Beringia. Distinctive triangular bifaces, date to c. 10,200 BP,
resemble Chindadn or Nenana complex forms. Notched points appear clearly associated with microblade
and burin technology that is hypothesized to date 5,000 B.P.
Holmlund, James (Geo-Map, Inc.)
[86] THE RIPLEY GEOGLYPH COMPLEX: A CASE STUDY OF GEOGLYPH SITE STRUCTURE AND
FEATURE RELATIONSHIPS
This paper presents the results of the 1992 Ripley Geoglyph Complex survey: 510 features and 15 km
of trails were identified on three topographically distinct terrace systems within the study area. Based on
, :
| Hoshower, Lisa 69
the spatial distribution of feature types and feature density, it was concluded that the local physiography
and concentration of essential resources played an important role in the location of certain feature types
(those that may have related to social or ceremonial activities such as geoglyphs and rock alignments ), but
only a minor role in the distribution of other features.
Holson, Jobn (BioSystems Anatysis)
[11] MEASURING THE EFFECTS OF ACCULTURATION IN THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORD:
THREE CASE STUDIES
This paper will examine the intensity of Native American and Euro-American contact using materials
excavated from three ethnographic sites in California. The sites to be discussed are chosen for their proximity
to Euro-American interaction spheres and represent the Spanish American and Settler Periods prior to 1850.
Comparisons will be drawn from the materials collected at the sites and the predicted results based on
ethnographic accounts of Native Californian and Euro-American contact. The study will show that there is
variability in the amount, type and quality of Euro-American goods found at Native Californian sites which
may indicate the degree of Euro-American material culture acceptance and use by indigenous people.
Hommon, Robert J. (National Park Service, Pacific Area Office)
[99] EMERGENT COMPLEXITY IN ANCIENT HAWAII
Complex adaptive systems theory is applied to indigenous Hawaiian sociopolitical evolution, considered
as a process involving interactions between bipolar phenomena such as self-organization and adaptation,
hierarchy and heterarchy, stability and change, and chaos and order. The original settlers of Hawaii carried
their sociocultural system in highly condensed form, the sect of relatively simple rules of the Polynesian
ramage or conical clan. The co-evolving states of 18th century Hawaii can be seen to have emerged from
the interaction between these local rules of self-organization and non-linear responses to natural and cultural
environmental stimuli.
Hoopes, Jobn (Kansas)
[32] CONTRIBUTIONS OF NON-AGRICULTURAL SUBSISTENCE STRATEGIES TO THE FORMATION
OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN COASTAL ZONES OF SOUTHERN COSTA RICA
Social complexity in large, late prehistoric demographic centers of southern Costa Rica was conditioned
by antecedents in earlier sedentary villages. Traditional models have emphasized the adoption of maize as
a staple as a crucial step towards complexity. However, data from coastal zones of the Golfo Dulce, Costa
Rica indicate that communities not dependent upon maize played a key role in structuring relationships of
centralization and specialization. This paper presents a detailed reconstruction of coastal subsistence strate-
gies from organic remains at Costa Purruja that emphasizes the contribution of offshore and estuarine
resources to the in situ evolution of compicx social systems.
Hoover, Robert (California Polytechnic State-San Luis Obispo) {Discussant 101]
Hopkins, Mary (Brandeis)
[30] SCALE OF PRODUCTION AND PRODUCT apes a IN TEOTIHUACAN COOKING
POTS
Classic Teotihuacan cooking pots made in two wares, Burnished (many forms, scattered small-scale
production) and San Martin Orange (few forms, centralized large-scale production ) are compared in terms
of standardization at all stages of the production sequence: clay selection, paste preparation, forming, finishing,
and firing. The effects of scale of production on uniformity vary crably from one manufacturing stage
to another. Tce msm rad’bobee bi hecreabeny Ceaddacsiey Nast ebay eee x ele tar Tasco
technical improvement. All of these can often be seen on one pot.
Horne, Melinda (INFOTEC Research) and Judith A. Willig (INFOTEC Research)
[83] 35-JE-49: TEN THOUSAND YEARS OF HUMAN OCCUPATION AND ADAPTIVE CHANGE }
Site 35-JE-49, adjacent to Mud Springs Creek in north-central Oregon, contains the longest record of
human occupation of all sites investigated along the Pipeline Expansion Project (PEP) corridor. A residential
base camp, 35-JE-49 contains discrete lithic reduction loci, numerous rock features, and a deeply stratified
rockshelter with abundant and varied cultural assemblages reflecting subsistence reliance on both faunal
and floral resources. Geoarchacological examination of the shelter’s sediments indicate at least eight distinct
periods of aboriginal occupation which correspond with buried palcosols, vertical increases in artifacts and
faunal remains, and 25 distinct hearth/midden/pit features. Chronometric data support an occupation from
9980 + -355 years BP.
Hosbower, Lisa
[101] BIOANTHROPOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY NATIVE AMERICAN
MISSION POPULATION
The biological and cultural consequences of the seventeenth-century Spanish mission system for the
native inhabitants of La Florida, with particular emphasis on the northern Utina, a Western Timucuan
, 70 Houston, Stephen
speaking group from present-day Florida, are discussed. Archacological, cthnohistorical, and bioanthropologi-
cal analyses of pre-Columbian and mission-period northern Utinan skeictal collections demonstrate that the
transition to mission life was marked by severe alterations in aboriginal lifeways. These changes were
accompanied by increases in infectious discases, nutritional deficiencies, and morbidity and mortality.
Observed trends in disease prevalence illustrate the detrimental effects of the Spanish mission system on
these Native American populations.
Houston, Stepben (Vanderbilt University)
[67] ANCIENT MAYA ARCHITECTURAL SPACE
Recent archacological, iconographic, and epigraphic research points to novel understandings of Classic
Maya architecture as a devised environment. This paper presents a variety of approaches and sets of evidence,
but focuses especially on emic concepts in the use and selective depiction of architectural space. Images
from the Classic period reveal how built spaces were shown, and what the Maya thought to be important
about them.
Hovey, Kevin (California-Riverside) and Scott L. Fedick (Caltfornia-Riverside)
[5] ANCIENT MAYA SETTLEMENT IN THE YALAHAU REGION OF NORTHERN QUINTANA ROO
The extensive freshwater of the Holbox Fracture Zone represents a unique setting for settlement and
land use within the northern lowlands. Systematic and reconnaissance survey has identified associations
between forms of domestic architecture and types of land and water resources. Many of the wetlands in
the study area are ringed by dense setticment, suggesting intensive use of these resources. Possible uses of
the wetlands for agriculture and other economic pursuits are discussed, and a model of settlement pattern
within the zone is proposed. The broader economic implications of the wetland zone are discussed within
the context of the northern lowlands.
Howard, Jerry B. (Mesa Southwest Museum and Artzona Slate) and Charles Glass (Arizona)
[26] SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL IMPLICATIONS OF PLATFORM MOUND ARCHITECTURE: THE |
MESA GRANDE CASE STUDY |
Recent research on Platform mounds has prompted diverse functional interpretations and new theorctical
directions. Analysis of architectural design has played a dominant role in these discussions. Architecture is
used to organize space, control and limit access and choreograph activities at the mound. This paper
describes a series of new techniques and methodological approaches applied to the architectural analysis
of the Mesa Grande, one of the rwo largest Hohokam platform mounds. The use of ground penetrating radar
technology to locate possible features and for hypothesis testing is discussed. Several new architectural
elements of Hohokam platform mounds are presented and discussed.
Howe, Kate (Florida State)
[29] PAN-MESOAMERICAN IMAGERY IN THE POST-TEOTIHUACAN ERA
e Recent studies in Pan-Mesoamerican iconographic motifs provide insights into the core-periphery status
of the lowland Maya and its interconnectedness with the Basin of Mexico after the collapse of Teotihuacan.
This paper focuses on the meaning of such cross-cutting images when viewed through a world systems
‘ perspective. A concluding section examines problems which must be addressed when interpreting pan-
Mesoamerican iconographic elements and offers suggestions for future research.
Howell, Todd (Arizona State) |
[80] THE HOHOKAM CLASSIC TO POST-CLASSIC TRANSITION: A VIEW FROM LOS GUANACOS
Selected data recovered from the Hohokam settlement of Los Guanacos are used to cxamine cultural
change during the Classic and post-Classic periods. A brief description of the site and a seriation of selected
features is presented. Two models are then tested that seck to explain the abandonment of Los Guanacos
(and perhaps the Hohokam Region in general). One model posits a collapse of the canal system and the
second suggests that local environmental degradation prompted site abandonment. Specific test implications
are used to examine differences between the Classic and post-Classic occupations.
Hudler, Dale B. (Texas-Austin) and Jon C. Lobse (Texas-Austin)
[87] A FUNCTIONAL AND CONTEXTUAL STUDY OF UNIFACIAL CHERT TOOLS FROM BELIZE |
Distinctive unifacial chert tools have been surface collected from a broad area of Belize since 1980 and
have also been found in excavations at Colha and Pulltrrouser Swamp. A preliminary analysis of these tools
was done in 1982 using 23 surface-collected specimens. The unifaces were thought to be woodworking |
tools dated approximately 4000-7000 B.P. In 1993, a broader effort was begun to determine function and
context. This included an experimental program in Belize and contextual data from excavations at Op. 4046
at Colha. New wear data are now available on these cools, recently dated at 3000-4300 B.P.
Hudson, Jean (California-Los Angeles)
[36] INTRASITE SPATIAL ANALYSIS: ETHNOARCHAEOLOGICAL DATA FROM AKA FORAGERS
Ethnoarchacological data from tropical forest foragers, the Aka of the Central African Republic, are
presented. Relationships between number of households, number of individuals, number of hearths, types
, Hyland, Justin R. and Maria de la Luz Gutiérrez 71
of structures, camp area, duration of occupation, and subsistence focus are examined using mapped data
from more than 60 camps. A smaller data sect is used to examine relationships between hut dimensions,
family size and composition, and average body size, and between relatedness, hut location and hut spacing.
These data are compared with published data for other groups and hypotheses of archacological relevance
concerning interpretation of group size and site function as reviewed.
Hughes, R. (see Cannon, K.) (105]
Hugbes, Richard E, (Geochemical Research Laboratory) and Craig E. Skinner (INFOTEC
Research)
[83] VARIABILITY IN OBSIDIAN SOURCE USE IN CENTRAL OREGON
The geologic sources for more than 6,500 obsidian artifacts from 84 archacological sites in the PGT-
PG&E Pipeline Expansion Project have been determined using x-ray fluorescence spectrometry. Although
numerous artifact-quality glass sources exist within the potential procurement spheres of these sites, only
a limited number of these obsidians were extensively exploited prchistorically. In this paper, we cxamine
the spatial distribution of obsidian from major sources and provide a preliminary assessment of diachronic
and synchronic variability in source use as monitored by time-sensitive artifact types and obsidian hydration
rim measurements.
Aunt, Terry (Hawaii-Honolutu) | Discussant 6]
Hunt, Terry (Hawaii-Honolulu)
[79] NIHOA ISLAND: COLONIZATION, ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE, AND ISOLATION ON A
HAWAILIAN FRONTIER
The diminutive Island of Nihoa lics 240 km northwest of the main Hawaiian Islands. The island was
intensively occupied, then abandoned prior to European re-discovery in 1790. Polynesian occupation on
Nihoa was late, of short duration, and brought significant change to the indigenous flora. In this paper |
examine the evidence for the nature and chronology of settlement and human-associated environmental
change. 1 consider the isolated position of the island and the implications for Hawaiian prehistory.
Hunter, Andrea A. (Nortbern Arizona)
[78] THE DOMESTICATION OF HORDIUM PUSILLUM (LITTLE BARLEY) IN THE MIDWEST
UNITED STATES
A morphometric analysis of archacological Hordeum pusillum and ethnographic research was conducted
to evaluate the utilization of this plant. A comparison of criteria delincated for the domestication of Old
World Hordeum spp. allowed for the identification of three specific morphological changes. Hordeum
pusillum caryopses exhibit two of these changes. Using Rindos’ Darwinian model of domestication, it
was determined that incidental domestication occurred during the Middie and Late Archaic, specialized
domestication during the Terminal Archaic/Early Woodland, incipient agricultural domestication during the
Middle and Late Woodland, and thereafter a sharp decline occurred resulting in a remnant form of incipient
agricultural domestication. 4
Hunter-Anderson, R. (see Ambrose, S.) (54)
Hutchinson, D. (see Larsen, C.) {90
Hyland, David C.
[69] ENZYME IMMUNOASSAY (EIA) STUDIES ON SELECTED LITHIC ARTIFACTS FROM
MEZHIRICH
Enzyme immunoassay (EIA) scrutiny of a selected suite of lithic artifacts from Mezhirich has revealed
the presence of non-hemolyzed blood attributable to Late Pleistocene food procuring and/or processing
et diee? iar iis ganchusd ies hance otal Giacsianedt ved the venudea of tea eutanda oon peiadl ba tareen of
technology, scenarios of subsistence, and food processing in mammoth-bone settlements on the East Euro-
pean Plain. ‘
Hyland, J. (see Gutiérrez, M.) (57)
Hyland, Justin R. (California-Berkeley) and Maria de la Luz Gutiérrez (Centro Regional del
Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, La Paz, Baja California Sur, Mexico)
[57] PREHISTORIC MOBILITY AND SUBSISTENCE IN THE SIERRA DE SAN FRANCISCO, BAJA
CALIFORNIA SUR, MEXICO
As an integral part of the Proyecto Arte Rupestre Sierra de San Francisco, Baja California Sur, Mexico a
stratified regional survey and limited test excavations were carried oul in order to assess the temporal and
functional position of Sierra de San Francisco mural sites in the overall prehistoric settlement pattern. Survey
results and excavation data from type sites, including excavation data from the mural sites of Cueva Pintada
, 72 Hyman, M.
and Cueva Soledad, are presented. Implications for evaluating overall seasonal mobility and resource schedul-
ing and the specific case for aggregation at mural sites are discussed.
Hyman, M. (see Rowe, M.) [103]
Ibarra-Moralex, E. (see McClung de Tapia, E.) |8|
Iceland, Harry (Texas-Austin)
[87] COLHA PRECERAMIC PROJECT: EXCAVATIONS AND STRATIGRAPHY

The Colha Preceramic Project carried out excavations in Spring 1993 at Operation 4046, where previous
testing had revealed buried preceramic deposits. A 4x6 meter blow was opened on the edge of a Maya
mound located next to an aguada, Four distinct stratified zones were identified, the lower two (Zones C
and D) representing preceramic occupations, The zones contained distinctive chert lithic assemblages. Zone
C, radiocarbon-dated between 1100-1300 B.C., may be linked to early agricultural activities at Cobweb
Swamp about 100 meters to the southeast,
Ingimundavsson, J. (see Amorosi, T.) |79|
Inomata, Takeshi (Vanderbilt University)
[60] ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT AGUATECA, GUATEMALA: THE STUDY OF A

FORTIFIED MAYA CENTER

Archaeological investigations at the site of Aguateca, El Peten, Guatemala, have revealed an extensive and
complex defensive wall system, The fortifications date to the end of the Late Classic Period (late 8th century ),
suggesting the intensification of warfare. In particular, the excavations of elite structures have demonstrated
the abrupt abandonment of the center, which was probably caused by the attack of enemics. These new
data imply the significance of warfare regarding the collapse of Classic Maya civilization.
Irish, J. (see Regan, M.) (98)
Isbell, William (SUNY-Bingbampton)
[14] KINGSHIP TO KINSHIP: HUARI AND THE RISE OF THE AYZLLU

Between the 9th and 10th centuries, the Huari polity collapsed and its capital city was abandoned. Climatic
change has been invoked to account for the failure of Huari, as has population replacement, perhaps through
militaristic invasion of the heartland. Research in the prehistoric capital shows that while depopulation was
fairly rapid, it was neither quick nor disruptive enough to support military invasion or acute natural disaster.
Alternatively, new data regarding the relationship of open mortuary monuments, ancestor cults, and ayl/u
organization may be revealing powerful, kin-based resistance to state construction and reconstruction in
Middle Horizon 2 Huari. I suggest that internal resistance may have played a key role in the failure of Huari's
centralization of power.
Jackson, T. (see Stevenson, C.) |8|

: Jacob, J. (see Goldberg, P.) |87|

Jacob, J. (see Pope, K.) |76|
Jacobi, K. (see Havill, L.) | 106]
Jacobi, Keith (Indiana University)
[106] MORTUARY PATTERNS AT THE SPANISH-MAYA MISSION AT TIPU BELIZE

The site of Tipu in Belize includes a visita mission that was used from 1540 to 1638 A.D. Buried beneath
and surrounding this Spanish-Catholic church were 518 individuals who are thought to be Maya. Analysis
of the dental remains using non-metric traits allows for a more personal view of life at contact, comparison
with known Spanish-Catholic burial practices, tests concordance with church recruitment procedures, and
assesses the influx of Maya refugees. In addition, results indicate a sex division of burials within the church
and the computer program MacClade has revealed family relationships within the cemetery.
Jacobs, D. (see Rice, G.) (98)
Jacobs, David (Arizona State) and Glen Rice (Arizona State)
[26] LABOR INVESTMENTS AND ROOM FUNCTION AT THE CLINE TERRACE MOUND

The Cline Terrace Mound, a Salado platform mound in Tonto Basin, was occupied throughout the late
Classic, and underwent a series of expansions. When estimates of the labor involved in these construction
efforts are compared to the number of rooms and their function, it suggests the use of populations not
residing at the site as a labor source. The Cline Terrace Mound also differs in other ways (¢.g., amount of
space devoted to storage, residences) from the contemporary Schoolhouse Mound. The implications of
these differences in mound types are discussed.
, Johnson, John R. 73
Jabren, Hope (Caltfornia-Berkeley), N. Toth (indiana), K. Shick (Indiana), J. D. Clark
(California-Berkeley), and R. G. Amundson (California-Berkeley)
[25] PHYTOLITH AND OTHER RESIDUE ON STONE TOOL SURFACES: EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
FROM BAMBOO AND BONE PROCESSING
We investigated stone tool surface-residues acquired in bamboo and bone processing, and that surface
residucs on tools obtained from the field may provide information on food availability and processing
technologies, Chert tools were experimentally manufactured and used for bamboo shredding, bone scraping,
or left pristine. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed on all tool surfaces. Tools bearing
bamboo residue exhibited bundles of hair-like bamboo phytolith. Tools were soaked in 35% H,O, for 24
hours to simulate effects of burial and diagenesis. SEM/EDAX elemental analysis was invoked to distinguish
James, Steven R. (Arizona State)
[46] DEPLETION OF ANIMAL RESOURCES IN PREHISTORIC AGRICULTURAL SOCIETIES:
COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST AND PACIFIC ISLANDS
Archaeologists have the advantage and potential for examining both short-term changes and long-term
trends in animal over-exploitation. Data from recent studies in both the American Southwest and Pacific
islands are cxamined in terms of four interrelated aspects: overhunting, habitat destruction, impact of
introduced species, and chains of extinctions. Polynesian chiefdoms brought about extinctions of numerous
land birds, whereas Hohokam and Chacoan societies caused resource depiction of various game and fish.
Differences are viewed as ones between islands and continents and not technological or sociopolitical levels.
Janusek, J. (see Seddon, M. T.) | 43]
Janusek, Jobn W. (Chicago) and Sonia Alconini (Universidad Mayor de San Andres)
143] SOCIAL DIVERSITY AND HISTORICAL CHANGE IN TIWANAKU CERAMICS: STEPS TOWARD A
TIWANAKU IV-V CHRONOLOGY
For years now our understanding of prehispanic social formations in the southern Andes has suffered for
lack of a detailed regional chronology. This study presents the results of an intensive ceramic analysis carried
out between 1991 and 1993, covering numerous areas of excavation at the sites of Tiwanaku and Lukurmata
in the southern Titicaca basin. Our analysis compared several distinct contexts at the two prehispanic
urban centers, including ceremonial, clite, specialized, and household areas. The results indicate that many
traditional assumptions regarding the chronology of Tiwanaku vessels, and regarding the nature of the
Tiwanaku polity in general, require re-cxamination.
Jenkins, L. (see Watkins, J.) |38|
Jochim, Michael (California-Santa Barbara) (Discussant 56]
Jochim, Michael (California-Santa Barbara) | Discussant 45]
Jochim, Michael (California-Santa Barbara)
[27] CHANCE AND CONTEXT IN EVOLUTIONARY CHANGE
Evolutionary thinking in archaeology is dominated by an emphasis on natural selection, to the negiect of
other forces of evolution. This emphasis carries with it an implicit assumption of behavioral plasticity—
that selection can shape behavior to any optimal end—with the implication that evolutionary change is
regular and predictable. Recent work acknowledges the of history and chance in constraining and
eas ran thet coavee: tock ik bee incon MSs os orcas toe eas erence ee ee
discussion focuses on the role of chance in evolutionary change and on how we can accommodate this
factor in our theoretical formulations.
Jobnson, Boma (Bureau of Land Management) }
[86] THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE LOWER COLORADO RIVER: AN OVERVIEW
An overview of the archacology of the lower Colorado River is presented on three related levels. First,
a brief resume of the history of research is discussed; second, a review df the types of resources and research
that have characterized the archacology of the lower Colorado River in recent years is presented; and third,
recent discoveries and new directions in research, including lithic technology and the interconnectedness
of ethnology and archacology, is considered. This paper advocates a greater relationship between the
archacological record, the ethnographic record, and the remaining knowledge the native peoples hold about
their own past cultural experience.
Jobnson, Jobn R. (Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History)
[11] CHUMASH SOCIOPOLITICAL ORGANIZATION DURING THE LATE EIGHTEENTH AND EARLY
NINETEENTH CENTURIES
Chumash society was greatly impacted by Spanish colonization beginning in the late nineteenth century.
Missionization and a cataclysmic population decline led to the demise of old socio-political forms. Fragmen-
, 74 Johnson, K.
tary ethnohistoric and ethnographic data have been subject to varying interpretations by a number of
different researchers regarding the nature of Chumash social structure and level of sociopolitical integration.
Recent analysis of mission register data and evidence in J. P. Harrington's ethnographic fieldnotes allows a
more complete picture of Chumash society to emerge. The interplay of demographic, geographic, economic,
and social network variables account for the configuration of Chumash sociopolitical institutions and the
subsequent changes that took place during the Mission Period.
Jobmnson, K. (see Allen, M.) |6)|
Jobnson, Lucy Lewis (Vassar College) |Discussant 41|
Jobnson, Lucy L. (Vassar College)
[35] AN ALEUT RESIDENCE ON CHERNABURA ISLAND, ALASKA
The Aleuts dug semi-subterranean houses both as protection from the cold climate and to conserve scarce
building materials. In the summer of 1993, we completely excavated one such house at site XSI-040 on
Chernabura Spit in the Shumagin Islands south of the Alaska Peninsula. Several house floors were marked
both by artifact concentrations and the placement of large rocks and small boulders around their perimeters.
Features recognized can be compared to those found at both residential and ceremonial structures at other
Aleut sites.
Jobnson, Matthew (Durbam, England)
[62] 17TH CENTURY SURVEILLANCE
it is the argument of this paper that the genealogy of many of the practices Foucault assembles under
the term “panopticism” may be traced back to early modern England. I examine a range of archacological
and documentary artifacts of surveillance and discipline from this period. Architecture becomes governed
by rules of segmentation and functional differentiation, a tool of bodily discipline. Parks and gardens are
laid out along geometrical principles and lines of sight that privilege the clite viewer. Most fundamentally,
basic farming practices become subjects of principles of “closure” which transform the landscape and labor
practices of human subjects alike.
Jobnson, P. (see Solimano, P.) | 18)
Jobnson, William Gray (Desert Research Institute)
[75] NUCLEAR TESTING AND COLD WAR STUDIES: HISTORIC STRUCTURES AT THE NEVADA
TEST SITE
Nuclear testing is one of the historical contexts in the Nevada Comprehensive Preservation Plan. As a
recognized historical context, it is considered an integral part of U.S. Cold War history. A recent survey of
Nevada Test Site structures and objects associated with nuclear testing has yielded important information
on the variety and scope of these cultural resources. This paper provides interpretations of these resources
within an archaeological framework and provides management considerations derived from the survey.
Jobnston, Kevin (Yale University)
{60] OUT OF SIGHT, OUT OF MIND: “INVISIBLE” RESIDENTIAL SETTLEMENT IN THE CLASSIC
MAYA LOWLANDS
Most Maya settlement analyses rest on the assumption that the full range of ancient Maya dwelling types,
and, by inference, the remains of all social and economic groups, are represented by visible mounds. In
fact, data indicate that “invisible” residences (nonmounded structures that leave no surface trace) were
ubiquitous in the Maya lowlands. That this has not been widely recognized is attributable to two factors:
(1) inter-regional environmental variations that affect the archacological perception of structure “visibility;"
and (2) inconsistences in the nomenclature used to describe “invisible” dwellings. Architectural attributes
common to “invisible” houses are employed to devise a formal typology of pan-lowland “invisible” Maya
residential settlement.
Jolly, K. (see Black, §.) (19)
Jones, G. (see Beck, C.) (96)
Jones, J. (see Phol, M.) (76)
Jones, J. (see Pope, K.) |76|
Jones, Jobn G. (Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Panama)
[87] SETTLEMENT AND AGRICULTURE AT COLHA: POLLEN EVIDENCE FROM COBWEB SWAMP
Analysis of pollen samples from Cobweb Swamp, part of the Maya site of Colha, has revealed a complex
settlement record quite different than that known from archacological excavations. Evidence of humans
extends to before 6000 B.C., while periods of forest clearing and the cultivation of domesticated plants arc
clearly recorded. A distinct early horizon contains evidence of manioc, but no other cultigens. In Maya
, Juel Jensen, Helle and Berit V. Eriksen 75
levels, however, there is a dramatic shift to intensive maize cultivation, along with cotton and probably
chilies. Wild fruit trees were spared by the Maya, though ramon was not selectively maintained.
Jones, Robert (Desert Research Institute) and Harold Drollinger (Desert Research Institute)
[37] DISTRIBUTION OF LITHIC MATERIAL ON PAHUTE MESA, SOUTHWEST GREAT BASIN
The spatial distribution of raw material sources on Pahute Mesa is presented. A variation in the types of
raw materials and their spatial distribution is evident. A change in the use of various raw materials through
time reflects a change to a greater use of local raw materials sources in the later periods. The variation in
the distribution and the change through time of raw materials reflect on the subsistence and mobility
patterns for the area.
Jordan, Juan Albarracin (Instituto Nacional de Arqueologia, Bolivia)
[85] INTEGRATION AND DISINTEGRATION: TTWANAKU’'S COLLAPSE AND LOCAL NESTED
HIERARCHIES
The Tiwanaku polity (A.D. 400-1100) extended its influence over a wide geographic area in the South-
Central Andes, integrating local culcural diversity into a unified system of complementarity. This enduring
hegemony has been traditionally perceived as the manifestation of a highly centralized and bureaucratic
state that monopolized labor and agricultural production for the sustenance of its urban loci and its expansion-
ist agenda; apparently, the collapse of the administrative apparatus took place duc to environmental perturba-
tions in the core region that disabled agricultural production and, therefore, the maintenance of its ruling
social stratum; new, local ethnic identities developed as a result,
Joyce, Arthur (American Museum of Natural History)
{55] IDEOLOGY, POWER, AND STATE FORMATION AT MONTE ALBAN
This paper uses an actor-based theoretical perspective to examine the origins and development of the
Monte Alban polity during the Late/Terminal Formative (500 B.C.-A.D. 250). The key theoretical problem
raised by the development of Monte Alban is to explain why non-clites moved to ecologically risky piedmont
areas and increasingly provided resources to support an emerging elite faction. This trend is explained by
the development of an elite strategy of social deception through ideological manipulation, which involved
increasing control of ritual, promotion of external conflict, and development of an clite social identity.
Joyce, Rosemary A. (Harvard University) (Discussant 96]
Joyce, Rosemary A, (Harvard University)
[34] LOOKING POR CHILDREN IN PREHISPANIC MESOAMERICA
Documents from 16th-century Central Mexico and Yucatan suggest that distinct developmental stages
from infancy to adulthood were symbolized through costume. Individuals at different stages engaged in
particular tasks, and transitions from stage to stage were marked by ritual. Because they affected matcrial
culture, these aspects of childhood have potential to be detected archacologically. Variation by age of
costume in burials of the Formative period is explored. The results are compared with an analysis of
«hd headed endmermimn: sarenemminasace seas scape: the heatnatie tte
‘ne dered
Judge, Christopber (Diachronic Research Foundation)
[52] EVALUATING ELEMENTARY STUDENTS’ PERCEPTIONS OF ARCHAEOLOGY
As archaeologists we often visit schools and give Se face ot waar notes
from the teachers, the impact of our lectures is seldom evaluated. From 1986 through 1992, students in a
one-week summer archacology camp were asked, as the first activity on the first day, to draw a picture of
an archacologist doing what an archacologist does. These images were used to shape the nature of the
week's activities. Hands-on activities and other multi-sensory experience appear to help dispel the mugente
myths and misconceptions about archacology, and to leave a lasting impression on the students.
Judge, W. James (Fort Lewis College) |Discussant 42] :
Juel Jensen, Helle (Aarbus) and Berit V. Eriksen (Aarbus)
[16] FOSSIL MOLLUSKS AND EXOTIC RAW MATERIALS IN LATE GLACIAL AND EARLY
POSTGLACIAL FIND CONTEXTS: A COMPLEMENT TO LITHIC STUDIES
Numerous prehistoric hunter-gatherer sites from western Europe have yielded fossil mollusks or exotic
lithics of “dispersed” origin. Many of these findings represent various kinds of long-distance connections.
Keywords with respect to such relationships are mobility and communication, We argue that lithic raw
materials used for tools, and fossil mollusks used for personal adornment, represent different expressions
of mobility patterns and/or communication between groups. Based on a case study from Late Glacial and
Early Postglacial Western Europe, we discuss the importance of stylistic analysis in the study of past hunter-
gatherer behavior.
, 76 Julien, Daniel G.
Julien, Daniel G. (Texas-Austin)
[77] GRADUAL CHANGE AND CATASTROPHIC REALIGNMENT: THE EARLY INTERMEDIATE
PERIOD AND AFTERWARDS IN CAJAMARCA

Settlement patterns in the Cajamarca region of the North Highlands of Peru indicate a gradual process
of growing political centralization during the Early Intermediate period. The major centers of both population |
and political power were located in the Andean intermontane valleys. Ceramic distributions suggest that
through most of the period, Cajamarca interacted most intensively with neighboring highland regions, and
had little, if any, interchange with the coastal Moche culture. With the end of the Early Intermediate period, |
the situation changed drastically. The coast-highland axis became dominant in Cajamarca’s external relations,
and the centers of population and political power moved to the western Andean slopes.

Julien, Michéle (C.N.R.S. Laboratoire d'Ethnologie Prébistorique), Pierre Bodu (Laboratoire

d'Ethnologie Prébistorique), and Boris Valentin (Laboratoire d'Etbnologie Prébistorique)

[16] FLINT ECONOMY IN SOME LATE PALAEOLITHIC SETTLEMENTS OF THE PARIS BASIN
(FRANCE)

Of the several Late Palacolithic sites of the Paris Basin, two types can be evidenced according to the
economy of raw flint. Some, such as Etiolles or Donnemarie, situated near Lutetian deposits containing
voluminous flint blocks of an excellent quality, are mainly workshops where blade production was aimed
to an extra-site use. Others, such as Pincevent and Marolles, settled near river banks where Senonian medium
size flint nodules of plain quality were available, are more related to hunting activities (reindeer, horse )
and the knapping activity was subordinated to local animal treatment. But, in both types of settlements, the
acquisition of raw material seemed to be ruled by some social control.

Julig, P. (see Storck, P.) |74|
Junker, Laura Lee (Vanderbilt University)
[36] THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF A.D. 500-1500 PHILIPPINE CHIEFDOMS

Ethnohistoric research suggests that the political economy in A.D. 500-1500 lowland Philippine chiefdoms
was characterized by a complex array of interlinked exchange systems: foreign luxury good trade with
China, regional specialization and inter-island trade in local prestige goods,and the use of status goods to
obtain critical raw materials from upland tribal populations. Archacological evidence from the Tanjay
chicfdom of Negros Oriental is used to document the growth and expansion of this chiefly prestige goods
economy and the inter-relationships between component exchange systems.

Kalasz, S. (see Metcalf, M.) |66|

Kang, Bong (Oregon)

[94] THE IMPACT OF WARFARE IN THE FORMATION OF COMPLEX SOCIETIES IN THE
PROTOHISTORIC KOREAN PENINSULA

Many scholars have formulated different models concerning the formation of complex societies, emphasiz-
ing factors such as irrigation, interregional exchange, population growth, warfare, and combinations of these.
Archaeologists have begun to understand the underlying conditions and socio-cultural processes that led

‘to formation of complex societies and to realize that different factors were at work in different world
regions. Certain sets of factors have been identified in the archacological record in both Korea and world
areas. This paper examines how onc of these factors, warfare, contributed to the rise of complex societies
in the protohistoric Korean peninsula (A.D. 300-600).

Kaplan, Flora E. S. (New York University) | Discussant 3}

Kardulias, P. Nick (College of Wooster), Richard W. Yerkes (Obio State), and Heatber |

Gaybeart (Kenyon College)

[84] FINDING THE NEOLITHIC “NEEDLE” IN THE CYPRIOT HAYSTACK: SURVEY AND REGIONAL
DYNAMICS IN CENTRAL CYPRUS

The Athienou Archacological Project conducted its fourth season of work in central Cyprus in 1993. The
survey recorded seven additional sites, including a Neolithic chert quarry, the second in the Malloura Valley.
Analysis of the Aceramic Neolithic flaked stone assemblage has identified a number of diagnostic features
for this important phase. The additional survey work also confirmed the initial assessment of a highly
nucleated settlement pattern in the valley. The regional dynamics in the Malloura Valicy differ significantly
from other areas in Cyprus, probably due to the location intermediate berween the mountains to the north
and the coast to the south.

Karimali, Evagelia (Boston University)
[50] SPECIALIZATION AND SELF-REPRODUCTION: THE NEOLITHIC MODE OF PRODUCTION
RECONSIDERED

Until now, domestic production and gift exchange have been proposed as the sole possible modes of

production and exchange for the early stateless societies of Neolithic Thessaly, Greece. Ethnographic data
, Kehoe, Alice B. 77
from the non-hierarchical socictics demonstrate the co-existence of different modes of production and
exchange. Although ideally thought as two entirely different types of trade, gift and market exchange, by
being complementary and convertible to each other, ensure the process of social reproduction. Behind the
operation of trade networks lies a quite stable system of domestic and specialized production units, character-
ined by different levels of technical competence and efficiency,

Katrenberg, Anne H. (Calgary)

[54] STABLE ISOTOPES AND INFANT FEEDING PRACTICES

Initial research on the use of the stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen for reconstructing dict focused
on adult individuals in prehistoric populations. More recent analysis of preserved protein from individuals
of all ages reveals a recurring patter where 6'°N values are consistently higher in infants, then taper off
around the first to second year of life. Based on the fact that nitrogen isotopes indicate trophic level, this
pattern has been interpreted as evidence for breast-feeding and weaning. The pattern has been observed
in several skeletal populations in the Americas, and a recent study of a historic cemetery sample from

Ontario suggests the possibility of refining estimates of weaning age.

Kay, Marvin (Arkansas)

{74] DALTON: AN ADAPTIVE RADIATION

Following Anderson, Dalton appears to represent a middle to late Paleoindian successful colonization of
the interior uplands of what is nominally known as the southeastern United States. This paper reviews the

Morse Dalton settlement model developed for the lower Mississippi River Valley and assesses Dalton

settlement strategies and subsistence for the western Ozark Highland, especially at Rodgers Shelter, Missouri.

Kealbofer, Lisa (Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute)

[25] PHYTOLITHS AND THE PALEOECOLOGY OF CENTRAL THAILAND

Sediment sequences from central Thailand document 8000 years of environmental change and human
impact. Three sequences from the Lopburi region are compared with two from the Bang Pakong Valicy,
east of Bangkok, to achieve a more in-depth understanding of the changes in regional habitats during the

Holocene. Evidence for human impact, including both economic species and carbon, in these sequences

appears not long after 8000 B.P., however intensive human disruption begins in the third millennium B.P.

These data serve to redefine our understanding of cultural and agricultural developments in central Thailand

during the Holocene.

Kearns, Timothy (Western Cultural Resource Management)

189] IN THE SYSTEM OR OUT: AN EXAMINATION OF SMALL HOUSE MATERIAL CULTURE
VARIABILITY AND GREAT HOUSE ASSOCIATION IN THE SOUTHERN CHUSKA VALLEY, NEW
MEXICO

Although many Pueblo [I habitation sites in the southern Chuska Valley, northwest New Mexico are
spatially associated with a Great House Community, others are spatially isolated. Does this differential
association indicate variability in the level of socio-economic organization or participation in socio-political

Neen en nn een nee ee en ee ape:

of involvement in regional socio-political systems. Data recent excavations at Puchlo [I small house

sites in the southern Chuska Valley are used to examine variability in access to non-local goods between

Great House community sites and spatially isolated sites. The results are then used to assess the relative

degree of involvement in regional socio-political networks.

Keegan, W. (see Stokes, A.) |54| ‘

Keegan, William F, (Florida Museum of Natural History) ;

[79] UNIVERSALS AND REFUTATIONIST LOGIC IN THE WEST INDIAN LABORATORY

The laboratory approach is based on the premise that a universal set of relations exists amongyariables
such that the outcome of any experiment can be predicted from knowledge of the variable's states. Use of
this methodology to study Taino prehistory was recently criticized by a philosopher of archacology. The
present paper defends the use of the laboratory mode! and reviews insights gained from comparing population
distributions across the Antilles. These insights correct recent misconceptions regarding the rate at which
the Antilles were first colonized, the relative use of terrestrial and marine foods, and the initial emergence
of caciques.

Keboe, Alice B. (Marquette University) |Discussant 52}

Keboe, Alice B. (Marquette University)

(34] WHAT WAS A CHILD?

“Child” is cognate to a Germanic term for “womb.” Its primary meaning was “offspring.” As Philippe

Aries argued in Centuries of Childbood, immature persons past weaning have often been seen as small but

not incompetent. They have been expected to endeavor to follow the activities of adults. Tailoring artifacts
, 78 Kelley, Jeffery, William Lipe, and Mark Varien
to their size has not been common, and toys are generally flimsy and perishable. Recognizing “children”
from societies that did not conceptualize “childhood” as Western bourgeois culture has constructed it, will
require not only meticulous sorting out of features commensurate with small-size persons’ activities, but
radically confronting our emic concept “children.”
Kelley, Jeffery (Wasbington State), William Lipe (Washington State), and Mark Varien
(Arizona State)
[37] THIRTEENTH CENTURY CANYON-RIM ARCHITECTURAL COMPLEXES IN THE MESA VERDE
REGION
The A.D. 1200s witnessed significant settlement aggregation and change in the central Mesa Verde region
of southwestern Colorado and southeastern Utah, One manifestation is the widespread appearance of massive
architectural complexes on canyon rims near reliable springs. Dominated by non-domestic features such
as enclosing walls, towers, D-Shaped buildings, and plazas, these complexes are generally associated with
cliff dwellings and/or talus slope structures as parts of larger aggregates. The characteristics, distribution,
chronology, and functions of sites with canyon rim architecture are explored, and a large, recently-mapped
and dated example—the Woods Canyon Site—is analyzed in more detail.
Kelly, Jobn (Southern Illinois-Edwardsville)
[78] POPULATION ESTIMATES AT CAHOKIA AND THE AMERICAN BOTTOM: PROBLEMS AND
PROSPECTS
Gregg's 1975 population estimate for the large Mississippian center of Cahokia has perpetuated a demo-
graphic demon contributing to a number of misconceptions regarding the overall size and complexity of
this settlement. Milner's more recent estimate for the outlying Mississippian settlements is methodologically
rigorous, however, tends to omit a number of settlement types and thus oversimplify the density of population
surrounding Cahokia. A wealth of new information has been generated at Cahokia and the surrounding
region. Utilizing this new data this paper examines these problems and offers a number of solutions to the
demographic dilemma that dominates the literature.
Kelly, Kenneth (California-Los Angeles)
[73] RECENT EXCAVATIONS AT SAVI, AN 18TH CENTURY WEST AFRICAN TRADE TOWN IN
BENIN
This paper discusses recent research conducted at Savi, a ade town located in the Bight of Benin. The
town, destroyed by the Fon kingdom of Dahomey, had been important in the slave trade with the New
World. Duc to its destruction in 1727 and subsequent abandonment, the town site provides an excellent
opportunity to investigate material culture in onc region of the West African coast during the early period
of European contact and trade.
Kelly, Robert L. (Louisville) |Discussant 16]
‘ Kelly, Robert L. (Louisville)
(90] PREHISTORIC BACKGROUND TO STILLWATER MARSH BIOARCHAEOLOGY PAPERS
This paper presents the prehistory background to the Stillwater Marsh bioarchacology papers. While
providing “the best foraging game in town" the archacology of the Carson Sink still points to a mobile
adaptation. However, pinyon groves of the nearby Stillwater Mts. were used through logistical mobility
only. Recently discovered sites in the marsh point to a reduction in residential mobility, perhaps after 1300
B.P. and a shift in settlement patterns after 650 B.P., although differential site exposure could play a role
here as well, Ethnographic data point to residentially mobile groups tethered to wetlands; these data also
show greater mobility of men than women.
Kennett, Douglas J. (California-Santa Barbara)
[92] OXYGEN ISOTOPE ANALYSIS OF ESTUARINE CLAM SHELLS AS A METHOD FOR
RECONSTRUCTING PATTERNS OF MOLLUSCAN USE BY PREHISTORIC POPULATIONS LIVING
ON THE COAST OF SOUTHWESTERN MEXICO
Stable oxygen isotope ratios in the shell carbonate of marsh clams living in the Acapetahua Estuary of
southwestern Mexico record fluctuations in salinity caused by alternating wet and dry seasons. Isotopic
composition of marsh clam shells from late Archaic Period (5000-4000 B.P_) archacological deposits in this
region are used to determine the season of clam harvest. In the early stages of the late Archaic Period marsh
clams were collected all year but were primarily harvested during the dry season, Procurement patterns
changed during the late Archaic Period with a general trend toward clam harvesting during wet scason
months. People living in this region possibly altered their overall subsistence strategy due to scheduling
conflicts that occurred with the adoption of agriculture.
, Kirch, Patrick V. 79

Kent, Jo (Colorado-Denver), James Kirk (Colorado-Denver), and Kimberly Lovett

(Metropolitan State)

[66] SETTLEMENT PATTERNS IN THE MIDDLE ARCHAIC PERIOD IN THE HOGBACK VALLEY,
COLORADO

The Dakota Hogback is located in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains, west of Denver, Colorado. It lies
between two known culture areas—the Mountain Tradition to the west and the Plains Cultures to the east.
Although there are over 55 recorded archacological sites and field work has been conducted in the Hogback
for many years, a comprehensive ficld survey and regional synthesis has not been attempted. This paper
will present a synthetic view of this arca concentrating on the Middle Archaic period. Specifically, this paper
will examine the question of cultural affiliation (mountain, foothill, plains ) and length of occupation at sites
in the area (short term or seasonal ).

Kent, Susan (Old Dominion)
[81] UNSTABLE HOUSEHOLDS IN A STABLE COMMUNITY: THE ORGANIZATION OF A RECENTLY
SEDENTARY SETTLEMENT

Diachronic observations during most of the life of a sedentary Kalahari community occupied by recently
somadic peoples offers insights into the dynamic processes that may have been in operation during the
initial shift to sedentism that occurred at different times and different places throughout prehistory. Factors
not often considered when modeling prehistoric communities appear to be as important or more important
than kinship and economics, such as sharing partners and friendship, in organizing the spatial patterning
and interaction of camps and households, in at least this newly sedentary Kalahari community,
Kepecs, Susan (Wisconsin)

[29] NORTHEAST YUCATAN AND THE AZTECS: THE MESOAMERICAN WORLD PERSPECTIVE ON
THE EVE OF THE SPANISH CONQUEST

The Late Postclassic period marked a new world order in Mesoamerica, characterized by Aztec dominance
over much of the macroregion. Yucatan was on the margins of this far-flung system. This is in stark contrast
to the Early Postclassic, when northeast Yucatan was under the political and economic influence of Chichén
itza, a major pole of pan-Mesoamerican commerce. Using various lines of evidence, including regional
settiement pattern data and the ethnohistoric record, this paper examines how northeast Yucatin was
affected by the changes generated by the Aztec state, and explores the nature of the core-periphery relation-
Kerley, J. (see Cassell, M.) {35|
Keyser, James (USDA Forest Service)

1103] ROBE ART: THE MISSING LINK IN THE BIOGRAPHIC ART LEXICON

Northwestern Plains Biographic Style Indian art was done in rock art, ledger books, and hide paintings.
Rock art and Icdger art have been well studied, and a preliminary lexicon to help interpret these drawings
has been defined. Robe art, however, is not well known to scholars of Plains Indian art. Recent research
shows that Biographic art on a number of these piecé can serve as a missing link to further develop the
Biographic art lexicon. The importance of these robe art drawings derives from their early date, coupled
with the refinement and fiexibility of this medium for illustrating nuances of detail,

King, Mark B. (Georgia State)
(55] DIFFERENTIATING IDEOLOGICAL SYMBOLISM FROM HISTORICAL SIGNS IN THE MIXTEC
CODICES

The ideological content of Mixtec codices is examined, advocating the complementary analysis of language,
symbolism, and ethnography as an effective means to interpret this content. This approach is shown to be
effective in the identification of cultural and ideological categories, ranging from the mést fundamental
principles of Mixtec cultural logic to invariant collections of offerings for specific ritual contexts, Pursuing
this methodology will lead to better understanding of ideological structure, and also offers the potential for
an analysis of ideological praxis, by comparing how different clite families recorded their genealogical
relationships using a common set of ideological concepts.

King, R. (see McCoy, P.) |102}|
Kirch, Patrick V. (California-Berkeley)
[39] OCEANIC ISLANDS: MICROCOSMS OF “GLOBAL CHANGE”

Most natural scientists still work under the assumption that the island ecosystems of the Pacific have seen
dramatic human impacts only since the intrusion of Europeans. Yet recent inter-disciplinary research between
archacologists, avian paleontologists, palynologists and others has now demonstrated that massive human-
induced changes in insular biota and landscapes commenced with Polynesian colonization 3-2,000 years
BP. This paper explores some implications of these new data for understanding processes of “global change.”

j
, 80 Kirch, Patrick
Kirch, Patrick (California-Berkeley) |
[6] LAPITA EXCHANGE: THE EVIDENCE FROM LITHIC MATERIALS OTHER THAN OBSIDIAN

The Lapita cultural complex in the southwestern Pacific (ca. 3600-2000 B.P.) is known to have involved
extensive long-distance, inter-island exchange. To date, such Lapita exchange has been reconstructed and |
modelied largely on the basis of ceramic and obsidian evidence. In this paper, | consider the additional
contribution to be made through petrographic analysis of non-obsidian lithic materials, particularly volcanic
and meta-volcanic oven stones and manuports, using materials from the Talepakemalai site in the Mussau |
islands. |

Kirk, J. (see Kent, J.) |66]|

Kirkendall, Melissa Ann (Hawai'l-Manoa)

[79] DIFFERENTIAL RESPONSES TO INFECTIOUS DISEASE IN THE PACIFIC AT EUROPEAN
CONTACT

Responses to infectious diseases introduced at European contact varied throughout the Pacific. General
issucs in disease response include the timing and frequency of European contact, mortality induced from
secondary factors, the genetic homogencity of the indigenous population, and patterns of inter and intra
group contact. Tahiti, Fiji, and Island Melanesia display characteristics along a continuum of variation when
examined against the backdrop of the issues. Archacological research exploring demographic and cultural
change in the Pacific needs to take into account potential variation in disease response at European contact.

Klesert, A. (see Benallie, L.) |93|

Knecht, Heidi (Miami)

[84] PROJECTILE POINTS OF BONE, ANTLER, AND STONE: EXPERIMENTAL EXPLORATIONS OF
MANUFACTURE AND FUNCTION

This paper explores ways in which the raw material selected for projectile point production influences
projectile point design, manufacture, and use. The structural and mechanical properties of bone, antler, and
stone are highly differentiated. Results of experimental manufacture and use of projectile points made of
these three materials indicate the manner in which variables such as technique of manufacture, hafting
technique, morphology, and performance characteristics (e.g, depth of penctration and reaction to impact)

are related to the raw material of production.

Knobloch, Pat (Institute of Andean Studies)

[77] ADAPTING TO THE EMERGING ROLE OF WARI LEADERSHIP

A 1978 analysis of ceramics from a 3 meter stratified refuse deposit at Wari produced evidence that

Middle Horizon 1 Ayacucho populations were interacting with south coast Nasca 8 populations, then central

coast Cajamarquilla populations and finally south highland populations. The transition from a long established

Huarpa community that began the social ties with south coast Nasca 7 populations to a widespread interaction

network indicates the domineering sociopolitical strategy of Wari leadership. This discussion will present

. recent research into the relationship of non-Wari polities at the end of the Early Intermediate Period as
they adapted to the emerging role of Wari leadership.

Kobl, Philip L. (Wellesley College)

[93] COLONIALISTS WEARING WHITE HATS: INTERNATIONALIST “READINGS OF THE PAST” IN
THE FORMER USSR

Official state-sponsored archaeology in the former Soviet Union can be criticized on many grounds, |
including its forced adherence to an outmoded 19th century evolutionary orthodoxy that denied or mini-
mized local cultural developments and diversity. While noting examples of this phenomenon, this paper
focuses on the more positive aspects of internationalist “readings of the past” which impeded (or at least
tempered) the construction of dangerous local national mythologies based upon the manipulation of the
archacological record.

Kobler, T. (see Gumerman, G.) {99}

Kobler, Timothy A. (Wasbington State and Santa Fe Institute)

[46] PREHISTORIC HUMAN IMPACT ON UPLAND NORTH AMERICAN SOUTHWESTERN |
ENVIRONMENTS: HISTORY OF RESEARCH, CONSEQUENCES FOR CULTURE CHANGE, AND
IMPLICATIONS FOR PREHISTORIC DECISION-MAKING

In this paper I review the history of research on the question of prehistoric human impact on the
environment in the upland Southwestern portions of North America and present knowledge on the nature,
severity, and consequences of those impacts. I then discuss how decision-making cither by reference to
social norms or rational strategizing can Iead to nonsustainable use of the environment. This will lead to
some predictions as to what strategies were in fact used for decision-making at certain points in the

|
, Kuhn, Steven and Mary C. Stiner 8]
prehistoric Anasazi sequence, as weil as a discussion of the general features of strategies that can result in
sustainable adaptations, whether in prehistory or today.

Kolb, Charles C. (National Endowment for the Humanities) {Respondent to Snow 3]

Kolb, M. (see Murakami, G.) |94|

Kolb, M, (see Sweeney, M.) | 100]

Kolb, Michael (State Historic Preservation Division, Hawati) and James Snead (California-

Los Angeles)

[81] ISSUES IN COMMUNITY-LEVEL ANALYSIS IN ARCHAEOLOGY

The traditional dichotomy between the ‘site’ and the ‘region’ in archaeological research has limited our
understanding of one of the most significant components of society lying berween the two; the local
community. Long a concern of ethnographers, study of this level of socio-political integration is relevant
for a number of issues currently of interest to archaeologists. This paper discusses theoretical issucs of
community-level analysis in archaeology by first defining some of the methodological concerns at the core
of this approach. Current research on community-level cultural landscapes in Hawai'i and New Mexico will
provide relevant case studies.

Korniet=, N. (see Soffer, O.) |69|

Koski, S. (see Gifford, J.) (41|

Kozarek, S. (see Connolly, R.) (23)

Krass, Dorothy Schlottbauer (Massachusetts)

[52] TRANSMITTERS OF (ARCHAEOLOGICAL) KNOWLEDGE: A STUDY OF TEACHERS

As anthropologists, we recognize that every region has a unique environment for learning about archacol-
ogy. In Massachusetts, curriculum requirements are determined by the school district, not the state; and
visible archaeological sites are all from the historic period. Creating useful, attractive materials for teaching
archacology had to start with an evaluation of the knowledge and attitudes of teachers—What do they know
about archaeology? Where do they get this knowledge? How accurate and current is it? How do they think
archacology relates to their teaching goals?—and of the institutional and cultural conditions that influence
their including archacology in their teaching.

Krueger, H. (see Ambrose, 5.) |54|
Kryder-Reid, Elizabeth (CASVA, National Gallery of Art)
[62] CALIFORNIA MISSIONS: LANDSCAPES OF DISCIPLINE

The explicit purpose of the 21 California missions was the conversion of California's indigenous peoples
© Catholicism, while the implicit purpose was claiming new territory and integrating its inhabitants into
ee a ee ee ee ee Be arenes capa bemctaiatiaiahos
dormitory—all disciplining institutions. Through daily and a variety of panoptic devices, the missions
were landscapes of control. The effectiveness of that control was not uniform, however, and this paper
examines the historical, visual, and material evidence of the mission landscapes as a physical framework of
relations of power between the Spanish and the Native Americans.

Kuckelman, K. (see Lightfoot, R.) {89] '

Kubn, S. (see Stiner, M.) |19|

Kubn, Steven (Loyola-Chicago)

[20] MIDDLE AND EARLY UPPER PALEOLITHIC TECHNOLOGICAL VARIABILITY ATRIPARO
MOCHI (LIGURIA, ITALY)

This poster presents findings on Mousterian and Aurignacian lithic assemblages from Riparo Mochi, a
deeply stratified rockshelter in northwest Italy. The appearance and character of change between Middle
and early Upper Paleolithic (Aurignacian) varies with the analytical perspective. Typological indicators
could suggest continuity between late Mousterian and carlicst Aurignacian, whereas methods of tool blank
production and patterns of raw material utilization changed radically across the same interval. These observa-
tions have implications for the techno-cconomic behavior of MP and EUP hominids, as well as for the utility
of many “diagnostic” features of Palcolithic industries.

Kubn, Steven (Loyola-Chicago) and Mary C. Stiner (Loyola-Chicago)
[2] BEHAVIORAL ECOLOGY OF HUMAN ORIGINS RESEARCH

Many attempts to apply archacological findings to debates about the biological origins of modern humans
are overtly typological, citing idealized conjectural patterns of hominid behavior as support for competing
models. However, it is inappropriate to assume that a single pattern of behavior characterized organisms
, 82 Kulisheck, Jeremy and Michael Adler
as complex as archaic or modern Homo sapiens. Moreover, when appropriately framed, archacological |
research reveals much variety within the behavioral repertoires of hominids. The main contribution of
archaeology to human origins research is a fuller comprehension of the limits and structure of different
hominids’ responses to environmental, demographic and social factors.
Kulisbeck, Jeremy (Soutbern Methodist University) and Michael Adler (Southern Methodist
University)
[58] DIVERSITY AND CONTINUITY IN CLASSIC AND PROTOHISTORIC VILLAGES OF THE TAOS
DISTRICT, NORTHERN NEW MEXICO

The material record of the Taos District, New Mexico, has been generally characterized by a significant
degree of continuity from the Coalition to the Classic Period, at a time when major changes are evident
throughout the rest of the Rio Grande region. Examination of the materials from Pot Creek Pueblo and
Picuris Pueblo indicate that such continuity takes place in the context of the adoption of other material
culture traits which emerge throughout the Rio Grande region during the Classic Period. Examination of
the site structure at Pot Creek and Picuris also indicates that site component, as well a8 possibly total site,
abandonment, was a common phenomena.
Kunz, M. (see Reanier, R.) |74|
Kus, Susan (Rbodes College)
[67] HOUSE TO PALACE, VILLAGE TO STATE: SCALING UP ARCHITECTURE AND IDEOLOGY

In many societies house form and organization map social and cosmological principles allowing them to
be appropriated somatically, emotionally and intellectually by individuals. A state's order that transcends
rural routine and space can be articulated with the cosmos by having royal palaces follow rules of rural
houses. In this scaling up the state benefits from the logic and metaphor of a world order whose “socialization”
is guaranteed a solid base without much state imposition. The complexity of such architectural and ideological
scaling up are discussed for 19th century Imerina in Central Madagascar using ethnohistorical, archaeological
and ethnographic information.
Kvamme, Kenneth L. (Boston University)
[49] SEEKING PATTERNS IN DATA: ALBERT C. SPAULDING AND STATISTICAL INFERENCE

Whether or not the quantitative revolution that has transformed some disciplines has come and gone in
archaeology and whether it has achieved its proper impact is open to debate. Whatever the case, it is
becoming clear that the EDA and pattern secking approach advocated by Albert Spaulding some four decades
ago is finally achieving major attention, but through a different and unexpected source, It is the advanced
graphical output and data visualization offered by modern computer software that is realizing Spaulding’s
original vision, It is through this mechanism that archaeologists are finally getting in tune with their data,
an outcome which will hopefully lay a groundwork for richer theory.
Kwiathowski, Scott (Archaeological Research Services)
[80] CONTINUITY AND CHANGE IN PHOENIX-AREA HOHOKAM SUBSISTENCE FROM THE

‘ CIVANO PHASE TO THE POLVORON PHASE: THE FLOTATION EVIDENCE

A relatively large number of flotation samples dating to both the Civano and Polvorén Phases have now
been analyzed from several Phocnix-arca Hohokam sites. Some authorities, especially Charles H. Miksicek,
have suggested that these data indicate that local Hohokam populations may have had declining success
with agriculture during the Civano Phase, and that this situation could have led to a greater reliance on
wild plants by the Polvoron Phase. This paper reviews the literature on Civano and Polvorén Phase Hohokam
subsistence—especially flotation studies from the metropolitan Phoenix area—and evaluates the data for
quantitative evidence of subsistence shifts,
Ladefoged, Thegn N. (Auckland)
[100] SOCIOECONOMIC TERRITORIES ON MOTUTAPU, AOTEAROA

Throughout prehistoric Aotearoa ( New Zealand ) technological and environmental conditions necessitated
annual storage of sweet potato for winter subsistence and planting stock. These food stores, and the land
used to produce them, were contested resources. In order to defend subsistence resources, individuals
were often organized into kin groups of between 30 to 150 people, the bapux. A landscape perspective is
used to interpret the results of a geographic information system analysis of global positioning system and
digital theodolite data from the small island of Motutapu. On one level, the replication of social and economic
territories defined by the distribution of fortified paa suggests competition between bapuu. A higher Ievel
of political integration is suggested by morphologically distinct paa situated in strategic locations.
Lambert, Patricia (California-Sania Barbara)
[47] SETTLING DOWN IN SANTA BARBARA: THE ORIGINS AND CONSEQUENCES OF SEDENTARY

VILLAGE LIFE IN SOUTH COASTAL CALIFORNIA

Cemetery data are used to identify and interpret changes in the setticment systems of prehistoric hunter-

gatherers of the Santa Barbara Channel area. Throughout the long prehistoric sequence, burial was the
, | Larsen, Clark and Dale Hutchinson 83
| primary means for disposing of the dead, Because the dead were buried in close proximity to habitation
sites, variables such as the appearance, size, and distribution of cemeteries provide important Clues about
temporal and spatial variations in the duration and intensity of village occupations. Skeletal remains from
these cemeteries provide a record of health and disease that is also useful in tracking increasing sedentism.
The causes and consequences of sedentism for these complex hunter-gatherers are discussed in the context
of the region’s unique prehistory.
Lamotte, Agnes (Lille) |
[20] MIDDLE PLEISTOCENE BIFACE INDUSTRIES FROM NORTHERN EUROPE: THE BEHAVIORAL
SIGNIFICANCE OF SOME SPECIALIZED ASSEMBLAGES
Several variations are evident in the lithic assemblages of six northern European sites (11 levels) with
similar geographic and paleoenvironmental contexts. Generally speaking, cleavers, choppers, chopping-
rools, bolas and polyhedrals are not present. Rather, these assemblages vary along three axes: many or few
bifaces (with an evolution in morphology), many or few flake tools (with variability in the use of interior
and exterior flake surfaces), and the presence or absence of the levallois technique. These three elements
form assemblage variability in northern Europe, which parallels the situation in Africa and the Near East
during the same period.
Lanata, Jose (Texas-Austin) and C. Britt Bousman (Texas-Austin)
[97] RISK AND ADAPTATIVE STRATEGIES IN PALEOINDIAN OCCUPATIONS AT CENTRAL TEXAS
in this paper we provide data from the Wilson-Leonard site that presents evidence for different exploitation
patterns among Palcoindians. Small and unpredictable, yet significant fluctuations in local environments and
climate could have played an important role in the employment of different adaptative strategies among
Paleoindian inhabitants of Central Texas. During periods of environmental change, human populations could
have altered their strategies to cope with food scarcity, including not only the exploitation of large mammals
but small animals and plant foods as well. The characterization of Paleoindian adaptative strategies as
concentrating on megafauna appears to be flawed.
Lange, Frederick William (Colorado) | Discussant 32|
Lange, Richard C. (Arizona State Museum)
150] AS FAR AS THE EYE CAN SEE: SOME BASIC TESTS OF PREHISTORIC SIGNALLING
CAPABILITY
Prehistoric architecture, such as towers, and site locations on high places lead many to speculate about
communication or signalling Researchers often draw lines of sight on maps to indicate potential communica-
tions, regardless of message being communicated, manner of transmission, or distances involved. Some data,
vesting signalling abilities, have been collected but are not widely available or known. A number of field
rests were conducted to test certain aspects of signalling, including different means and messages, and over
various distances. Certain techniques permit signalling over long distances, but the messages are limited.
Larick, Roy R. (Bement School)
(34] CHILDREN LEARNING PREHISTORY IN CONTEMPORARY FRANCE
By American standards, prehistory bombards French children. The quantity and quality of learning avenues
ceflect French patrimonial ideology but are increasingly fueled by profit. Five avenues for learning Paleolithic
prehistory illustrate the case: numerous public sites with guided visits, traditional school curricula in
prehistory; a growing number of small-scale private theme paris; a wildly proliferating popular literature;
and action-oriented learning modules developed by professional archaeologists. The paper evaluates these
avenues on modes of presenting (questioning-answering ) and learning (active-passive), and on explanatory
attitude (open-closed ). It speculates future developments in commercialism and international applications.
Larralde, Signa (Museum of New Mexico) and Sarab H. Schlanger (Museum of New Mexico)
[33] ANASAZI AXES FROM THE LA PLATA VALLEY: MANUFACTURE, USE, AND DISCARD
Excavations of parts of two Anasazi communities during the La Plata Highway Project yielded a large
sample of Anasazi axes and other large hafted tools. Several types of axes were found in various stages of
manufacture, making it possible to reconstruct a variety of manufacturing trajectories. Axe and maul distribu
tion suggests patterns of tool use and curation, as well as patterns of residential abandonment of the Anasazi
communities at Jackson Lake and Barker Arroyo. These patterns are contrasted with large hafted tool
distribution at other Four Corners Anasazi communities.
Larsen, Clark (North Carolina-Chapel Hill) and Dale Hutchinson (East Carolina University)
(90] OSTEOPATHOLOGY OF HUNTER-GATHERERS FROM THE CARSON DESERT:
RECONSTRUCTING PREHISTORIC LIFEWAYS IN THE WESTERN GREAT BASIN
Study of human skeletal remains from the Stillwater Marsh region of western Nevada has revealed details
of adaptation. This paper reports on a range of paleopathological indicators, indicating that populations
, R4 Larson, L.

were generally healthy, with relatively litle evidence of physiological stress or experience with infectious

pathogens. High prevalence of osteoarthritis argues for a nonsedentary, physically demanding lifestyle.

Larson, L. (see Phillips, L.) (18)

Larson, Lynn L. (Larson Anthropological/Archaeological Services)

[18] RESULTS OF THE WEST POINT PROJECT EVALUATED IN REGIONAL AND ETHNOGRAPHIC
CONTEXTS

The West Point artifact assemblage and data analysis provide a data base for 4,500 years of land use for
a landform in Puget Sound. Comparison with sites on the Duwamish River, Chester Morse Lake, the San
Juan Islands, and the Gulf of Georgia may provide answers to important regional questions such as; When
and why did the shift from forager to collector organization occur in Puget Sound or throughout the
Northwest? How did earthquakes affect settlement pattern through time in the Duwamish River Valley? Did
Duwamish villages participate in an interdependent economy based on ecological strengths?
Larson, Mary Lou (Wyoming)

[66] ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSEPITS: THE EDSELS OF THE INTERAMERICAN WEST?

Semi-subterrancan features known as housepits in the Rocky Mountains and Northwestern High Plains
served as dwellings throughout much of the area's prehistory, with a fluorescence during the Early Plains
Archaic. If one subscribes to Gilman's criteria for the use of such dwellings, housepits should have been
ideal dwellings for hunter-gatherers in the area. However, other architectural types, such as tipis and
wickiups, surpassed housepits in importance. Investigation of the characteristics of Rocky Mountain housepits
and their theoretical underpinnings provide insight into these enigmatic features.

Laub, Richard (Buffalo Museum of Science)
[74] THE PALEOINDIAN RECORD AT THE HISCOCK SITE (WESTERN NEW YORK): ITS NATURE
AND CONTEXT

Spring-derived terminal Pleistocene sediments at the Hiscock Site contain disarticulated, mixed bones of
American mastodon (MNI=8) and other megafauna species, as well as abundant conifer twigs and cones
that were probably fecally deposited. These sediments have also yielded lithic artifacts (mostly fluted bifaces ),
and several bones that may have been culturally modified. Two well-like excavations could be products of
proboscidean and/or human activity. The site is interpreted to have contained several spring-fed pools in
a corridor between two large lakes that extended more than 50 miles in an east-west direction.

Lawlor, Elizabeth J. (California-Riverside)
[25] SITE-FORMATION PROCESSES AFFECTING PHYTOLITH DEPOSITS IN THE MOJAVE DESERT

In theory, phytoliths are deposited through decay of plant material and remain in place (i.¢,, within about
30 m.) until recovery by the archacologist. Does this decay-in-place model apply in the Mojave Desert or
adjacent Great Basin? If so, then we can use phytoliths there to identify prehistoric plant-processing features.
The answer depends on a reference collection focused on (1) cultural practices of gathering, processing,
and discarding certain plant parts, and (2) phytolith assemblages from soils representing modern vegetation

« associations. | report an experimental field study comparing soil samples from modern food preparation
arcas to sampics from control areas.
Lazrus, Paula Kay (New School for Social Research)
[91] FARMERS, PASTORALISTS & ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION IN SARDINIA

Data from a recent field survey in two regions of Sardinia suggests that specialized pastoralism on the
Island is a fairly recent phenomenon. Research on land-use and settlement patterns from prehistory through
the present time, indicate that major environmental changes probably did not occur until the late Middle
Ages or later. The most significant transformation of the environment is an even later phenomenon beginning
in the 1800s due to external political and economic influences imposed on the island's inhabitants leading
to the shift from agriculture to pastoralism and environmental degradation.

Leach, J. (see Mauldin, R.) | 33]
Lebo, Cathy (Indiana)
[104) THE MYTH OF MARGINALITY: FEAST OR FAMINE IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST?

The traditional view that the Southwest is marginal for corn agriculture, therefore all corn farmers lived
under greater environmental influence, needs to be reassessed. Direct archaeological evidence from recent
skeletal studies indicates reliance on corn as the overwhelming component of prehistoric meals. Ethnohistoric
farming practices maintained a fairly dependable food supply in spite of recurrent crop shortfalls. A simulation
of corn harvests under reconstructed paleoclimatic conditions is used to reexamine the marginality of
prehistoric life in the presence and absence of such an adaptive farming strategy.

Lebow, C. (see Schalk, R.) |83|
, Levi, Laura 85
Lee, M. (see Stepbens, D.) |70|
LeFevre, C. (see Corbett, D.) [79
Lekson, Stepben (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center)
[99] COMPLEXITY AT CHACO AND CAHOKIA

Archacological complexity—a social condition—and SFI's complexity—a measurement of structure—
most obviously intersect at points when relatively simpic, homogeneous archaeological patterns are trans-
formed into highly structured, heterogeneous patterns. In the later prehistory of America north of Mcxico,
ewo examples of complexity or complex transformations are central: Chaco and Cahokia. The strikingly
parallel structures of these transformations are used to evaluate the utility of both archacological and SFI's
complexity in understanding the past on a continental scale.

Lensink, Stepben C. (lowa) and Fred A. Finney (lowa)
[105] DEALING WITH RISK IN THE INITIAL MIDDLE MISSOURI VARIANT: LOCAL SUBSISTENCE
SYSTEMS AND REGIONAL INTERACTION NETWORKS

People of the Initial Middle Missouri variant in lowa, known as Mill Creek, appear to have engaged in
tour strategies by which village agriculturists cope with risk—diversification, exchange, mobility, and storage.
Previously collected subsistence data from Mill Creek is re-evaluated (to suggest a more complicated system
of resource diversification than originally proposed by the climatic hypothesis. New perspectives on Mill
Creek field systems, storage capacity, remote hunting camps, and regional interaction with sites in the
Mississippi valley are presented. These data argue for a greater range in the means of dealing with fluctuations
is food supplies than previously known,

Lent, D. (see Pope, K.) (76)

Leonard, Banks L. (California-Los Angeles) and Glenn S, Russell (California-Los Angeles)

[77] COALESCENCE AND TRANSFORMATION IN THE EARLY INTERMEDIATE PERIOD: FROM
HORIZON TO HORIZON IN THE CHICAMA VALLEY, PERU.

Recent settlement pattern studies in the lower Chicama allow examination of sociopolitical transformations
@uring the EIP. After Early Horizon numerous small sites became nucleated into fortified hill towns, suggesting
istravalley competition among small polities. By Late Gallinazo defensive sites were abandoned and major
monumental centers were built, reflecting political unification of the valley. Middle Horizon saw further
transformation, including the abandonment of Moche centers, construction of a new center, change in burial
practices, ceramic diversification, and strong influences from Cajamarca and Lambayeque.

Leone, Mark P. (Maryland-College Park) | Discussant 62]

LeTourneau, Philippe (New Mexico)

[37] RECENT INVESTIGATIONS AT THE ANTELOPE WELLS OBSIDIAN SOURCE, ANIMAS
MOUNTAINS, NEW MEXICO

a Sela ie Ae a
While the location of the primary source area for this vo glass is generally known, knowledge of the
source material's geologic, physical, and chemical characteristics is limited. This report summarizes recent
Seid work that contributes new information regarding geologic occurrence, surface density, chemical
composition, and physical characteristics of the obsidian. ‘

Letts, K. (see Moe, J.) (52)
Leventhal, Ricbard (California-Los Angeles) and Wendy Ashmore (Pennsylvania)
§60] FROM EDGE TO CENTER: TERMINAL CLASSIC XUNANTUNICH, BELIZE

Originally a secondary component in the Naranjo polity, the ancient Maya center of Xunantunich kmerged
as the dominant political force its part of the upper Belize river valley in the Terminal Classic (A.D. 850-
$000). In its third ficld season (1994), the Xunantunich Archaeological Project (XAP) continues inquiry
tno the causes and implications of the rise and decline of this abruptly assertive late center. As part of the
imquiry, XAP is also testing hypotheses about the impact of the governance shifts on the surrounding
populace, an impact current models of maya socicty suggest were minimal.

Levi, Laura (Arizona)
(60] CENTER AND COMMUNITY AT SAN ESTEVAN, BELIZE

At the site of San Estevan, a typology of structure groupings facilitates investigation of the differential
Gstribution of residential arrangements within a prehispanic Maya community. The study finds activities
housed in monumental precincts to be directly implicated in the settlement’s residential organization. Diffuse
political authority, weak political economies, and kingroup self-sufficiency are frequently invoked to account
Ser the dispersement of residence around Maya centers of monumental architecture. Research at San Estevan
, 86 Levine, Frances
suggests, to the contrary, that these settlement systems achieved their form in response to stringent political
and economic entailments of community life.
Levine, Frances (Santa Fe Community College)
[58] REEXAMINING THE BASIS OF ETHNOGRAPHIC ANALOGY: AN EXAMPLE FROM PECOS
PUEBLO, NEW MEXICO
Pecos Pueblo was the principle community on the Upper Pecos River in New Mexico from A.D. 1450
until the 1790s when Hispanic settlers entered the valley, In 1838, a much reduced Puebloan community
emigrated to Jemez Pueblo. Archacologists haye referred to Pecos in modeling general theories of site
abandonment and regional integration. Primary demographic records from Pecos Pueblo and the surrounding
Hispanic communities are analyzed for the period 1696-1840. They suggest multiple factors contributed
to population decline at Pecos Pueblo, Baptismal, burial and marriage records refiect the contributions of
disease, exogamy, warfare and resource Competition in the decline of the Pueblo population.
Levine, Mary Ann (Massachusetts-Amberst) and Barrett P. Brenton (Massachusetts-Amberst)
[34] THE PRESENTATION OF PALEOINDIANS IN JUVENILE LITERATURE
Although Palcoindians have figured prominently in juvenile literature, this medium has received insufficient
attention by archacologists. This paper discusses images and texts portraying Paleoindians in fiction and
non-fiction intended for children. We explore the repetition of some themes and the emergence of new
themes throughout the history of juvenile literature about Paleoindians. In addition, we call attention to
the role of children in these presentations of the past. An examination of such accounts illuminates the
information available to children on these initial settlers. Reading these stories also forces us as archacologists
to reexamine our own stories about the past.
Levy, Janet E. (North Carolina-Charlotte) {Forum Participant 13}
Lewarch, D. (see Bangs, E.) | 18}
Lewarch, Dennis E. (Larson Anthropological/Archaeological Services)
[18] THE WEST POINT CHRONOLOGY: A 4,500 YEAR LAND USE SEQUENCE
Over 60 radiometric dates calibrate a long hunter-gatherer land use sequence at West Point, with initial
use episodes beginning ca. 4500 B.P. near the base of a bluff landform and continuing up the slopes and
top of a higher clevation beach berm through ca. 200 B.P. Five temporal components are defined for
West Point occupations using dendrocorrected age ranges of radiocarbon dates, stratigraphic superposition
relationships, and horizontal distribution of cultural deposits across changing landform surfaces. Shifts in
activity area locations through time are reviewed to document impacts on landslides, changing sea level,
and earthquake-induced ground subsidence,
Light, P. (see Prentiss, W.) |105|
Lightfoot, Kent G. (California-Berkeley)
[11] THE SOCIOPOLITICAL ORGANIZATION OF HUNTER-GATHERERS IN CALIFORNIA: ISSUES
OF CONCERN
. Two issues are introduced in a symposium on the sociopolitical organization of California hunter-gatherers.
The first concerns native responses to carly European explorations, epidemics, and the later recruitment
of laborers into Spanish missions and a Russian fur trade ourpost. How did these encounters influence the
spatial distribution, hierarchical claboration and population size of native polities? The second issue concerns
the common use of ethnographic models in California archacology, How relevant is A.L. Kroeber's longstand-
ing tribelet model for understanding the organization of prehistoric native Californian politics?
Lightfoot, Ricky (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center) and Kristin A. Kuckelman (Crow
Canyon Archaeological Center)
[89] WARFARE AND THE PUEBLO ABANDONMENT OF THE MESA VERDE REGION
Throughout the past century archacologists have debated the role of warfare in the thirteenth century
Pucbloan abandonment of the northern American Southwest. The authors of this paper summarize regional
evidence of violence and its influence on settlement location, community organization, and regional abandon-
ment. A recent locality-based study in the Mesa Verde region addresses these issucs using oral history, rock
art, and excavation data from two villages. The results of this study support the argument thar violence
contributed to the formation and final abandonment of thirteenth century Pucblo villages in the northern
Southwest.
Lillios, Katina T, (Ripon College) and Howard A. Snyder (Yale)
[91] RESOURCE SELECTION AND GROUNDSTONE ARTIFACTS OF THE PORTUGUESE COPPER
AGE: A CONTEXTUAL APPROACH TO PREHISTORIC TECHNOLOGY
A mineralogical and source assessment of groundstone artifacts from lowland Portuguese Copper Age
sites provides evidence for selective and variable use of resources between burials and settlements and the
, '
| Longacre, William and Mark Neupert 87
possible criteria for which various artifacts and the materials used to make them were valued. Most ground-
| stone tools found in settlements are amphibolite, a metamorphic rock whose nearest sources are 100-500
km from lowland sites, but whose density, hardness, and foliation ideally suit it for manufacture and use as
hammers, chisels, axes, etc. In contrast, groundstone artifacts from burials are made principally from local
igncous and sedimentary rocks and are non-functional, unused replicas of the amphibolite tools.
Lincoln, Thomas (Bureau of Reclamation), Teresa L. Hoffman (Bureau of Reclamation),
Ronald Dorn (Arizona State), and Glen Rice (Arizona State)
[50] THE AGE OF A MESOAMERICAN STYLE PETROGLYPH IN SOUTHERN ARIZONA
Cation-ratio dating of rock varnish is used to arrive at a minimum estimate for the age of a Mcsoamerican
style petroglyph near Phoenix, Arizona. The glyph was executed using the pecking techniques standard for
Hobokam rock art, but the layout, dense packing of lines, and apparent subject matter are not characteristic
of this area. The design may show the side-profile of a face with a speech bubble, pointed havhelmet, cross-
sectioned conch, and a shell necklace. This glyph is discussed in the context of other pictorial representations
; in the Southwest that reflect Mesoamerican influences but were executed within the local forms of matcrial
culture.
Lindauer, Qwen (Arizona State)
[26] SMALL SCALE INTEGRATION AND DIFFERENTIATION AT THE BASS POINT PLATFORM
MOUND
The platform mound at Bass Point combined the functions of a residence, a storehouse, and a meetinghouse.
Social differentiation is suggested by the placement of cremations and inhumations a5 well as the position
ef rooms on and around the platform. Analyses of the magnitude of storage, the amount of trash, and effort
im platform construction are used to estimate a small scale of integrative activity. There is evidence that
relatively few non-residents were required in the construction and maintenance of the platform. These
dara suggest that platform mounds may appear in a context of small populations having subtle levels of
ferentiation.
Lindeman, M. (see Guderjan, T.) [60|
Lindly, Jobm (Arizona State)
[20] A TECHNOLOGICAL STUDY OF LEVANTINE MOUSTERIAN ASSEMBLAGES
Middle Paleolithic lithic assemblages from the Levant are studied to gain insights into the technological
organization that occurred during this period. Currently favored technological typologies are scrutinized
along with views of how and why change occurred through time. The goal of this study is to begin to
characterize the range of adaptive choices that occurred from the point of view of lithic technology. This
weformation is then utilized to comment upon the ongoing debate about the origins of modern humans.
Lipe, W. (see Kelley, J.) |37|
Lipe, William D. (Wasbington State and Crow Canyon Archaeological Center) | Discussant 3|
Lipe, William D. Leenttr tgs atspderasySernaarcane. sow einen ni ney teats
185) MATERIAL EXPRESSION OF SOCIAL POWER IN ORTHERN SAN JUAN, A.D. 1150-1300
The Puchloan occupation of the northern San Juan region of SW Colorado and SE Utah in A.D. 1150-
1300 is characterized by a peak in regional population size, locally high population densities, increasing
aggregation, new forms of civic architecture, and rapid regional abandonment at the end of the period. A
seview of architectural, artifactual, mortuary, and settlement dat indicates that the material expression of
power differentials was continuously variable and subtic, rather than strongly patterned and ostentatious.
The context includes both warfare and changes in subsistence risk; relationships of these variables to changes
i sociopolitical organization are discussed.
Liss, K. (see Reese-Taylor, K.) | 44) ’
Loendorf, Larry (Arizona)
103] SHIELD-BEARING WARRIOR PICTOGRAPHS FROM MONTANA TO COLORADO
Shield anthropomorphs are found throughout the Rocky Mountain states. Numerical age estimates (‘°C
and Cation Ratio dates) indicate the figures were made as early as A.D. 1100 in central Montana, A.D. 1200
& central Wyoming and A.D. 1500 to A.D. 1600 in southeastern Colorado. The dates for these figures could
eepresent Athapascan movements south or they could be the product of another group, perhaps the Kiowa.
Lotse, J. (see Hudler, D.) |87|
Longacre, William (Arizona) and Mark Neupert (Arizona)
[71] IS THE CUSTOMER ALWAYS RIGHT? ETHNOARCHAEOLOGICAL STUDIES OF CERAMIC
PERFORMANCE CHARACTERISTICS IN NEGROS, THE PHILIPPINES
Ethnoarchacological field work over the past two summers has focused upon the accuracy of customer's
=praisals of the performance characteristics of pots produced in two localities on the island of Negros in
, 88 Lopez Varela, Sandra

the Philippines. Overwhelming preference for pots produced in one locality led to an exploration of the

production technology in the two sites and to physical/chemical compositional studies of the clays and

tempers used. Production of pots in the two sites is virtually identical, but there are substantial differences

in the clays. We focus upon the behavioral relevance of such laboratory measurements. Is the customer

always right? Sometimes!

Lopez Varela, Sandra (CONACYT/SEP)

[29] THE LATE AND TERMINAL CLASSIC AT YAXCHILAN AND POMONA: A MACROREGIONAL
PERSPECTIVE ON CERAMICS AND SOCIAL REORGANIZATION

Following the decline of Teotihuacan, ceramic production in the Maya northwestern zone of Yaxchilan
and Pomona includes stylistic traditions that were introduced by groups affiliated with the Teorihuacan
past. These trends apparently reached the northwestern zone via the Gulf Coast, reflecting a Late/Terminal
Classic period shift away from the earlier highlands-based network of pan-Mesoamerican interactions. Addi-
tionally, the “Teotihuacan revival” in the northwestern zone marks this region as an important periphery
through which new products and ideology were transmitted to the rest of the Maya lowlands.
Lorenzen, Karl (California-Riverside)

[5] LATE POSTCLASSIC REUSE OF CLASSIC MONUMENTAL ARCHITECTURE AT NARANJAL,
QUINTANA ROO, MEXICO

Preliminary analysis of monumental architecture at Naranjal reveals that Classic structures were modified
and reused during the Late Postclassic period. Citing comparable architectural features from Mayapan,
Tulum, and other Late Postclassic sites, this study describes the characteristics that define and differentiate
the Late Postclassic occupation at Naranjal. Documentation of Late Postclassic reuse of structures at Coba,
Dzibilchaltun, and other sites of the northern lowlands will be used to interpret the late reuse and modifica-
tions at Naranjal.

Love, M. (see Fredrickson, D.) |11|

Loveland, Carol (Utab State)

[90] A BIOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE ON PREHISTORIC HUMAN ADAPTATION IN THE GREAT SALT
LAKE WETLANDS

Eighty-six skeletons recovered after the retreat of floodwaters along the castern shore of the Great Salt
Lake provide valuabic information about environmental stresses and disease episodes faced by the prehistoric
inhabitants of the region. Dental wear and degenerative joint disease are the two most pervasive conditions
noted in the population. Enamel hypoplasia and transverse lines occur on several skeletons suggesting that
the population was under some dictary or disease stress. Skul! radiographs reveal altered development of
the mastoid in many individuals, reflective of frequent, virulent respiratory infections. Unusual anomalous
conditions noted in this skeletal population are discussed.

Lovett, K. (see Kent, J.) [66]
Lowell, Julia C. (Northern lowa)
‘ [37] THE HEARTH AS ARTIFACT IN PREHISTORIC PUEBLOS

This session presents a statistical analysis of over 400 fire features from three prehistoric pueblo sites
located in the Grasshopper region of Arizona. Six fire feature types are defined and illustrated that vary in
form, size, provenience, and associated artifacts. These include rectangular slab-lined, circular unlined,
circular clay-lined, roasting pit, oven, and ceremonial types. Shifting patterns in fire feature types and
proveniences through the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries A.D, may reflect critical changes in subsistence,
seasonality, food preparation techniques, cthnicity, or houschold and community organization. For compari-
son, fire features from the historic Pucblo are also illustrated.

Lucero, Lisa (California-Los Angeles)
[12] CERAMIC FUNCTION, TECHNOLOGY, AND LABOR INVESTMENT: FACTORS REFLECTING
SOCIAL AND POLITICAL CONDITIONS.

This paper addresses how ceramic function, technology, and labor investment refiect social and political
conditions in Late Classic Maya society. Current evidence indicates houschold level ceramic production.
Although houschold level production suggests an open system, the distribution of certain vessels would
indicate a more controlled system. Since it was not likely feasible for direct control of distribution, more
indirect means of controls had to have been used. Such indirect means could have included ideological
sanctions, a theme common throughout Mesoamerica. The extent of ideological control reflects social and
political conditions.

Luedtke, Barbara E. (Massachusetts-Boston)
[92] GEOLOGY AND ARCHAEOLOGY IN BOSTON HARBOR

Recent research on the geological evolution of Boston Harbor allows new insights into the history of
human uses of the area. The distributions of carly Holocene river beds and the process of marine inundation
, Mack, Joanne 89
are crucial to the interpretation of Archaic period activities. Later geological processes such as the growth
of sand spits appear to have affected resource distributions as well as access to the islands in the harbor by

Woodland Period people. The integration of new geological data with archaeological data increases the

precision of our interpretations of changing settlement patterns and land use in the Boston Harbor area.

Lycett, Mark T. (New Mexico)

(89] STRUCTURE AND CONTENT IN PREVIOUS RESEARCH: NELS NELSON'S EXCAVATIONS IN
THE GALISTEO BASIN

Between 1912 and 1914, N.C. Nelson conducted extensive excavations at seven large, late prehistoric
ec contact period habitation sites in the Galisteo Basin, Santa Fe County, New Mexico, Nelson recorded

@erails of architecture and artifact recovery for cach excavated room. Using Nelson's notes and collections,

this study investigates formal variation in architecture both within and between sites, as well as variation

i= artifact deposition by location, volume, and content. These data make it possible to study site structural
eariation at the level of a settlement cluster and to evaluate that variation in relation to other changes in
archacological patterning coincident with European contact.

Lyman, R. Lee (Missouri-Columbia)

[18] THE WEST POINT TERRESTRIAL AND MARINE MAMMAL FAUNAL ASSEMBLAGE: PATTERNS
AND COMPARISONS WITH OTHER PUGET SOUND ARCHAEOFAUNAS

The vertebrate faunal assemblage from the West Point site complex is one of the oldest reported from
= salt-water coastal context in Washington State. While interpretations of richness or diversity are limited
by correlations with sample size, tentative patterns can be proposed. Seasonality data indicate spring through

Gil use episodes with some differences by temporal component. Subtle spatial differences in processing

activities are suggested by degree of bone fragmentation. Comparison of the West Point assemblage to other

Puget Sound archaeofaunas suggests that local site habitat characteristics are important factors that condition

feunal assemblage composition.

Lynot, M, (see Goodman, D.) |63}

lynott, Mark (National Park Service) and Alison Wylie (Western Ontario)

[38] STEWARDSHIP: THE CENTRAL PRINCIPLE OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL ETHICS

The Ethics in Archacology Committee was formed to address issues about the use of looted data in
eesearch and publication. The Committee’s proposal to hold a workshop to discuss ethical issues was funded

Sy the National Science Foundation and the National Park Service. In November, 1993 eighteen people

participated in a workshop at the University of Nevada-Reno. Three days of intensive discussions resulted

& the development of six principles of archaeological ethics. The role of archaeologists as stewards of

echacological record is foundation upon which these principles are based. The principle of stewardship is

presented.

Lyons, Patrick D. (Arizona State Museum)

1#9] DESCRIBING AND EXPLAINING LITHIC cee AT PREHISTORIC PUEBLOAN SITES

Analyses of lithic assemblages from prehistoric pucbl sites in the American Southwest have been
problematic due to an incomplete understanding of site and assemblage formation processes and difficulty

& dealing with “amorphous” or “expedient” lithic technologies. This paper illustrates cxampics of such

problems and presents a number of attempts at solving them. Central to the paper is an examination of the

traditional formal/expedient dichotomy and the application of iebitage typologies to the description and
explanation of intrasite lithic assemblage variability,

MacDonald, Catherine (Father Leo J. Austin Catholic Secondary School)

152] PROGRAM EVALUATION AT THE SECONDARY SCHOOL LEVEL

How do you get school systems and teachers to buy into your education program? Effectivé program
evaluation not only convinces schools that educational archacology is worth spending tax dollars on but
also helps you to develop programs which serve the educational needs of your student clientele, Program
evaluation shows that the amount of valuable classroom time spent using archacology as a method of
approaching history or any other subject increases cognitive thinking skills, encourages students to see the
past in a new way, provides tremendous opportunity for interdisciplinary learning and assists students to
become effective evaluators of their own learning.

Mack, Joanne (Pomona College)

61] PREHISTORIC UPLAND SITES WITHIN THE UPPER KLAMATH RIVER DRAINAGE, SOUTHERN
OREGON AND NORTHERN CALIFORNIA: VARIATION IN FUNCTION, SIZE, AND TOOL STONE
SOURCES

Systematic surface collection and test excavation of prehistoric sites and a botanical inventory and
evaluation of food plants in site locales within the Southern Cascades of Oregon and northern California
, |
}
|
| |
|
|
|

| —

| oi

>

|
|
:
, SYMPOSIUM, FORUM, AND WORKSHOP ABSTRACTS
[1] Sponsored Forum: STRAIGHT FROM THE HORSE'S MOUTH: FRANCIS P. MCMANAMON
ANSWERS YOUR NAGPRA QUESTIONS (SAA Task Force on Repatriation)

Frank McManamon, Departmental Consulting Archacologist for the National Park Service will make a brief
statement concerning the implementation of Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act and
its draft regulations. The remainder of the session is devoted to NAGPRA-related questions and discussion
from the audience. This forum will clarify the effects of NAGPRA on current and future excavation procedures
and on the disposition of human remains, funerary objects, and other items that are in existing muscum
collections or result from ongoing work. It is directed to all archaeologists, especially individuals involved
in the implementation of NAGPRA, archacologists involved in excavations subject to NAGPRA, and those
concerned with research collections.

[2] Invited Symposium: HUMAN EVOLUTION: INTERACTION OF BIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR

An anthropological tenant, derived from the nineteenth century formulation of the discipline, asserts a
bidirectional interaction between biology and behavior. In archacology the use—and also misuse—of this
assumption is well documented and supposed biological discontinuities have been equated with and served
to buttress cultural distinctions. In recent years both DNA analyses as well as archaeological and paleontologi-
cal finds from Europe, Africa, and the Near East have caused both archacologists and biologists to re-examine
such assumptions. This symposium uses data derived from different time periods and regions of the world
to examine how, in an extended time frame, biology and behavior interact.

[3] Invited and Sponsored Symposium: ARCHAEOLOGY IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
(American Society for Conservation Archaeology)

Recognizing the 20th anniversary of the passing of the Moss-Bennctt bill and founding of the American
Society for Conservation Archaeology in 1974, we seck a broad and deep look at the ideal future for US.
and world archeology. North American archeology has been transformed since 1974 shifting from an
“esoteric enclave” of higher education to broad involvement in the economic, cultural, and political life of
our nations. Our environment is dynamic, with complexity and change increasing at a quantum pace, This
program initiates conversations on the long-term best interests of American archeology from a holistic
perspective.

[4] Symposium: THE ORIGINS OF SETTLED VILLAGE LIFE IN SOUTHWESTERN ASIA: THE VIEW
FROM EASTERN ANATOLIA

Eastern Anatolia is geographically and culturally integral to any consideration of the dynamics of culture
change in southwestern Asia. However, until recently, only minimal data from carly settled village communi-
ties have been available from this critical region. Recent surveys and excavations in eastern Anatolia are
beginning to fill this gap in our data. In so doing, they will likely force revision of existing models concerning
the origins of settled village life in southwestern Asia. The papers in this session examine the impact of the
new Anatolian data on our understanding of the origins of sed@gtism and domestication.

[5] Symposium: THE YALAHAU REGIONAL HUMAN ECOLOGY PROJECT: ANCIENT MAYA
POLITICAL STRUCTURE AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN THE NORTHERN LOWLANDS

Recently initiated investigations at the major center of Naranjal and associated sites in the extensive
freshwater wetland zones of northwestern Quintana Roo provide nqw perspectives on the prehistory of the
northern Maya lowlands. Settlement survey and reconnaissance document use of land and water resources
of this unique wetland zone. Comparative studies of monumental architectural styles and of ancient road
systems provide evidence for local and regional interaction. Multiple lines of evidence suggest widespread
interaction across the northern peninsula, linking the eastern region of Naranjal with developments a such
Early Classic centers as Ake and Izamal.

[6] Symposium: PREHISTORIC LONG-DISTANCE INTERACTION IN OCEANIA

The colonization strategies employed during settlement and subsequent diversification of island societies
are key issues in Oceanic archacology. Since isolation is a fundamental condition fostering divergence,
understanding how relative extremes of isolation have influenced the evolution of human diversity in the
Pacific becomes an important problem that must be examined for cach island sequence. This symposium
presents case studies from throughout Oceania that identify primarily exotic fine-grained basalt and volcanic
glass artifacts by geochemical techniques, a pursuit only recently applied on a regional scale. Theoretical
issues are addressed for explaining the role of continued interisland interaction in sociopolitical change.
[8] Symposium: POSTCLASSIC XALTOCAN: ECOLOGICAL AND SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF

PRODUCTION IN THE NORTHERN BASIN OF MEXICO

Three seasons of survey and excavation at Xaltocan, Mexico, have defined the resources available to the

occupants of the site, A.D. 800-1500. This fieldwork has also yielded evidence that resource utilization was
]
, 90 MacKinnon, J. Jefferson
allows testing of an hypothesis proposing upland sites as small, specialized sites, used seasonally by the
inhabitants of large campsites and village sites located on the terraces of the Upper Klamath River. Analysis
and interpretation of materials recovered during two recent field seasons indicate the character of upland
sites varics and includes large campsites with tool kits indicating their inhabitants exploited both animal
and plant resources over approximately 8000 years.

MacKinnon, J. Jefferson (Collin County Community College)

[76] RISE OF SEA LEVEL AND ACCOMPANYING MANGROVE ENCROACHMENT AS A POSSIBLE
CAUSE FOR THE CESSATION OF ANCIENT MAYA SALT PRODUCTION ON BELIZEAN
COASTAL LAGOONS

Ancient Maya salt production by the sa/ cocida method on Belizean coastal lagoons seems largely confined
in time to the Late/Terminal Classic, while it has continued down to the present in other arcas. Explanations
that coastal salt production in Belize ceased as a result of the Classic Maya “collapse” and/or due to the
expansion of long-distance salt trade based in northern Yucatan are explored and a new possibility advanced
that it resulted from sea level rise accompanied by mangrove encroachment.

MacNeisb, R. (see Taylor, R.) (97|

Maguina, A. (see Shimada, I.) |15}|

Mabaney, W. (see Storck, P.) |74|

Mainfort, R. (see Cogswell, J.) |78)

Makowski, Krzysztof (Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Peri)

[77] THE BEGINNING OF THE EARLY INTERMEDIATE PERIOD IN THE CENTRAL COAST OP PERU

The results of the works effectuated in the last five years at Chancay Chillén, Rimac and Lurin Valleys

(the author's ones included) serve as a starting point to make a multidimensional re-evaluation of the

cultural situation at the Central Coast, nearly between 200 B.C. and 300 A.D. The gathered evidences fall

in contradiction with the image of extreme political fragmentation and total absence of frontiers frequently

attributed to this cpoch (Early Intermediate Period 1-4).

Malinowski, Lynn M. (Argonne National Laboratory) and Shawn D. Haley (Red Deer

College)

[72] NEW EVIDENCE FOR GREAT BASIN PREHISTORIC CONNECTIONS TO THE EARLY ARCHAIC
IN THE WASATCH MOUNTAINS OF CENTRAL UTAH

The second season of fieldwork in the Wasatch Mountains has contributed significantly to the knowledge
of prehistoric populations in the alpine valleys of central Utah. Continued work in this high altitude region
has revealed distinct prehistoric settlement patterns. Early Archaic sites are found in certain cast-west
trending, high altitude finger valleys, while Formative and Protohistoric sites tend to be found in lower
elevation north-south trending valicys. In addition, the Archaic sites yiclded a larger number of obsidian
artifacts than expected. The obsidian source analysis performed on these artifacts suggests 4 strong connection

‘ to the Great Basin.

Mandryk, Carole (Harvard University)

[$0] HUNTER-GATHERER SOCIAL COSTS AND THE NONVIABILITY OF SUBMARGINAL
ENVIRONMENTS

A review of general principles of hunter-gatherer adaptations and their applicability in Arctic and desert
ecosystems provides a basis for modeling behavior in submarginal environments. The low primary productiv-
ity of extremely depauperate environments results in high mobility requirements and low population density;

Le., dispersion of the population past the point at which social relations maintaining cssential mating and

information networks can be maintained. It is determined that submarginal environments are nonviable

because it is impossible to meet both economic and social needs within the constraints imposed by extremely

Mann, D. (see Reantier, R.) |74|

Manson, Joni and David Snyder (Obio Historic Preservation Office)

[102] USING TURN-OF-THE-CENTURY WHITEWARES AS ECONOMIC INDICATORS

Late nineteenth/early twentieth century sites, common features of the American landscape, frequently
yield large assemblages of whiteware sherds, Unfortunately, most laboratory analyses of historic whitewares
do not consider the sherds in their historical context—as the physical remains of consumption patterns
determined by the socioeconomic status of the consumers. In this study, old merchandising catalogs and
newspaper advertisements ( 1890-1929) were used to obtain price lists correlated with ware types, to create

a ranking index by which comparative analyses of historic whitewares can provide data on the socioeconomic

status of the turn-of-the-century consumer.
, Masucci, Maria 9]
Marrinan, Rochelle A. (Florida State)
{101} MISSION PATALE: THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF AN OUTLYING APALACHEE MISSION
Franciscan evangelization of Apalachee Province in northwest Florida began in 1633 and ended with the
destructive raids of English colonists and their Creek allies between 1702 and 1704, Mission Patale represents
she early phase of Franciscan evangelization. The mission is believed to have endured at the location under
investigation for fewer than twenty years (1633-71650), During its existence, it was home to five to six
sundred Apalachees and a single friar. Mission Patale informs us about the early mission setting and provides
data against which the courses of culture change can be measured.
Martine, D. Kristen (New Mexico)
189] VARIATION IN SMALL SITE CERAMIC TECHNOLOGY DURING THE HISTORIC PERIOD (1540-
MID-1800S) AT ZUNI, NM
This study examines ceramic technology associated with little-known small sites occupied between 1540
and the late 1R00s in the Bosson Wash area of Zuni, N.M. Preliminary analyses indicate that there is
) considerable variation in wares, temper, firing atmospheres, and vessel forms, possibly related to differences
& site location and configuration. Preliminary analyses suggest little evidence for trade between site occu-
eants and surrounding groups, Furthermore, a gap in the occupation of the valley is indicated by the near
eotal lack of glazewares.
Martinez, Antoinette (California-Berkeley)
$11) SOCIOPOLITICAL INFLUENCES ON GENDER ROLES IN THE NORTH COAST REGION OF
CALIFORNIA
Analysis of recent survey data from the Fort Ross region of northern California can not only be used to
eealuate Kroeber’s tribelet model, but can also help gauge the degree of change that came with carly
sineteenth century fur trade at Colony Ross. Differentiation in site size, function, and distribution through
ee will be used to help define changes in sociopolitical organization. This information can then be used
% hypothesize how shifts in intensification, production, and labor associated with changes in sociopolitical
eeganization may have altered the lives of the indigenous people, particularly women.
Maschner, Herbert D.G. (Wisconsin-Madison) and Hoffman, Brian W, (Wisconsin-Madison)
\47) THE EVOLUTION OF VILLAGE LIFE ON THE NORTH PACIFIC
General trends in the formation of permanent villages and in the size and spatial organization of houses arc
compared for the northern Northwest Coast, Kodiak Island, and lower Alaska Peninsula. Specific similarities in
ee diachronic development of villages are demonstrated after 3500 B.P. Diachronically, house floor size is
sewn to be a good indicator of increasing political complexity and is seen mostly after A.D. 500 to A.D.
0000. Villages are argued to first form in all areas a product of economic affluence combined with reasonably
dense populations, Late intensification in village formation, at least in some arcas of the north Pacific, appear
© correlate with increasing levels of violent conflict.
Masson, Marilyn (Texas-Austin)
155) COCO, ANCESTORS, AND THE ANNUAL Se ae OF SECULAR AND
RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS OF POWER AMONG THE IC PERIOD ZAPOTEC
Ethnohistoric and ethnographic analogies illuminate ways in which rituals associated with Cocijo, the
sewerful Zapotec deity of rain and lightning, were used to express and maintain political power, Communica
Goo with Cocijo, aided by interceding ancestors, was a critical act which ensured the onset of rains for the
agricultural cycle. The funerary contexts of Cocijo effigies suggest that they were used in calendrically-
tamed pilgrimages to tombs, in a manner comparable to the placement of Postclassic Maya effigy censers
es ancestral shrines. Scenes of Cocijo effigies portray groups of impersonators in standardized regalia
Evidence suggests that such religious officials offset the power of secular leaders.
Masters, Patricia M. '
[3] MORTARS AND MARINE PROCUREMENT IN SAN DIEGO COUNTY, CALIFORNIA
Mortars made from water-rounded cobbles are found extensively in submerged localities along the coast
ef San Diego County, but they are rarc in terrestrial sites. The majority of mortar sites are near shore reefs
aed kelp beds. The BTC site, yielding hundreds of mortars, may represent an ancient cobble spit utilized
=: 4 mortar factory site. Its depth of 2-5 meters and a radiocarbon date of 4230 + /-200 place the manufacture
end use of cobble mortars in the Middle Holocenc. 80% of the mortar sites are localities that could have
: seen used for shellfish collecting or offshore fishing 4-5,000 years ago.
Masucci, Maria (Drew University)
fi5] TEMPER, POTS, AND INTERREGIONAL TRADE IN SOUTHWEST ECUADOR
Trade is cited as a major factor in the rise of late prehistoric hierarchical societies in the northern Andean
area The organization of this trade and its role in societal developments has been difficult to define. Research
| & Southwest coastal Ecuador shows that pottery as well as tempering materials were moved between
*
, 92 Mathews, Jennifer P.
regions. Only certain pottery types were transported and the imported tempering materials were limited
to the manufacture of the fine paste decorated wares. The possible significance of the trade is considered
through an examination of the types of items being transported.
Mathews, Jennifer P. (California-Riverside)
[5] THE BOX NI GROUP OF NARANJAL, QUINTANA ROO, AND EARLY ARCHITECTURE OF THE
CENTRAL MAYA LOWLANDS
The distinctive Early Classic megalithic style of the northern lowlands did not exist in isolation, but rather
shared a number of features with monumental architecture of the central Peten. One particularly striking
example is the triadic platform grouping, found at Naranjal, Uaxactun, and other Late Preclassic sites of the
central Lowlands. The temporal and geographic distribution of Maya triadic platform groupings are reviewed
in conjunction with such shared architectural features as apron moldings and inset corners. These compari-
sons support the carly dating of the megalithic style and help define the special characteristics of this
northern lowland style.
Mathovuszhi, Ilona (Ilinois-Urbana)
[91] THE USE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF AQUATIC FOOD SOURCES IN A FLOODPLAIN ECOSYSTEM
DURING THE NEOLITHIC PERIOD
The role of non-domestic resources in the subsistence practices of neolithic communities in the Great
Plain of Hungary has received little attention. Current studies stress the importance of domestic plants and
animals, and ignore the prehistoric environmental setting, and its influence on subsistence practices. A new
model of the neolithic subsistence practices on the Great Plain is presented based on a new and comprehen-
sive synthesis of paleoenvironmental data from the Great Plain, my recent analysis of neolithic fish remains
from the area, fish biological information, and ethnographic data on the utilization of aquatic resources in
the Great Plain during the 19th century.
Mattbews, Christopber (Columbia University)
[62] PANOPTIC THEATRICS: THE USE AND ABUSE OF ELEVATED SPACE IN COLONIAL
AMERICAN PERFORMANCE
The panoptic metaphor has been fruitfully employed in the historical recognition of the means by which
modern states established mechanisms of surveillance over their citizenry. First recognized in prisons and
hospitals the mechanics of surveillance were interpreted as the means by which the modern state taught
subjects to be citizens, This paper explores another venue of surveillance, the theater. The suggestion is
that in the colonial theater of British North America the relationship of those in the clevated box seats and
those on the floor is an experiment in the mechanisms of surveillance by the elite as they came to see their
clevated seats as a stage for the demonstration of appropriate behavior.
Mauch Messenger, Phyllis (Minnesota) | Discussant 38}
Mauldin, Raymond (New Mexico) and Jeff D. Leach (Ft. Bliss)
[33] GRINDING ASSEMBLAGES AND ECONOMIC PATTERNS: AN EXAMPLE FROM THE AMERICAN
. SOUTHWEST
Ground stone research has often focused on specific tool rypes (¢.g., manos) rather than the entire
grinding assemblage, Here, we compare aspects of assemblages associated with food processing (manos,
mectates, mortars, pestics ) from the Chihuahuan desert and the highlands of southern New Mexico to monitor
aspects of economics in these two settings. Differences in tool type ratios and attributes of specific tools at
sites within regions suggest that the highlands have diverse grinding technologies relative to the Chihuahuan
desert. These patterns may refiect both the different resource structure and the overall adaptation extant
in the regions.
Maxwell, David (Arizona)
[44] MARINE MATERIALS FROM CACHES AND PROBLEMATICAL DEPOSITS AT TIKAL
Preliminary study of cache materials from Tikal reveals considerable variability, with a wide variety of
lithic, marine, ceramic, and faunal materials described. While some caches consist exclusively of one class
of materials, many show a mixture of items. This paper examines the relationship between marine objects
(shell, fish remains, coral) and other artifact classes found in caches and problematical deposits. Correlations
can be made between artifact types and the original environment of the marine items (beach, deep water,
etc. ). It is predicted that the degree of artifact elaboration will show a positive correlation with the degree
of difficulty involved in obtaining a particular type of marine item.
Maxwell, Timothy D. (Museum of New Mexico)
[58] PREHISTORIC POPULATION CHANGE IN THE LOWER RIO CHAMA REGION OF THE
NORTHERN RIO GRANDE
During the Rio Grande Classic period (A.D. 1325-1600 ) there was a dramatic population increase through-
out the northern Rio Grande and its tributaries. In the lower Rio Chama region, changes in ceramic technology
, McCormack, William 93

and decorative motifs, the appearance of certain items of material culture, and the establishment of several

large villages led archaeologists to posit migration into the region as an explanation for change and population

growth. There have been few alternative explanations for this growth. Data from the lower Rio Chama

region suggest that intrinsic population growth may have had a significant effect on overall population levels.

Mayer-Oakes, William J. (Texas Tech University) |Respondent to Pagano 3]

McCafferty, G. (see McCafferty, S.) |30|

McCafferty, Geoffrey G. (Brown) and Sergio Suarez Cruz (CRP-INAH)

[30] CHOLULA AND TEOTIHUACAN IN THE EARLY CLASSIC PERIOD: RECENT INVESTIGATIONS
AT THE TRANSITO SITE (R106)

Close cultural ties between the urban centers of Cholula and Teotihuacan have long been assumed based
in similarities in architecture and ceramic types, yet little contextual information has been available to
evaluate the processes involved in this interaction. Recent excavations at an Early Classic period house in
Cholula recovered deposits relating to domestic activities as well as an claborate subfloor tomb. These
materials (including ceramics, lithics, and figurines) are used to interpret cultural identities represented,
while radiocarbon dates from the excavation permit the refinement of the Classic period chronology. Results
of this analysis relate to questions of Cholula/Teotihuacan interaction in terms of economic, political, and
religious spheres.

McCafferty, Sbarisse D. and Geoffrey G. McCafferty (Brown)
[30] TLACHIHUALTEPETL: THE GREAT PYRAMID OF CHOLULA AS SACRED LANDSCAPE

Tlachihualtepetl, the Great Pyramid of Cholula, was the largest man-made structure of pre-Columbian
Mesoamerica, built in a succession of building phases spanning both the prehispanic and Colonial eras, As
one of the premier religious centers of central Mexico from at least the Classic period to the present, the
meaning content of Cholula as a sacred landscape has undergone important systemic changes while maintain-
ing an underlying structure of religious importance. During the Postclassic period the Great Pyramid acted
as a cosmic portal for supernatural communication with both the heavens and the underworld, This paper
examines the changing meaning content of the Pyramid using ethnohistorical, ethnographic, and archacologi-
cal evidence.

McCartney, Peter H. (Arizona State)
[98] MODELING PREHISTORIC AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS IN THE TONTO BASIN, CENTRAL
ARIZONA

The strong spatial correlation between natural drainage systems and platform mound sites in the Tonto
Basin suggests that irrigation agriculture may have played an important role in the formation of Salado
settlement systems during the late 13th century. A GIS database combining information on topography,
hydrology, vegetation, soils and geomorphology is used to estimate the quantity and distribution of prehistoric
arable lands in and around present-day Roosevelt Lake. The hypothesis gencrated by previous research that
there were marked local differences in dry farming produgtivity is evaluated with added emphasis on the
potential for irrigation agriculture.

McClung de Tapia, E. (see Tapia-Recillas, H.) |10|

McClung de Tapia, E. (see Zurita-Noguera, J.) |25| ‘

McClung de Tapia, Emily (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico), Judith Zurita-

Noguera (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico), and Emilio [barra-Morales

(Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico)

[8] PALEQETHNOBOTANICAL EVIDENCE FOR POSTCLASSIC PLANT USE AND ENVIRONMENTAL
CONDITIONS FROM XALTOCAN, MEXICO

Preliminary results of the analysis of plant remains including macrofossils, pollen and phytoliths, recovered
from excavations at Xaltocan in the northern Basin of Mexico contribute to the reconstruction of Late
Holocene environmental conditions in the area as well as to knowledge concerning plant use. Comparisons
are made with evidence for plant use as well as paleoccological indicators from other subregions of the
Basin of Mexico (Chalco, Teotihuacan) in order to outline general trends and specific variants,

McCormack, William (California-Berkeley)
[94] THE EVOLUTION OF LONG DISTANCE STONE PROCUREMENT SYSTEMS IN PALAEOLITHIC
INDIA

Surveys of the Vindhyan mountains south of the Gangetic plain indicate that the Son river valley is the

probable source of roolstone materials at Upper Palacolithic and post-Palacolithic sites in the middle Ganges
valley. These findings double the estimated maximum length of the largest known Palacolithic procurement
system in South Asia to 160 km and shed further light on economic events that culminated in the origins
, EEE
94 McCorriston, Joy
of rice agriculture. The development of long distance procurement in the Upper Palaeolithic marks a
transition from the use of local materials during the Lower and Middle Palaeolithic to one based on high
quality imports. This change appears to represent a strategic shift from “expedient technology” to "personal
gear” and signifies the emergence of curated technologies.

McCorriston, Joy (Smithsonian Institution)

[73] THE FIBER REVOLUTION: AGRICULTURAL INTENSIFICATION IN ANCIENT MESOPOTAMIA

Mass-produced textiles played a crucial role in the trade networks that sustained Mesopotamia's great
urban centers in the third millennium B.C. Poor preservation, however, has made it difficult for archaeologists
to trace the development of textile production from a generalized household activity to a specialized
weavers’ craft. This paper draws on archaeobotanical, archacozoological, artifactual, and ecological evidence
to argue that the transformation of textile production in Mesopotamia was linked to changing population
pressure, agricultural intensification, changes in land use, and the development of a landless class, Changes
in the social and economic organization of textile production can now be closely linked to these processes
implicated in the emergence of complex socictics.

McCorvie, M. (see Morrow, C.) [36]

McCoy, F. (see McMabon, N.) {73}

McCoy, Patricia (Bureau of Land Management) and Robert E. King (Bureau of Land

Management)

[102] “AN ENORMOUS AND CONTINUOUS BODY OF WORKABLE GRAVEL OF PROVED HIGH
GOLD CONTENT;” APPROACHING TEN DECADES OF MINING, THE VALDEZ CREEK
MINING REGION, ALASKA |

The Valdez Creek drainage of South Central Alaska was the site of a 1903 gold rush. Since then, mining
has continued sporadically, with most operations until recently being relatively small scale. Beginning in
the 1980s this changed. Today in Valdez Creek, Cambior Alaska, Inc. operates the largest placer gold mine
in the state. Using slides, the authors will review the history of this region, focusing on the changing nature |
of mining activities which have occurred since the carly 1900s, Implications for future management of
historic remains from prior mining episodes will be discussed.

McCutcheon, Patrick (Washington) and José A. Afonso (Granada)

[19] QUANTIFYING THE MECHANICAL BEHAVIOR OF CHERT FROM THE CENTRAL MISSISSIPPI

RIVER VALLEY AND SOUTHEAST IBERIA, SPAIN
The reduction of rocks into stone tools is possible through the initiation and propagation of cracks in a
controlled manner. Control refers to predictability: a given force applied in a given mode will result in the
detachment of a fragment with a particular size and shape within relatively narrow limits. Predictability can

be evaluated by mcasuring the variability of mechanical behavior for a particular lithic raw material. We

present the results of mechanical tests on unheated and heat-treated chert from the central Mississippi river

valley and southeast Iberia, Spain.

McEwan, Bonnie G. (San Luis Archaeological and Historic Site)

[101] TEN YEARS OF ARCHAEOLOGY AT MISSION SAN LUIS
As the capital of Florida's western mission chain during the second half of the seventeenth century, San

Luis de Talimali was one of the largest missions in La Florida, The townsite consisted of a church complex,

fort, native council house, and Spanish and Indian villages. A decade of archaeological and historical research

at cach of the major areas of the site has provided a wealth of information about native and European

responses to various facets of mission life throughout several generations of cohabitation.

McFaul, M. (see Metcalf, M.) (66

McGovern, Thomas H. (Hunter College, CUNY), Paul Buckland (Sheffield), Andrew Dugmore

(Edinburgh), Charles Schweger (Alberta), and Cynthia Zutter (Alberta)

[46] RAIDING THE LANDSCAPE: NORSE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT IN THE NORTH ATLANTIC .
Between ca. A.D. 800-1000, Scandinavian chiefly societies with a mixed maritime/agricultural economy

expanded into the offshore islands of the North Atlantic, Colonizing the Shetlands, Orkney, Caithness,

Hebrides, Faroes, Iceland, Greentand and Vinland, during the Medieval Warm Period, these settlers brought

continental economies and expectations to a widely varied set of island ecosystems. In many regions,

rapid degradation of flora and soils took place associated with social and climate change. Recent research

coordinated by the North Atlantic Biocultural Organization (NABO) highlights the extent of premodern

impacts.

McGuire, R. (see O'Donovan, M.) {7}
, McManamon, Francis P. 95
McGuire, Randall (Binghamton University)
[93] DECOLONIZING ARCHAEOLOGY
Many archacologists have realized that the past is a locus of struggle and that what we as archacologists
say about the past is embedded in the power relations of that struggle. But this is not a simple clash
between colonialist archacologies of domination and nationalist archacologies of resistance. The nationalist
archacology is itself always selective and used to legitimate inequalities of power within the nation, Thus
decolonizing archacology requires a critique both of our own position in the struggle and of the logic of
nationhood that structures the confrontation.
| McHargue, Jan (California-Berkeley)
(44) ETHNIC STYLING—THE DEVELOPMENT OF SITE-SPECIFIC STYLES IN MAYA RELIEF
CARVING
Carved Maya stclac, lintels and wall panels are heavily invested with stylistic information about the
identities of their makers. These messages are recorded not only in the written hicroglyphic texts and in
the portraits of historical persons that appear upon the monuments, but also in the manner of presentation
and carving, which I call style. Stelae styles were deliberate declarations of a city's individual identity, but
within a broader overall identity as Maya. Identification and description of these styles will lead to an
understanding of how the Maya defined the boundaries of these ethnic identities and the types of interactions
that occurred between groups.
McKee, Brian R. (Arizona)
[48] IDENTIFICATION OF STRUCTURE FUNCTION: A SWEATBATH AT THE CEREN SITE, EL
SALVADOR
The identification of structure function is often unsystematic, sometimes relying on a single diagnostic
| characteristic. Exceptional preservation through volcanic burial at the Ceren site offers an opportunity for
detailed analysis of structure function. Structure 9 has been tentatively identified as a sweatbath (temazcal )
based on diagnostic features present in known sweatbaths in the ethnographic and archaeological records.
| The structure is constructed primarily of clay, with a river cobble firebox and a wattle-and-daub domed
roof bencath a thatch roof, Ethnographic examples provide clues of the use of this structure and its social
role in this Classic Period village.
McKillop, Heather (Louisiana State)
[76] PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF ANCIENT MAYA SALT: UNDERWATER
ARCHAEOLOGY IN SOUTH COASTAL BELIZE
Models of Maya trade are evaluated by examination of production and distribution of salt from south-
coastal Belize. Models include salt production to meet local needs; for coastal-inland transport; for inland
trade for use by commoners with higher quality northern Yucatan salt reserved for elite use; for salt drying
seafishes for inland transport; and for the long distance market. Ceramic and lithic analyses indicate that
the trading port at Wild Cane Cay was Ree rer ees trade from the underwater site
of Stingray Lagoon and other salt production workstations.
McMabon, Nancy (State of Hawaii, State Historic Preservation Division), Floyd W. McCoy
(Hawati-Kaneobe), Marcus Pillion (Wooster College), and Stavros Papamarinopolous
(University of Patras) ‘
[73] PRE-ERUPTION LBA TOPOGRAPHY AND SHAPE OF THERA
Ground-penctrating radar (GPR) has mapped the Late-Bronze Age (LBA) topography on Thera buried
beneath thick volcanic deposits left by the catastrophic eruption ca. 1628 B.C., an eruption ranked fourth
in explositiviry during the past 100,000 years or so. In combination with geologic mapping and study of
volcanostratigraphic relationships within the Minoan tephra deposit, we present an interpretation of the ’
LBA palcotopography, particularly in the Akrotiri area adjacent to the excavation of the LBA city, and the
pre-cruption shape of Thera. Buried valleys, sea-cliffs, soils, in addition to man-made structures, are clear
in these data.
McManamon, Francis P. (Archaeological Assistance Program-National Park Service) | Discussant
92]
McManamon, Francis P. (Archaeological Assistance Program-National Park Service) |Forum
Participant 1]
McManamon, Francts P. (Archaeological Assistance Program-National Park Service) .
[3] CHALLENGES FACING ARCHAEOLOGISTS IN THE 21ST CENTURY .
The enactment of the Archacological Recovery Act must have seemed the culmination of a great struggle
to its proponents. Yet the end of one road is the beginning of another and 20 years since Moss-Bennett. |
The archaeological world is decidedly different from 1974. Challenges facing archacologists today and for |
, 96 McManamon, Francis P. and Ellen Herscher
the next generation include: public understanding and; relationships with Native Americans and other
descendants of those we study; organizing, providing and preserving archacological information; preservation
and access of collections; and én situ site preservation.
McManamon, Francis P. (National Park Service) and Ellen Herscher (Archaeological
Institute of America)
[38] THE OBLIGATION TO EDUCATE
Archaeologists must reach out to the many publics to explain and enlist their support for the stewardship
of the archaeological record. These educational efforts should cover both the methods and techniques of
archaeology and the results of archaeological research. Archaeologists who are unable to undertake these
kinds of activities must encourage and support the efforts of others. A number of archacological organizations
have public education programs underway. Cooperation and coordination among these organizations is
essential (0 ensure maximum impact of public education and outreach efforts.
McNutt, Nan (N.M.A. Education Consulting)
[52] APPLYING THE RIGHT YARDSTICK
As archacology education projects and products are developed for schools, museums and other public
Organizations, the need for sensitive and appropriate evaluations are vital for measuring outcomes, This
paper will recount the steps in evaluating three diverse projects/products: ( 1) Project Archaeology: Saving
Traditions, a curriculum projecv/product; (2) Field Studies in Social Sciences, a National Science Foundation
teacher institute; and (3) Get a Handle on the Past, a traveling exhibit. These will demonstrate the importance
of “up front” evaluation as well as “ficld testing.”
McPherron, Shannon (Pennsylvania)
[20] A REDUCTION MODEL TO ACCOUNT FOR MORPHOLOGICAL VARIABILITY IN LOWER
PALEOLITHIC BIFACES
A metric analysis of several hundred Lower Paleolithic bifaces from northern European sites reveals a
consistent pattern of bifacial reduction. Biface morphology is largely a function of the intensity of bifacial
reduction within the limits imposed by raw materials. When previously published data from other parts of
the Old World are reexamined from this perspective the results are identical. This implies that, despite
considerable morphological variability, biface technology was remarkably consistent throughout the Middle
Pleistocene and that typological comparisons of biface variability must consider the stage of reduction of
cach assemblage.
Méluzin, Sylvia (California State-Fullerton)
[48] THE TUXTLA SCRIPT AND THE ORIGINS OF WRITING IN MESOAMERICA
The Tuxtla script, in being an carly (if not the earliest ) writing system in Mesoamerica, prompts investiga-
tion into not only its origins but also the beginning of writing itself in this culture area. Three points relevant
in studying the beginnings of any writing system are discussed as well as nine categories of potential sources
for hieroglyphic models. Five facets of Middic Formative Mesoamerica that could have affected writing
beginnings there are then presented.
Mendoza, Ruben (Colorado-Denver)
[66] ASSESSING THE HUMAN ECOLOGY OF THE COLORADO FRONT RANGE, 7500-1000 B.P.
Current investigations by the University of Colorado at Denver are attempting to assess the impact of the
altithermal on the human ecology of the Colorado Front Range (7500-1000 B.P.). In addition to providing
an assessment of the 1992-1993 field seasons at the Crescent Rockshelter locality (Site 5)F148), this report
reviews ongoing efforts to retrieve data pertinent to settlement and paleoclimatic patterns via a systematic
program of auger testing, transect sampling, pH analysis, and pollen and radiocarbon tests. Implications
from the data are reviewed in terms of the objectives of continuing investigations into the human ecology
of the Crescent Rockshelter and the larger regional context of the Colorado Front Range.
Merriwether, D, Andrew (Pittsburgh), David M. Reed (Pennsylvania State), and Robert E.
Ferrell (Pittsburgh)
[106] ANCIENT AND CONTEMPORARY MITOCHONDRIAL DNA VARIATION IN MAYANS
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA ) variation was examined in ancient Mayans (Classic Period) from the Copan
site in Honduras and from contemporary Mayans from the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. Ancient DNA was
extracted from rib bones from archacological sites. Contemporary DNA was retrieved from blood samples
and cell lines collected from living Mayans. Frequencies of Schurr et al's (1990) four founding lineages
differed markedly between these two Mayan populations, with types A and B being most frequent in
contemporary Mayans and types C and D being the most frequent in ancient Mayans.
Mertens, Steven (Illinois)
[91] THE EARLY UPPER PALEOLITHIC IN ROMANIA
The nature of the transition from the Middle to the Upper Paleolithic in Europe has become the focus
of recent debate, The majority of research concerning this transition comes from Western Europe or the
, a
;
Miller, Naomi F. 97
| Near East. Recent research suggests that archacological traits traditionally used to define the Upper Paleolithic
in Europe are not applicable for the Early Upper Paleolithic in Romania. This paper will examine these traits
and propose that major differences exist between the Early Upper Paleolithic and the Late Upper Paleolithic
in Romania.
Meskill, Frances (Texas-Austin)
[48] LANDSCAPE, CREATION MYTHOLOGY, AND BALL COURT: A PERSPECTIVE ON IZAPAN ART
AND CONTEXT
increasing attention ts given to the relationship between site planning and world view and its symbolic
expression in art and architecture, particularly for the Mesoamerican area. For Izapa, southern Chiapas,
NWAF reports cite significant connections between landscape and site layout; these and other studies stress
| the importance of creation mythology in viewing Izapan art. Connections are made by Schele and others
between creation myth and the Mesoamerican ball court. In this paper, the Izapan landscape is viewed as
potential model for ball court and as interpretive vehicle for certain art works, This perspective may inform
. relationships at other sitcs.
Metcalf, Michael D. (Metcalf Archaeological Consultants), Patrick K. O'Brien (Metcalf
Archaeological Consultants), Kelly J. Pool (Metcalf Archaeological Consultants), Steve Kalasz
(Centennial Archaeological Consultants), and Michael McFaul (Laramie Soil Services)
166] ARCHAIC PERIOD CHRONOLOGY AND RESOURCE UTILIZATION IN NORTHWESTERN
COLORADO
Excavations at 40 sites along a major pipeline route across northwestern Colorado and southern Wyoming
allow a substantial revision of the Archaic Period prehistory of the region. Over 150 new radiocarbon
@ates and a sizable projectile point assemblage contribute to a refined chronology, and pollen, faunal, and
geomorphologic analyses contribute to reconstructions of subsistence and paleoenvironments. House pit
@ructures were excavated on five sites. Research is structured to focus on subsistence and group mobility.
Although most of the occupations on the project were archaic in age, the Paleoindian-Archaic and Archaic-
Late Prehistoric transitions are represented as well.
Michaels, George (California-Santa Barbara)
#49] CONCLUDING REMARKS; ALBERT SPAULDING AND THE CONTINUATION OF
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Mikkelsen, P. (see Hildebrandt, W.) (83)
Miksa, Elizabeth (Desert Archaeology, Inc.) and James Heidke (Desert Archaeology, Inc.)
[36] EXTENDING POINT COUNT DATA TO THE “REAL WORLD" OF CERAMIC TEMPER
IDENTIFICATION
Desert Archacology, Inc., has developed petrofacics models for the identification of sand sources for sand
tempered ceramics in the Tucson and Tonto Basins of Arizona. The petrographic point count methodology
emetic ee en i ee eee eee
of the model to the remaining thousands of sherds that require analysis is accomplished using petrographic
cata as the basis for careful description and discrimination of source sands in hand samples. The use of a
Sow-chart and representative samples for each source allows rapid identification of temper sources for
shousands of sherds. '
Miller, Artbur G. (Maryland)
[55] TEXTS AND MURALS: THE PLACEMENT OF POWER IN ZAPOTEC IDEOLOGY
Colonial Zapotec texts can serve as an interpretive tool in understanding pre-Hispanic Zapotec ideology.
For example, a reexamination of the Period Illa murals of Monte Alban Tomb 105 in the light of a sgidy
of extant Zapotec calendars written in Sierra Zapotec during the sixteenth century can reveal how the
Zapotec may have physically constructed power relationships on their landscape and, specifically, where
and when the Zapotec decided to build and move their cities. That the Zapotec world view was little
a@ected by Spanish incursions into the Sierra, as well as a growing mass of data from various disciplines,
counter the “up streaming” objection to the use of ethnohistoric data to explain the pre-Hispanic past and
send to support the validity of these insights into Zapotec ideology.
Miller, Naomi F. (Pennsylvania)
(24) LATE CHALCOLITHIC ARCHAEOBOTANICAL EVIDENCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
CONSTRAINTS AND “FOREIGN” INFLUENCE IN SOUTHEASTERN ANATOLIA
Hacinebi Tepe, a fourth millennium B.C. site on the Euphrates, has two contemporary, but physically
Gstinct components, an indigenous Late Chaicolithic one and an intrusive Uruk one (with Mesopotamian
#Snities ). Archacobotanical research on local Late Chalcolithic deposits has established the characteristics
of the agricultural economy, and shown it to be similar to that of contemporary Kurban Héyik, about 100
I
, 98 Miller, Naomi F.
km upstream from Hacinebi. As environmental constraints are necessarily shared, identification of differences
between the archacobotanical assemblages of the newcomers and the indigenous people would suggest
how strongly cultural traditions influence agriculture and land use practices.
Miller, Naomi F. (Pennsylvania)
[39] LONG TERM VEGETATION CHANGES IN THE NEAR EAST

The Near East provides some of the strongest evidence for the profound, long-term impact of people on
the environment, mainly because it has the longest continuous sequence of permanent settlement in the
world. Human-induced vegetation change occurred at different rates over a broad area in a variety of
ecological zones, Archacobotanical evidence documenting these changes at Ain Ghazal (Jordan ), the Euphra-
tes valicy, Malyan (Iran), and Gordion ( Turkey ) includes declining building timber diameters and increases
in three proportional measures: anti-pastoral types in seed assemblages, distant or secondary forest types
in charcoal assemblages, and seeds from dung relative to wood fuel quantities.
Milliken, Randall T.
[11] MULTI-VILLAGE, MULTI-FAMILY POLITIES OF THE SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA

Contact period Spanish missionaries perceived the landscape of Central California's San Francisco Bay
Area as having been controlled by dozens of land-holding groups, each with numerous villages within fixed
territories some cight to ten miles in diameter, Mission baptismal records provide evidence that these
“Nacioncs” numbered 200 to 400 persons and consisted of inter-marrying lineages. Residence was ambi-
local and group cndogamy varied from 50 to 80 percent. Call them tribes, tribelets, or polities, such groups
were once common across North America. Unfortunately, we know next to nothing about the mechanisms
of economic co-ordination and dispute settlement within the California groups.
Mills, Barbara (Arizona)
[12] SHIFTING SOCIAL AND POLITICAL CONTEXTS AND THE TECHNOLOGY OF CERAMIC

PRODUCTION IN THE ZUNI AREA

The social and political contexts of craft technology at Zuni have shifted many times during the late
prehistoric and historic periods. These shifts provide a backdrop for investigating the interplay between
changing socio-political forms and technological variation. In particular, the impact of European expansion
on Zuni ceramic technology is discussed, from the Catholic missions to the American period. The effects
of this expansion include the introduction of new forms, the promotion of technology transfer among the
pucblos, and the spatial and social reorganization of production.
Milner, George R. (Pennsylvania State) and James S. Oliver (illinois State Museum)
[36] A GIS ASSESSMENT OF LATE PREHISTORIC LANDSCAPES AND SETTLEMENTS IN THE

CENTRAL MISSISSIPPI RIVER VALLEY

First approximations of Mississippi River channels and wetlands in ARC/INFO, a Geographic Information
System (GIS), are generated for the Cahokia site area. The GIS is used in evaluating the natural and social
attractants to various parts of the valley and the emergence of sociopolitical complexity in the region.
Wetlands exerted a strong influence on the positioning of Mississippian settlements, including mound

* complexes, The spatial data highlight a poor match between the disposition of prehistoric remains, including

mounds, and conventionally defined sites. Moreover, they underscore a need to reevaluate the Commonly
accepted Cahokia settlement model.
Milo, Richard G. (Chicago)
[2] HOMINID MEAT PROCUREMENT AT KLASIES RIVER MOUTH: PRELIMINARY RESULTS OF A

MICROSCOPIC STUDY

Preliminary results of a microscopic examination of the entire bovid assemblage from the Middle Stone
Age layers as Klasies River Mouth Cave 1, in South Africa, suggest that the Middle Stone Age ( MSA ) hominids
there were much more proficient at obtaining meat than has previously been thought. Cut marks and other
disarticulation marks, some of them still containing fragments of stone tools, indicate that the Klasics
hominids were, at the least, the dominant scavengers of large mammals on the landscape. Additional evidence
hints that the Klasies hominids may have been capable of actively taking the largest and most dangerous
bovids.
Minar, C. Jill (California-Riverside)
[70] HANDLING RADIOCARBON SAMPLES IN THE FIELD: MYTHS AND REALITIES

A survey of archacologists and ficld manuals revealed a surprising lack of consistency in methods for
retricving and handling radiocarbon samples in the field. Consultation with materials manufacturers and
radiocarbon specialists suggested that some methodological concerns are unfounded. In other cases, methods
used for retrieving and handling samples present unrecognized problems, especially for materials to be
submitted for AMS dating. This paper will discuss the myths and realities associated with the collection and
handling of radiocarbon samples by archacologists in the field.
, . Mithen, Steven 99
: Minnis, Paul (Oklaboma) and Michael E, Whalen (Tulsa)
[7] BALLCOURTS OF CHIHUAHUA
Ritual architecture (¢.g., ballcourts, kivas, and mounds) is often used to define the extent and character
of prehistoric regional polities. Based on the study of thirty structures (both ballcourts and “stone circles” )
from northwestern Chihuahua, we consider how differences between these structures are related to the
dynamic history of Casas Grandes. There seems to have been communities within a short distance that
| competed with Casas Grandes during the early Medio period. In short, Casas Grandes may not have been
as tightly unified a regional polity during its history as has been assumed.
Miracle, P. (see O'Brien, C.) {91}
| Miracle, Preston (Michigan)
191] SUBSISTENCE INTENSIFICATION DURING THE LATE GLACIAL? EVIDENCE FROM THE
EASTERN ADRIATIC
Recent advances in our understanding of the tempo and mode of Late Glacial paleoenvironmental changes
provide a sound and provocative basis for modeling changing human-ccologies around the Picistocene-
Holocene transition. | develop a model of subsistence intensification as a strategy selected in the context
of increased environmental risk, and examine it against Late Pleistocene faunal data from the Eastern Adriatic
Basin, Europe. | suggest that mobility by itself could not mediate these fluctuations, and that Late Glacial
hunter-gatherers also responded by intensifying the processing of bones in pursuit of extracting grease and
ft and expanding dietary breadth by taking lower ranked resources,
Mitchell, Douglas (SWCA, Inc.) and Michael S. Foster (Soil Systems, Inc.)
{80} ASHES TO ASHES, DUST TO DUST: THE CLASSIC TO POSTCLASSIC TRANSITION AT PUEBLO
GRANDE
Recent work at the large Hohokam village of Pueblo Grande in the Salt River valley of central Arizona
has resulted in new information on the Classic to Postclassic transition, the Civano to Polvoron phase, in
the Hohokam areca. The data from Pucblo Grande indicates the Polvorén phase may have occurred somewhat
earlier at Pucblo Grande than suggested for other Polvorén occupations. Changes in architectural styles,
matcrial culture, demography, and social organization between the Civano and Polvorén phases at Pucblo
Grande are presented. Current models of phase transition are assessed as is the concept of the Polvorén
phase in light of the Pueblo Grande data.
Mitchell, Peter (Cape Town), Jobn Parkington (Cape Town), and Royden Yates (Cape Town)
145] A TALE FROM TWO CAVES: THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE PLEISTOCENE-HOLOCENE
TRANSITION IN SOUTHERN AFRICA
Recent analyses of materials from Elands Bay Cave and Sehonghong in ecologically distant parts of southern
Afcica allow us to detect differences and similarities in archacological records from the same time period.
ere ee Des Cotes Sl OBES ne Srey NO ee nae mee
2 period of dramatic environmental transition, We believe there ate implications here for the understanding
of the biological, demographic, technological, and social histories of southern African people.
Mitchem, Jeffrey M. (Arkansas Archeological Survey)
[30] ONGOING MISSISSIPPIAN EXCAVATIONS AT THE ee lh IN NORTHEAST ARKANSAS
During a four month Geld season at Parkin Archeological State excavations were concentrated in
three parts of the main village site. In Locus 2, a trench that was excavated across the moat in 1991 was
extended to search for a presumed palisade wall. In Locus 3, two previously-discovered structure floors
were more fully exposed. In Locus 4, additional units were excavated to better define structure Boor and
associated features encountered in previous field seasons.
Mitchum, B. (see Walker, D.) |10| ;
Mitben, S. (see Finlayson, B.) |84|
Mitben, Steven (Reading University)
|27] EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY AND PREHISTORIC ARCHAEOLOGY
The appropriate use of evolutionary theory in archacology is one that focuses on individual behavior and
makes explicit reference to human psychology. Other approaches, such as a group adaptationist stance, may
provide useful heuristic devices, but ultimately lack theoretical credibility and will fail to provide an adequate
account of culture change. By adopting an evolutionary approach to human psychology, and focussing our
studies on generic, rather than specific, past individuals, we will gain a more profound understanding of the
celationship between biological and cultural evolution. Arguments that this approach cannot be operationa-
eed with archacological data are challenged.
|
, 100 Mock, Shirley

Mock, Shirley (Texas-Austin)

[76] THE NORTHERN RIVER LAGOON SITE; LATE-TERMINAL CLASSIC SETTLEMENT,
SALTMAKING, AND SURVIVAL ON THE BELIZE COAST

This study considers the implementation and diversification of new economic strategies at the Maya site
of Northern River Lagoon on the northern coast of Belize, Central America during the Late-Terminal Classic
Period, Recent research supports previous interpretations of extensive salt production (sal cocida) for
exchange and/or the preservation of marine-cstaurine resources. It is proposed that coastal settlement and
implementation of new economic activitics were “survival” strategies adopted during the Late-Terminal
Classic period to allay food uncertainties and shortages at inland sites,

Moe, Jeanne M. (Bureau of Land Management) and Kelly A. Letts (Bureau of Land
Management)
[52] ARCHAEOLOGY EDUCATION: CAN IT MAKE A DIFFERENCE?

Can education alter values which translate into protection of archacological sites and artifacts? The goal
of Utah's Intrigue of the Past Archacology Education Program is to teach young citizens to value and conserve
the past. The program was launched in 1990 to combat vandalism of cultural resources. An evaluation of the
program's instructional materials, their use in the classroom, and students’ attitudes regarding archacological
conservation issucs has been completed. This paper reports evaluation results and outlines future program
directions.

Moeller, Konnie L. (Argonne National Laboratory) and Jobn F. Haffecker (Argonne National

Laboratory)

[63] CULTURAL RESOURCES AND A GIS APPROACH TO LAND MANAGEMENT AND
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE

Cultural resources management and compliance is approached best within the broader framework of
natural resource planning and land management. Argonne National Laboratory is assisting federal agencies
with the development of a computer-based resource management system for large facilities. Spatial and
textual data regarding surveys, archacological sites, and historic buildings can be stored, manipulated, and
displayed in the context of a larger environmental database (eg, wetlands, vegetation, hazardous waste )
using a Geographic Information System. Predictive modeling Capabilities also streamline planning practices
by coordinating archacologically sensitive areas with other environmental compliance concerns.
Monagban, Jobn (Vanderbilt University)

[55] SACRIFICE AND POWER IN MIXTEC KINGDOMS

This paper examines sacrifice in ancient Oaxaca both as an expression of power, and as one of its material
conditions, More specifically, it uses examples from the Mixtec kingdoms of the sixteenth century to argue
that sacrifice, in addition to being an idiom through which questions of power were communicated, served
as a transactional mode through which elites extracted resources from commoners. It goes on to suggest
that this sacrificial mode of extraction correlated with particular religious roles played by elites, sometimes

‘ has implications for our understanding of the role of religion in the political evolution of Mesoamerican
societies,
Montgomery, Barbara (Statistical Research, Inc.) and J. Jefferson Reid (Arizona)
[42] THE BROWN AND THE GREY: PEOPLE, POTS, AND POPULATION MOVEMENT IN EAST-
CENTRAL ARIZONA

Decorated ceramics have long been used as markers of trade, population movement, and ethnic identity
in the American Southwest. Undecorated ceramics have also functioned as ethnic markers. Brown wares
have been equated with mountain people and gray wares with plateau people. Most of these studies have
not distinguished the movement of pots from the movement of people. In this study, undecorated ceramics
are shown to be useful in tracing population movement over short distances within a region, while decorated
ceramics are limited to detecting movement between regions.

Montgomery, Jobn (Eastern New Mexico University) |Respondent to McManamon 3]

Moore, Jerry D. (California State-Dominguez Hills)

[67] PREHISPANIC RITUAL AND HUMAN PERCEPTION IN THE PUBLIC ARCHITECTURE OF THE
COAST OF PERU

The communicative clement of ritual involves transmitting information between participants and observers
of social dramas. When public ritual occurs in formalized spaces, architectural forms may reflect the modes
of communication associated with particular rites. Using basic data about thresholds of visual and auditory
perception, it is possible to suggest the modes of ritual communication that occurred in a built space. This
approach is applied to a sample of public architecture of the North Coast of Peru. The analysis indicates
major shifts in the organization of public ritual which marked fundamental reorganizations in prehispanic
Andean socictics.
, Moser, Stephanie 101
Moore, Lawrence (Heritage Resources Branch)
[102] STUDYING THE MODERN WORLD: TRENDS IN HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY
The scope of historical archaeology is now much broader than it used to be. No longer is the field just
the study of colonial sites or an interest in European expansionism. It is the study of these and much more:
Victorianism, industrialization, capitalism, acculturation, to name a few. Additionally, historical archacologists
are exploring regions beyond the New World—Africa, Asia, and a new look at the Old World. These changes
necessitate an expanded definition for the discipline, one that incorporates all the topics studied. Suggested
here is that historical archacology studies the Modern Period, the late 15th century to the present.
Moratto, Michael J. (INFOTEC Research, Inc.)
[83] THE PGT-PG&E PIPELINE EXPANSION PROJECT: ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH GOALS,
OBJECTIVES, AND METHODS
A five-year program of intensive field surveys and excavations involving 400 archacological sites along
: the 1670-km route of a natural gas pipeline in ID, WA, OR, and CA was designed to address local, regional,
and project-wide research problems focused upon variability in hunter-gatherer adaptive strategics. Paleoenv-
ironments and cultural adaptations were investigated through a wide range of specialized studics. The results
of these studies (geomorphology, tephrochronology, palcobotany, zooarchacology, lithic analyses, x-ray
fluorescence spectrography, obsidian hydration measurement, blood residue analysis, and others) have
elucidated patterns of land use, sedentism/mobility, resource procurement, subsistence, and exchange over
a span of 10,000 years.
Moreno, Jerryll (Northern Arizona University)
[104] THE IMPORTANCE OF HIGH-QUALITY PROTEIN ACQUISITION IN LATE SOUTHWESTERN
PREHISTORY AND THE EXPLANATORY POWER OF NUTRITIONAL MODELS
The identification of an increased artiodactyl index has inspired some researchers to elaborate on the
importance of high-quality protein acquisition in late Southwestern prehistory. This elaboration has led to
the development of a nutritional model concerned with human dependance on low-quality protein maize.
However, alternative possible explanations have not been adequately considered. Using archacofauna from
a late pueblo community in eastern Arizona, the artiodacty! index is calculated, bone density measures are
formulated, and a cost surface analysis is conducted. These alternatives are weighted and the importance
of high-quality protein in late prehistory, and the model, are assessed.
Morris, L. (see Seeman, M.) |88|
Morrow, Carol (Southeast Missouri State) and Mary R. McCorvie (USDA-Shawnee National
Forest)
[36] GEOGRAPHIC CORRIDORS: MULTILAYERED CONDUITS OF EXPLORATION, CONQUEST,
SETTLEMENT, AND TRANSPORTATION
Geographic factors shape, constrain, influence, and reflect human movement on the physical landscape.
In North America, the need for interior access, combined with the danger of attack along the major waterways
was an important impetus for developing the carly inland corridors of travel. The trans-Appalachian
Bee otro te tah Ge: beucsacot steaedened taicorchigpasces of eramepoction coxvidcer jn this ech
facilitating the movement of populations and material culture on a massive scale. The need for access to
markets and services further drove the process of developing road networks. The development of late
cighteenth/early nineteenth century roads in southern Illinois is examined to illustrate these processes.
Morrow, Juliet (Washington University and OSA, Iowa)
[88] CLOVIS LITHIC TECHNOLOGY: IMPLICATIONS FOR FLUTED POINT TYPOLOGY IN THE
MIDCONTINENTAL UNITED STATES
Some researchers have made a strong distinction between castern and western fluted points; some have
pened Sax: Nese Clovis: 1s ent neprencated cat of: the Miselepay Rivce: Westers SEvgs leery See
projectile points exhibit a highly distinctive biface reduction strategy. Examination of flut point preforms
from various castern sites indicates that all of the characteristic hallmarks of Clovis biface reduction were
employed in the manufacture of fluted points occurring in the mtidcontinental region of North America.
From a technological perspective, the distinction that has been drawn between eastern and western Clovis
points is not so clear as some have proposed and perhaps fluted point complexes in cither half of North
America are more intimately and chronologically related than has been suspected.
Morse, D. (see Goodyear, A.) |56|
Mortimore, M. (see Stone, G.) |9|
Moser, Stepbanie (Sydney)
[40] EVOLUTIONARY IMAGES: HUMAN ANTIQUITY AND PICTURES OF THE “ETHNOGRAPHIC
OTHER”
When archacologists began to construct images of life in prehistoric times they drew on a number of
different sources. Central among these sources were the pictures of “savages” living in far away lands. This
, 102 Moss, M.
paper will explore the use of images to introduce evolutionary themes in the study of human history, and
in particular, it will examine the role that pictures of the ethnographic “other” had in this process. A number
of key texts on human antiquity from the nineteenth century, will be looked at in terms of the way that
they utilized other visual traditions to inform their reconstructions of life in the past.
Moss, M. (see Erlandson, J.) |56|
Moss, Madonna L. (Oregon) and Jon M. Erlandson (Oregon)
[92] RADIOCARBON DATING AS AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY TOOL IN COASTAL
ENVIRONMENTS
Radiocarbon dating has traditionally been used by archacologists as a post-excavation strategy to define
the antiquity of features, strata, or assemblages within sites. In this paper, we argue that 14C dating can be
used as an effective research tool during archacological surveys, especially in coastal areas where sites are
often eroding rapidly. Using examples from the Pacific Coast of North America, we show how 14C dating
can be used as a regional survey tool to identify and examine changes in settlement patterns, population
levels, paleoenvironments, technology, and socio-political organization.
Motsinger, T. (see Phillips, D.) | 104)
Motsinger, Thomas N. (SWCA, Inc.) and Mary-Ellen Walsh-Anduze (SWCA, Inc.)
[7] SOCIOECONOMIC MUTUALISM AND CERAMIC PRODUCTION IN THE GILA BUTTE-
SNAKETOWN REGION, SOUTHERN ARIZONA
The Gila Butte Site and Snakctown have long been suspected to have served as the focus of a specialized
production and exchange system that supplicd much of the Hohokam region with buffware ceramics. Recent
investigations involving excavation, acrial photographic studies, ground-based survey, and ceramic analysis
have yielded data that help clarify the nanire of the socioeconomic relationship that developed between
the two villages. This new evidence supports the hypothesis that raw material was extracted at Gila Butte,
then transported via a still-visible road or trail to Snaketown, where ceramic production was completed
and the distribution system originated.
Mulbolland, S, (see Thompson, R.) {25}
Mulbolland, Susan C. (Minnesota-Duluth)
[25] THE STATUS OF METHOD AND THEORY IN PHYTOLITH ANALYSIS
The growth of a discipline usually proceeds from specific project-oriented applications to a more general
consideration of methodological and theoretical issues. Phytoliths have been reported for well over 100
ycars; at various times extensive research has occurred in different disciplines, The interdisciplinary nature
of the field has encouraged a wide range of approaches. No single research strategy can address all the
research problems to which phytolith data are applicable. Clear descriptions of methods and research
designs are-cssential for comparison of data and project results, as well as continued growth of the field.
Muller, Nancy (Massachusetts-Amberst)
*[62] A SPATIAL CONSISTENCY? WHITE SUPREMIST STATE-SUPPORTED ARCHITECTURE: A
COMPARISON BETWEEN PRISONS AND PUBLIC HOUSING PROJECTS
Spatial design determines an individual's sense of autonomy as well as access to community interaction.
One way for the state to maintain White supremacy is to isolate so-called “undesirable” individuals in both
private and public space. In the case of penitentiary design, spatial security is enforced by an internalized
discipline which restrains undesirables within the institution. In the case of public housing projects, external
communities are disciplined to remain outside the project. Both of these concepts serve as a symbolic
statement by the state of its authority to “incarcerate” or purposefully exclude those people it deems
“undesirables.”
Miller-Beck, Hans-Jurgen (Universitat zu Tiibingen) | Discussant 45]
Miller-Beck, Hans-Jurgen (Universitat zi Tiibingen) | Discussant 36}
Mullins, Paul R. (Massachusetts-Amberst) and James A. Delle (Massacbusetts-Amberst)
[62] THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE MODERN STATE: THE MATERIAL CULTURE OF DISCIPLINE
AND SURVEILLANCE
This paper will survey the archaeology of formal institutions and informal mechanisms that define the
modern capitalist state. Institutions and mechanisms ranging from prisons to theaters materially produced,
circulated, policed and reproduced social behaviors which maintained state power relations. Institutions
such as prisons, factories, and plantations, systematically structure state authority through the surveillance
of individuals. In addition to these formalized institutions we will consider less systematic surveillance
mechanisms, including urban space, newspapers, and the theater. This paper will consider how apparently
dissimilar institutions discipline and observe social subjects in capitalist states.
, 7
Neff, H. 103
Murakami, Gail M. (International Archeological Research Institute) and Michael J. Kolb
(Hawat’i Historic Preservation Division)
[94] CULTURAL DYNAMICS AND THE RITUAL ROLE OF WOODS IN PRE-CONTACT HAWAIT
Wood charcoal identification is ideal for the study of cultural dynamics if viewed as a class of material
culture that actively reflects choices concerning domestic practices, ideology and ritualization, and political
relationships. Archaeological evidence of ritual wood use from two temples in pre-contact Hawai'i, supple-
mented with ethnohistoric data, provides a test case that woods underwent significant social transformations
between A.D. 1400-1820. Variation in wood use from these two sites demonstrates how the biological
environment can be imbued with cultural meanings, meanings that in turn illuminate how elite political
and ritual strategies interact with a society's biological environment and ecological landscape.
Murpby, Larry (National Park Service)
[41] INVESTIGATION OF AN INUNDATED TERRESTRIAL SITE OFF THE FLORIDA EAST COAST
The Douglass Beach Site (8SL17) is an inundated Archaic site overlain by an eighteenth century shipwreck.
Distributions of Archaic artifacts were found to be relatively concentrated, considering the potential for
site destruction as sea levels rose, Further results of the research are discussed, focusing on the terrestrial
site and its relevance to understanding processes of inundation and preservation. Extrapolations are made
about the location of other continental shelf sites. Two principles of site-formation processes relevant to
inundated sites are presented.
Murpby, Larry (National Park Service), M. C. Beaudry (Boston University), James Brown
(Northwestern), and R. E. W. Adams (Texas-San Antonio)
[38] BEYOND THE LAW, OR ABOVE IT? ETHICS AND THE COMMERCIALIZATION OF THE
ARCHAEOLOGICAL RECORD
Among the issucs discussed at the Reno workshop was a wide-ranging concern about actions by archacolo-
gists and others that may lead to commercialization of archacological materials. This involves any direct
participation or collaboration by professional archaeologists in activities that result in the assignment of
monetary value to or to enhance the commercial value of archacological materials. The process of “commodi-
fication” goes beyond trade in looted artifacts. The principle of archacological stewardship makes archacolo-
gists responsible for their actions both in clear-cut cases of Icgality as well as in ill-defined areas of unintended
or unanticipated effects of research, publication, and collaboration.
Murray, Mattbew L. (Harvard University)
[91] ACTS OF ENCLOSURE: SOCIO-POLITICAL RITUAL IN IRON AGE CENTRAL EUROPE
Landscapes of the later Iron Age in Central Europe are characterized by large rectilinear enclosures
known as “Vierechkschanzen”. These enigmatic monuments have been variously interpreted as fortifications,
warchouses, and most recently as Celtic religious sanctuaries. A new approach to "Vierechkschanzen”
combines a critical examination of contemporary excavation data with a dialectical study of Iron Age
landscapes to explore the character of the enclosures and their role in the processes of social change and
political legitimation. These structures replaced burial places, as formal arenas for socio-political discourse
during the Late Lron Age and were not merely places of spirflual or supernatural enclosure.
Murray, Tim (La Trobe University)
[93] CONTINUITY AND DISCONTINUITY IN ABORIGINAL AUSTRALIA
Basccent pies che prcklenache secheccingy of Aupsalie: tay sepewed Sess Senta 5 Se
the identity of Australia and the place of Aboriginal Australians Within the broader society. These debates
have tended to focus around issues such as land rights and compensation which have themselves directly
relied upon the demonstration of prior occupation and cultural continuity. This paper surveys the current
relationship between Aboriginal people and prehistoric archacologists in Australia. ,
Nash, Stepben (Arizona)
[19] TREE-RING DATA AND THE HISTORY OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION: A
COMPARATIVE CASE STUDY :

: Recently developed site oriented tree-ring databases provide information on tree cutting (and by exten-
sion) site occupation for prehistoric and cthnohistoric sites on and around the Hopi Mesas, Arizona. These
data, when considered in conjunction with published dendrochronological and historic data from Walpi
Pueblo, provide a sound basis for examining dynamics intervening between archacological site formation,
dendrochronological data, and archacological investigation.

Neck, R. (see Phol, M.) |76)

Neff, H. (see Cogswell, J.) [78]
Neff. H. (see Hodge, M.) |8|
, 104 Netf, Hector
Neff, Hector (Missouri)
(96) WHY ARCHAEOLOGISTS LIKE TO USE PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY TO ANALYZE POTTERY
Chemical and physical analyses of pottery are believed to contribute toward explaining variation in readily
observable macroscopic characteristics (e.g., form, surface finish, etc. ). But to formulate testable hypotheses
to account for macroscopic variation, the meaning of chemical and physical variation first has to be clearly
established. Examples discussed in this paper illustrate how geological, cultural, and analytical processes
can contribute to the chemical variation identified in “provenance” studies. Means for identifying the
source(s) of chemical variation are presented. Examples also show how, once the meaning of chemical data
is identified, they can be used to test hypotheses about other observable variation, including variation
underlying such units as culture historical “types.”
Neff, L. Theodore (Navajo Nation Archaeology Department and Pennsylvania)
[89] BLACK MESA ANASAZI: BURIAL PATTERNS: MOBILITY AND SITE ABANDONMENT
PROCESSES
Archaeological survey, excavation and analysis on Northern Black Mesa, Arizona, has produced an unparal-
leled data base for the study of mortuary remains from a regional perspective. Although some analyses of
the spatial location of inhumations have been brought to bear on questions of Anasazi mobility and adaptation
on Black Mesa, work to date has focused chiefly on physical anthropological questions. The under utilized
perspective of grave spatial location is used to further evaluate mobility hypotheses, as well as to consider site
abandonment processes. The paper utilizes mortuary data collected during recent Navajo Nation Archacology
Department excavations at 32 sites on Northern Black Mesa.
Nelson, Ben A. (SUNY-Buffalo) | Discussant 42]
Nelson, Ben A. (SUNY-Buffalo)
[85] POWER AND POLITY IN THE BORDERLANDS: A MESOAMERICAN PERSPECTIVE ON THE
AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
Dimensions of the political organization of Southwestern populations are examined by comparison with
their seemingly more hierarchical neighbors in northwest Mexico, Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, and La
Quemada, Zacatecas, are used as case studics from which to draw comparisons on four manifestations of
political power: labor investment in central places, scale of road systems, status differentiation in mortuary
programs, and symbolism associated with ritual facilities. The comparisons point co significant differences
in the construction of social power in the two regions, and yet reveal more similarity in the degree of status
differentiation than is commonly assumed.
Nelson, Greg C. (Oregon)
[90] DENTAL ENAMEL HYPOPLASIA AS INDICATOR OF PHYSIOLOGIC STRESS IN A SKELETAL
SERIES FROM MALHEUR LAKE, OREGON
Dental enamel hypoplasia has been shown to be a good indicator of non-specific physiologic stress
occurring during the time of tooth crown formation (Goodman and Rose, 1990). For the Malheur Lake
skeletal series 46% (24 of 52) of individuals exhibit at least onc hypoplastic event. Although relatively high
‘ in comparison to other North American hunter-gatherer groups it is much lower than the rate of 66% found
at Stillwater Marsh. These rates indicate that the inhabitants of the Malheur Lake area experienced relatively
frequent episodes of dietary or disease stress during the carly childhood years most probably related to
weaning or fluctuations in food availability.
Nelson, Margaret C. (SUNY-Buffalo) | Discussant 84]
Nelson, Margaret C. (SUNY-Buffalo) | Discussant 49}
Nesbitt, Mark (Institute of Arcbaeology-London)
[4] NEW ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE FOR PRE-AGRARIAN DIET AND ENVIRONMENT IN
NORTHERN IRAQ AND SOUTHEAST TURKEY
The application of machine-flotation techniques has led to the recovery of large assemblages of charred
plant remains from three contemporary (c. 10,000 uncal. B.P.) epipaleolithic sites: Qermez Derre and
Me'lefaat in northern Iraq, and Hallan Cemi in southeast Turkey. These seed and charcoal remains offer the
opportunity to compare developments in diet and environment in this region with evidence from the better
known cultural sequence in the Levant, and to compare sites on a north-south environmental transect from
Hallan Cemi (in oak forest) to Qermez Dere (on the border of the steppe).
Neupert, M. (see Longacre, W.) [71]
Neupert, Mark (Arizona)
[71] CERAMIC STRENGTH TESTING MADE EASY: METHOD AND THEORY FOR MAINSTREAM
CERAMIC ANALYSIS
The measurement of ceramic strength provides insights into both the technology of pottery production
and the performance of vessels during use. Thus, strength testing has a role in any comprehensive ceramic
, Norr, Lynette 105
analysis, providing additional lines of evidence for many research areas. A recently developed approach
makes practical and reliable the strength testing of archacological ceramics. Examples from the American
Southwest illustrate the effective integration of strength testing into mainstream research designs. The
application of strength data to several issues including technological change and regional variability, trade
and exchange, and formation processes are discussed.
Newman, Jay (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers)
[19] SOURCE DISTANCE EFFECTS ON LITHIC REDUCTION TECHNOLOGY
A number of lithic studies have indicated that average flake weight (size) appears to be a direct reflection
of the ease of lithic procurement with the greater the distance to the lithic source, the smaller the respective
general flake size, Similar high-quality lithic materials from Pot Creek Pucblo and the Cerrita pithouse site
of the Taos area of New Mexico provide an excellent situation for the study of the effects of lithic source
distance on lithic material metrical attributes given the wide array of locally available and exotic lithic
resources available at varying distances from the two archeological sites and incorporated and utilized
within the individual settlements.
Nichols, Deborab L. (Dartmouth College) | Discussant 8]
Nickens, Paul R. (US. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station), Lawson Smith (US.
Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station), and Maureen Corcoran (U.S. Army Engineer
Waterways Experiment Station)
135] PROCEDURES FOR IMPLEMENTING LONG-TERM SITE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION IN
THE COLUMBIA RIVER BASIN
Numerous significant archaeological sites occur throughout the Columbia River system in the northwestern
US. Past reservoir construction and ongoing operations activities along the rivers create many threatening
ampacts for these vulnerable resources. This paper discusses the development of some management-oriented
procedures that are designed to provide basin-wide, long-term site protection and preservation results,
These procedures include an analytical geomorphic methodology to identify and evaluate ongoing processes,
a resource monitoring system to identify changing conditions in resource integrity, and a site protection
process that will cnsure long-term preservation for endangered sites.
Nielsen, Axel E. (Universidad Nacional de Jujuy, Argentina)
[85] THE CONTROL OF SOCIAL REPRODUCTION: TOWARD AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL STUDY OF
SOCIAL POWER IN QUEBRADA DE HUMAHUACA, ARGENTINA
The emergence of social power can be related to the ability of certain sectors within a society to control
economic, political, and ritual resources that are vital for the reproduction of the group. The systematic
study of the spatial relationships between social units and evidences of production and consumption of
various resources at both regional and intrasite levels produce substantial information on this subject.
The analysis of archacological data from Quebrada de Humahuaca (Jujuy Province, Argentina) within this
Samework, makes it possible to identify some of the sources of social power that characterized the socioceco-
somic formations that developed in the area during the fit and Inka Periods (ca. A.D. 1000-1535).
Nishimura, Y. (see Goodman, D.) |63|
Nisbimura, Yasushi (Nara National Cultural Properties Research Institute) and J. Daniel
Rogers (Smithsonian Institution) ‘
$63] DEVELOPMENT OF STATE-OF-THE-ART GEOPHYSICAL EQUIPMENT AND TESTING FOR A
JOINT U.S.JAPAN STUDY OF NATIVE AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
The Ministry of Cultural Affairs in Japan has sponsored a 5 year intensive study directed toward the
engineering and development of state-of-the-art geophysical instruments strictly for applicationgin archaco-
logical prospection. Included in the ministry's instrument procurement are applications of spacecraft based
Scomponent magnetometers and other hi-tech instruments. The results of testing this new equipment at
the Spiro site and other locations is presented, ,
Norr, Lynette (IUinois-Urbana/Champaign)
154] DIETARY INTERPRETATION OF DELTA-13 C IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL HUMAN BONE APATITE
The stable carbon isotope ratios in archaeological human bone apatite carbonate, and the difference
between the stable carbon isotope ratios in the carbonate and those of the collagen, provide useful dictary
wformation beyond that of the carbon and nitrogen isotope ratios of the bone collagen. Studies of the stable
isope composition of human bone apatite and collagen from populations with coastal, agricultural, and
eonagricultural diets are cited as examples for interpreting d13C in bone apatite, Archacological populations
fom coastal Central American sites are used as examples of consumers of isotopically complex diets in
which human bone apatite carbon isotope values have contributed significantly to paleodietary interpretation.
, 106 Novick, Lee
Novick, Lee (North Carolina Department of Transportation)
[102] WASTE NOT: DEPRESSION ERA GOLD MINING IN NORTH CAROLINA

In 1799 gold was discovered near Charlotte, North Carolina, which became the leading gold producing
State cast of the Mississippi River prior to the Civil War. Meckicnburg County boasted 118 recorded goid
localities, with mines often funded by out-of-state companies, and mining towns similar to those of the
western frontier. They became less successful in the period following. With the New York stock market
crash and a world economy tied to nations using the gold standard, gold fever hit North Carolina. Investors
capitalized mines and local residents conducted small operations processing spoil piles from old mines.
This paper explores archacological evidence from these depression era gold mining sites.
O'Brien, Chris (Wisconsin-Madison) and Preston Miracle (Michigan)
({91] HOMINID PREY ACQUISITION IN THE BALKAN LATE PLEISTOCENE

We discuss temporal and regional patterns of hominid predatory behavior during the Late Pleistocene of
the Eastern Adriatic region of Europe. Dental increment analysis is used to cstablish mortality profiles and
season of acquisition for large ungulate taxa from the sites of Badanj, Kopacina, and Sandalja IL Results from
increment analysis are contrasted with those from alternative methods, including crown heights and dental
wear, to examine the potential effects of analytical methods on variation in acquisition patterns. Variation
in prey acquisition is then examined in the context of competing explanations, including ecological determi-
nants of prey availability and current regional models of hominid behavior.
O'Brien, M. (see Cogswell, J.) {78}
O’Brien, Michael (Missouri)
[27] THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF AN EVOLUTIONARY ARCHAEOLOGY

Evolutionary archacology, with its strict adherence to neo-Darwinian principles and focus on artifacts as
phenotypic traits, is but one of several competing frameworks for understanding the differential persistence
of variation in the archaeological record. Recent archacological literature would suggest that the approach
is beginning to figure prominently in the discipline, though it is clear that several important theoretical and
especially methodological issues have not yet been addressed. Serious attempts to advance our understanding
of the roles played by evolutionary processes such as selection and drift must be based on a firm understanding
of the historical development of issucs.
O'Brien, P. (see Metcalf, M.) |66]|
O'Connell, James (Utab) and Kristen Hawkes (Utab)
[27] BEHAVIORAL ECOLOGY, ARCHAEOLOGY AND EVOLUTION

Archacologists have a long-established interest in the evolution of human behavior but lack the theoretically
well-grounded operational framework in which to pursue it. For nearly three decades, behavioral ecology
has provided evolutionary biologists with just such a framework. Over the past ten years it has been employed
productively by anthropologists as well. We review major clements of this paradigm, distinguish it from
other evolutionary approaches now employed by archaeologists, and illustrate by example its applicability
to the study of human behavior in both ethnographic and archacological contexts.

‘ O'Donovan, Maria (Binghamton) and Randall H. McGuire (Binghamton)

[7] THE ACTIVITY STRUCTURE OF CERRO DE TRINCHERAS

Little research has been done on Cerros de Trincheras sites that were widely distributed in the Sonoran
desert of the American southwest and Mexico during late prehistory. The distribution of these sites indicates
their key role in understanding inter-regional relations. Before we can understand inter-regional relations,
we have to determine the functions of these sites. Explanations have focused on the defensive or agricultural
advantages of terraced hill sites. Others maintain the sites were primarily villages. Our research at the site
of Cerro de Trincheras, a regional center, in Sonora, Mexico indicates that it is a multi-function village.
O'Rourke, Dennis (Utab), Ryan Parr (Utab), and Shawn Cartyle (Utab)
[90] MOLECULAR GENETIC VARIATION IN PREHISTORIC INHABITANTS OF THE EASTERN

GREAT BASIN

Mitochondrial DNA from over 35 burials recovered from the castern margin of the Great Salt Lake has
been screened for patterns of molecular variation. All samples have been individually radiometrically dated,
and span the range 750-2,000 B.P. One molecular marker (a nine base deletion) occurs in over 75% of
these samples, and in comparable Anasazi samples, but is absent in two ancient Siberian samples examined.
The frequency of the deletion is less than 40% in most Amerind groups, and is apparently absent from
circumarctic populations, including Northern Athapaskan. Such molecular diversity provides context for
assessment of prehistoric population movement and affinities.
Ocetting, Albert (Heritage Research Associates)
[90] PREHISTORIC WETLAND ADAPTATIONS IN HARNEY BASIN, CENTRAL OREGON

The rich archaeological record of Harney Basin provides context for examining human burials from
Malheur Lake. Archaeological research indicates that widespread use of the basin’s lakes and marshes began
, Orr, Heather 107
after 5,000 B.P. and was most intensive after 2,000 B.P. Site locations and certain tool types indicate a
lacustrine subsistence focus for many sites. Large, diverse sites, including housepit villages, are found along
stable lakeshores and in the mosaic of marshlands. Harney Basin was one of several well-watered basins in
the northern Great Basin that supported prehistoric populations making intensive use of wetlands resources
and residing near these resources.
Olive, M. (see Taborin, Y.) {16}
Oliver, J. (see Milner, G.) [36]
Olver, José R. (Garrow & Associates)
[56] ECOLOGICAL ADAPTATIONS IN THE LATE PLEISTOCENE-EARLY HOLOCENE TRANSITION
PERIOD OF NORTHERN SOUTH AMERICA
Based on the available published data, this paper examines the nature and diversity of human responscs
(adaptation ) in Northern South America to changing ecological and climatic conditions during the transitional
period between the Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene (ca. 13,000-8,000 B.P.). Although paleoclimatic
data in this region is still wanting and often disarticulated from archacological correlations, the general
trend appears to be one of increased adaptive radiations resulting in roughly contemporaneous yet divergent
traditions. This paper will test the preceding hypothesis by reexamining whether the hard facts support it
or not
Olsen, Nancy (New Mexico)
[72] BANDELIER NATIONAL MONUMENT PICTOGRAPHS AND PETROGLYPHS; A PRELIMINARY
STUDY
A preliminary pattern recognition study to identify contextual use of petroglyphs and pictographs taken
from the Bandelier National Monument Inventory Survey cavates provides heuristic information about motif
category organization A Maximum Likelihood factor analysis delineates three potential patterns, a Chi-
square test confirms a fourth. This study is a first step towards constructing mid-range evolutionary theory
to explain the appearance of pictographs and petroglyphs in archacological contexts. These preliminary
patterns, defined beyond the intuitive level, present a methodology for studying rock art distribution across
@ Spatial section of the Pajarito Plateau.
Olson, Kirsten A. (California-Los Angeles), Anabel Ford (California-Santa Barbara), and
Michael Glascock (California-Santa Barbara)
[12] REGIONAL EXCHANGE AND LOCAL DISTRIBUTION: THE MANAGEMENT AND MEANING OF
MAYA OBSIDIAN IN THE BELIZE RIVER AREA
Assumptions of centralized control over prestige goods are based on distributions of wealth and power
inferred from settlement size and complexity. A good example is the Lowland Classic Maya obsidian trade.
Throughout Mesoamerica, obsidian can be traced to highland sources that reveal long-distance connections.
in the Lowlands, the obsidian industry has been traditionally associated with civic-ceremonial centers.
Clearly, the Late Classic Maya elite effectively eee eee production and distribution of
obsidian, yet the nature of centralized production has clusive. Data from the Belize River area
present an alternative picture of decentralized control by elite in the hinterlands.
Orcutt, Janet (National Park Service), Tineke Van Zandt (Michigan), and Robert P. Powers
(National Park Service)
[58] BIG PROBLEMS AT BIG SITES: INTERPRETING FORMATION AND GROWTH AT CLASSIC AND
PROTOHISTORIC RIO GRANDE PUEBLOS
Despite nearly 100 years of investigation at large Classic and Protohistoric period Rio Grande pueblos,
the formation and growth of these sites are poorly understood. Ranging fom several hundres. 49 Over &
1000 rooms in size, with numerous roomblocks and plazas, these villages apparently supported undreds
of people over long periods of time. This paper uses chronological information, particularly tree-ring dates,
to investigate patterns of internal site growth and to map episodes of big site construction across the region.
Social, economic and climatic reasons for the development and maintenance of large aggregates are explored.
Orr, Heather (Texas-Austin)
[55] SACRIFICE PLACES AND THE RITUAL BALLGAME IN LATE FORMATIVE ZAPOTEC POLITICAL
STRATEGY
An ideological substratum identifiable at Monte Alban and Dainzu interrelates creation, death, and rebirth
through a ritual ballgame enacted at special sacrifice places. This pattern emerges in Late Formative Zapotec
architectural programming, site layout, and iconography. The underlying mythological-ideological framework
was wiclded by Zapotec elite as a political tool during a period of intensified conflict and competition. The
wider implications of this pattern include its appearance and manipulation at other Mesoamerican centers.
, 108 Osborn, Alan
Osborn, Alan (Nebraska-Lincoln)
(51) SYMBOLS IN LIMBO: THE UTILITY OF POSTPROCESSUAI ARCHAEOLOGY

Postprocessual archaeologists have argued that material culture was used by societies to organize and
manipulate their external world. Symbols, as ideological expressions, were incorporated into the design
and fabrication of material items. Postprocessualists have suggested that symbols inherent in material culture
underlie human motivation and action. Symbols have not been studied within their broader systemic,
behavioral context. Symbolic information is vital for human adaptation yet it has rarely been viewed within
an integrated perspective. This paper reexamines Hodder's study of Maasai material culture and symbols
using socioecological theory and evaluates the utility of postprocessual efforts.

Qwen, Bruce (Programa Contisuyu)
[43] WERE WARI AND TIWANAKU IN CONFLICT, COMPETITION, OR COMPLEMENTARY
COEXISTENCE? SURVEY EVIDENCE FROM THE UPPER OSMORE DRAINAGE, PERU

The prehistoric Andean states of Wari and Tiwanaku were contemporary, yet little is known of their
relationship nor their differences in organization because their territories seemed to have little or no
geographic contact. Systematic site survey shows that significant populations of both states occupied the
upper Osmore drainage, living in close proximity in interdigitated but distinct territories defined by altitude,
land form, and differing approaches to irrigation. Relative dating, setiement pattern, architecture, canal
locations, and other cvidence shed light on the relationship between the two states and the fundamental
characteristics that distinguished one from the other.

Ozdogan, Mebmet (Istanbul University)
[4] THE FORMATION OF NEOLITHIC CULTURES IN EASTERN ANATOLIA

Almost all models for the development of sedentary food-producing communities in the Near East have
considered the Syro-Levantine lowlands as the nuclear zone and the castern Anatolian highlands as a marginal
zone. Despite the minimal number of sites yet excavated in eastern Anatolia, this area now stands as a major
nuclear zone in the formation of Neolithic socicties. The artifactual, as well as non-artifactual assemblages
from these sites indicate the development of an indigenous modc of sedentary life, developing along parallel
lines with the Syro-Levantine mode. This suggests sustained intcraction between these two major culture
zones,

Pagano, Daniel N. (Advisory Council on Historic Preservation)
[3] COMPREHENSIVE SYSTEMS DESIGN OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL COMMUNITY

During the twenty-first century archaeological resources will be consumed by accelerated and dynamic
changes in our environment. Encroaching development, scholarly research and shifting legislative priorities
will contribute to further depletion of the resource base. In order to flourish, professional archacologists
will need to transform their twenticth century approach and expand beyond academic, cultural resource
management and regulatory perspectives. One alternative is to seck greater involvement from a spectrum
of interested public in the creation of community based preservation cfforts. A rationale and strategy for
creation of new designs for community involvement in management of archacological resources is presented.
Paine, Richard R. (Southern Illinois University)

[76] LET THEM EAT CHOCOLATE: POPULATION GROWTH, RESOURCE STRESS, AND THE RISE
OF THE COPAN NOBILITY (A.D. 700-950)

Hazards analysis of 105 residential mound group occupations from Copan, Honduras, indicates that non-
royal elite household survival was unaffected by the collapse of the royal dynasty circa A.D. 822. Architectural
activity within elite households expanded during the Late Classic, after all ecological zones in the Valley
had been colonized. Non-royal elite houscholds continued to prosper into Copan's “collapse” period as
resource stress increased abandonment rates of commoncr houscholds and royal monumental activity
ceased. Implications concerning clite control of subsistence resources are discussed.
Papamarinopolous, S. (see McMabon, N.) |73}

Parezo, N. (see Fowler, D.) |38)

Parker, R. (see Sheppard, P.) ||

Parkingion, J. (see Mitchell, P.) | 45)

Parr, R. (see O'Rourke, D.) [90]

Parsons, Jeffrey R. (Michigan) {Discussant 8]

Parsons, Jeffrey R. (Michigan) | Discussant 85}

Pate, Donald (Flinders University)

[104] STABLE CARBON ISOTOPE ASSESSMENT OF HUNTER-GATHERER MOBILITY IN
PREHISTORIC SOUTH AUSTRALIA

The inland riverine Roonka Flat archacological site is located 120 km north of the South Australian coast.
The site was used as a burial ground throughout the Holocene. The Roonka Flat skeletal sample represents
, Pennington, Susan J. 109
the largest excavated prehistoric burial population in Australia. Bone collagen stable carbon isotope values
indicate a greater use of non-local marine and/or arid interior foods during the Early Holocene than in the
Late Holocene. These paleodictary results support conventional archaeological data from southeastern
Australia that suggest increased hunter-gatherer territoriality accompanied by more efficient use of local
food resources in the Late Holocene.

Paviu, lvan (Arizona State Museum)

[91] ENCLOSURES OF THE EUROPEAN DANUBE NEOLITHIC

At the specific moment of the European Danubian Neolithic the formally unified group of circle enclosures
“ppears within the central Danube area (Lower Austria and Southern Moravia) and adjacent countries
(Bavaria, Bohemia and Slovakia), During the last two decades many of them were excavated or prospected
by gcophysics. They represent most probably the social centers of the sites and archacologically documented
division of the settlement areas.

Peartbree, E. (see Rolett, B.) |6|

Pearsall, D. (see Zhao, Z.) |25|

Pearsall, Deborab M. (Missourt-Columbia), Dolores R. Piperno (Smithsonian Tropical
Research Institute), Robert A. Benfer, Jr. (Missourt-Columbia)

125] IDENTIFYING CROPS THROUGH PHYTOLITH ANALYSIS

One focus of phytolith research is identification of cultivated plants in the archaeological record. The
way in which crops are identified differs among crops (use of diagnostics, evaluation of assemblages )
and among researchers (multiple identification methods for maize, rice). We review the methodology of
establishing identification criteria for crops. Approaches discussed include use of diagnostics, classification
approaches (using shape, size), and statistical approaches, including multivariate techniques. We evaluate
the strengths and weaknesses of existing methods and of the ways analysts address the problem of identifying
crops.

Pearson, Marlys (Massachusetts-Amberst)
§62] “DELIGHT IN THE DISTRACTION AND RUIN OF FAMILIES”: RUNAWAY WIFE
ADVERTISEMENTS IN COLONIAL NEWSPAPERS AS A FORUM FOR CONTESTED POWER

Runaway wife advertisements in Colonial newspapers can be interpreted as attempts to control women
through subjecting them to the public gaze. There they could be shamed, entreated, or threatened into
coming home, or excoriated and humiliated in a final public good riddance. Although these advertisements
arc almost exclusively a male discourse, women’s counter-strategies can often be discerned within them.
This is especially true of those ads in which men feel compelled to respond to gossip, in itself a powerful
agent of social control.

Pedler, C. (see Adovasio, J.) |69)

Pedler, C. (see Carr, K.) (69)

Peebles, Christopber S, (Indiana University)

[49] DATABASE AND “THE DIMENSIONS OF ARCHAEOLOGY" &

Databases comprise representations and samples of reality: therein are recorded aspects of entities either
neal or imagined from a living present or a past that endures in the present. In the case of archaeology, the
samples themselves are samples of surrogates that themselves represent past realities. The writings of Albert
Spaulding express a deep concern with the ways archacologists select samples, the ways in which they
cepresent the durable remains of the past, and the ways in which the} combine these representations to
ereate prehistory. The methods he espouses in “The Dimensions of Archacology” are directly applicable,
aithough often ignored, in the construction of archacological databases today.

Peeler, Damon E. (Proyecto Especial Monte Alban) and Marcus Winter (Instituto Nacional
ée Anthropologia e Historia) ‘
{55} SACRED TIME AND SPACE AND THE GROWTH OF MONTE ALBAN

Growth and development of the urban center of Monte Alban may have depended upon various manifesta-
sens of power, as well as economic and social factors. Recent work at this site suggests that, among these
smnifestations of power, specialized astronomical and calendric knowledge may have played a role in the
Seendation of Monte Alban and other Valley of Oaxaca sites. This paper examines how ideological factors
say have contributed to urban development at Monte Alban.

Pendergast, D. (see Chippendale, C.) |38)

Pennington, Susan J. (Minnesota)

§25] TOWARDS THE ROUTINE INTEGRATION OF PHYTOLITHS INTO PALEOETHNOBOTANICAL
RESEARCH

Phytoliths are a multifaceted data resource, which has been used in isolation to address many archaeological
aed palcoenvironmental research questions. However, an alternate approach is to view phytoliths as a

— . —
, 2 [11] The Sociopolitical Organization of Hunter-Gatherers
shaped by the changing socio-political relationships between Xaltocan and other communities. Relationships
such as exchange, alliance, domination of other settlements and subordination to outside rulers affected
both extractive industries such as agriculture and fish processing and craft industries such as pottery
manufacture and obsidian working, Thus, social relations mediate between humans and their environment
to produce what might be seen as gains in systemic efficiency or exploitation of large segments of the
population,

[11] Symposium: THE SOCIOPOLITICAL ORGANIZATION OF HUNTER-GATHERERS IN

CALIFORNIA: A CONSIDERATION OF NATIVE AND EUROPEAN ENCOUNTERS

This symposium examines the sociopolitical organizations of native peoples who were responding to the
colonial practices of Spanish missionaries, Russian fur traders, and Euro-American ranchers in California.
Symposium papers consider how native polities underwent change using archacological, ethnohistorical,
and ethnographic sources. Observations are made on the spatial distribution, hierarchical elaboration, and
population of native socicties in northern, central, and soudhern California. Some participants also address
the relevance of using ethnographic models to understand the sociopolitical organizations of prehistoric
and prorohistoric hunter-gatherer societies in California
[12] Symposium: THE SOCIAL AND POLITICAL CONTEXTS OF CRAFT TECHNOLOGY

The papers in this symposium explore the dynamic interaction between social and political milicus and
craft technology. In our papers, we consider technology beyond the scope of environmental and economic
adaptation. Themes include the ideological contexts of technological innovation and elaboration; technology
as it intersects with houschold, community, state, gender, and class; conditions facilitating control of technol-
ogy for political and social ends; and the social and political settings which support particular technologies
and the characteristics—such as labor intensity and standardization—they impart to finished goods.

[13] Sponsored Forum: DARE TO DOMINATE A DOMINEERING DISSERTATION (SAA Student
Affairs Committec)

The SAA Student Committee presents a sponsored forum on the dissertation process. There will be short
(5 minute) presentations by the speakers followed by a question and answer session. Topics will include
resources available to graduate students, the SAA dissertation prize, dealing with committees, publication
options, motivation, etc. All participants are also asked to think about issues of age, gender, race, sexual
orientation, etc. in reference to the dissertation process.

[14] Symposium: BEYOND STATE COLLAPSE: CASE STUDIES IN THE AMERICAS

The aftermath of state collapse is an issue that lies at the heart of understanding cultural evolution in the
Americas. Each of the papers in the symposium examines the issue of state collapse and subsequent cultural
adaptation from the standpoint that the process, in and of itself, is nearly always incomplete, and a matter
that is quite complex. Each of the case studies presents data for a given region, and an evaluation of the
processes (historical, social, and cultural) that were underway in the restructuring of society just centuries
before the Spanish arrival.

[16] Symposium: LITHIC RAW MATERIAL ECONOMY IN LATE GLACIAL AND EARLY
POSTGLACIAL WESTERN EUROPE

Regional patterns in the use of lithic raw materials from different sources provide information on hunter-
gatherer mobility, territorial organization, and exchange. New theoretical perspectives on technological
systems call for a critical examination of arguments linking patterns in caw material use with aspects of
hunter-gatherer behavior. This session brings together scholars working in several different regions of
western Europe to present comparative data and evaluate theoretical approaches to lithic raw matcrial
economy among Late Glacial and Early Postglacial hunter-gatherers. Case studies focus on the scheduling
and organization of raw material procurement for tool production. Discussions should provide insight into
common processes as well as regional diversity in Late Glacial and Early Postglacial Europe,

[18] Poster Symposium: THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF WEST POINT, SEATTLE, WASHINGTON: 4,500
YEARS OF LAND USE IN SOUTHERN PUGET SOUND

The West Point archacological site complex is within the boundaries of a sewage treatment plant in

Seattle's Discovery Park. Shell midden and other cultural deposits were discovered initially in February,
1992 during construction of new treatment facilities, Over 60 radiocarbon dates from almost 2 years of
ficld work document land use beginning ca. 4500 B.P. and continuing to 200 B.P. A project overview
provides background for summarics of land use chronology, subsistence patterns, and lithic organization
Research results are compared to ethnographic and archacological data from southern Puget Sound to
broaden interpretations,
[21] Workshop: EXHIBIT DEVELOPMENT FOR ARCHAEOLOGISTS—A WORKSHOP ON
EVALUATION, DESIGN, AND INSTALLATION (SAA Public Education Committee)
This three session workshop will focus on tailoring exhibits to a specific audience or the general public.
Each session is independent of the others and may be attended individually, Session | is Evaluation: Front
, [28] Protecting the Archaeological Resources of the Hemisphere 3
End, Formative and Field Testing, Session II is Aesthetics and Mechanics of Signage and Installation. Session
tl is Participatory Exhibits.

[22] Symposium: BIOARCHAEOLOGY OF THE CHINCHORRO PEOPLE

Although a nonranked society, the Chinchorro Culture from South America practiced sophisticated tech-
niques of artificial mummification beginning 8,000 years ago. The complexity of Chinchorro's socio-religious
development is intriguing and has not been systematically addressed, An interdisciplinary group of archaeolo-
gists, paleopathologists and physical anthropologists will present their findings on settlement patterns, social
organization, mummification techniques, health, and diet, This will be the first symposium dedicated to
Chinchorro mortuary complexity.

[23] Symposium: SURFACE ARCHAEOLOGICAL DATA AND THEIR INFERENTIAL POTENTIAL

Until the 1970's, surface archacological data generally were considered, with a few notable exceptions,
substantively inferior to excavation data. Since the 1970s, surface archaeological data have been used
principally, but not exclusively, to characterize aspects of the regional archacological record and to guide
the location of excavation units, Participants in this symposium demonstrate that the inferential potential
of the archaeological record can be expanded considerably—contributing to the development of theory
and method as well as to models of prehistory—when surface data are considered essential, unsullied
elements of archacological research.

[24] Symposium: THE DYNAMICS OF CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT IN EASTERN ANATOLIA:
INTER-REGIONAL RELATIONS AND SECONDARY STATE FORMATION

Eastern Anatolia is geographically and culturally integral to any consideration of the dynamics of culture
change in southwestern Asia. However, until recently, only minimal data relating to inter-regional exchange
and secondary state formation have been available from this critical region. Recent and current surveys and
excavations in eastern Anatolia are beginning to fill this gap in our data. The papers in this session examine
the impact of the new Anatolian data on our understanding of inter-regional exchange and secondary state
development in southwestern Asia during the 4th-1st millennia B.C.

[25] Sponsored Symposium: METHOD AND THEORY IN PHYTOLITH ANALYSIS (Society for
Phytolith Research)

While phytolith analysis has become a standard tool in archacology, identification and interpretation
remain challenging. We begin this interdisciplinary session with advanced methods in microscopy (illustrated
with a videotape of 3-D images of phytoliths ) and statistics. We then discuss the identification of crops, of
plant ecofacts, and of human impacts on the landscape; the formation of environmental and cultural deposits,
including residues on stance tools and pottery and the remains of fibers; and the combination of phytoliths with
other paleoethnoboranical data, The final paper summarizes issues raised by previous ones and encourages
thorough reporting for continued growth of the field.

[26] Symposium: ASSESSING THE IMPLICATIONS OF PLATFORM MOUNDS FROM THE
PERSPECTIVE OF SEVEN CASE STUDIES

The recent dramatic increase in knowledge of Southwestern platform mounds has given researchers a
greater appreciation for differences in mound function. This symposium presents a series of case studies
where the functional assessment of a platform mound also is a study of complexity that entails measurement
of changes in social organization, Questions of nF existence of elites or complexity without elites are
addressed through an evaluation of evidence for (1) differentiation of occupants of platform mounds and
(2) indications of integration through orchestrated consumption and storage activity for cach case study.
[27] Symposium: EVOLUTIONARY THEORY IN ANGLO/AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY

This symposium focuses on the archacological application of concepts drawn trom macroevolutionary
theory, and reflects a renewed interest among archacologists in general theory of culture change. We suggest
that Anglo-American archacology has long operated under a general theory of culture change that is broadly
analogous to Neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory. This paradigm is seldom made explicit, however. because
of the history of the discipline and the lack of in-depth understanding of biological evolution on the part
of many archacologists. The papers presented range from broadly conceptual to substantive, and encompass
a considerable geographical and temporal span.

[28] Sponsored Forum: PROTECTING THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES OF THE
HEMISPHERE (SAA Task Force on Latin America and National Park Service)

This forum brings together diverse perspectives on archaeological resource protection from different
countries throughout North and South America. Participants will briefly discuss the views developed from
their own experiences of the major threats to archacological resources, of the public perceptions of the
value of archacological resources, of the legal recourse for protection, and of the particular successes and
, 110 Peterson, Jane
complementary data set. This approach allows the integration of phytoliths, both silica and calcium based,
with macrobotanical and pollen data in order to describe a more complete archaco-botanical record for
any one plant. The author's preliminary research into magical and medicinal plants of the medieval period
will highlight quantification issues as well as providing models for production, deposition, and recovery.
Peterson, Jane (Arizona State)
[9] SOCIAL INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE FORAGER/FARMER TRANSITION: SEXUAL DIVISIONS OF
LABOR IN THE LEVANT
The temporal depth and richness of the Levantine archacological record provide a unique opportunity
to explore the nature and pace of changes in the sexual division of labor across the forager/farmer transition.
Archaeological data supply the bases for defining a range of economic activities in both hunter-gatherer
and agricultural contexts. An osteological study of muscle markings on cortical bone ( enthesopathies) is
used (to infer how these activities were organized among men and women. Assumptions about prehistoric
labor patterns embedded in cxisting models of the transition to domestication economics are assessed based
on the results of this analysis.
Peterson, Jobn (Bureau of Reclamation)
[86] RESOURCE MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES ALONG THE LOWER COLORADO RIVER
The Bureau of Reclamation is implementing proactive resource management strategics along the lower
Colorado River through the use of systematic field surveys, ethnographic studies, and data integration. This
program has focused new attention on the fragile earth figures and related manifestations that are located
on the desert pavement, Earth figures are rare and threatened cultural resources. The program is designed
to balance resource management mandates with research concerns through the use of non-destructive data
acquisition techniques, The end product will be an information base useful for managers, scholars, Native
Americans, and the public.
Petit-Maire, Nicole (Laboratoire de Geologie du Quaternaire)
[45] CLIMATIC CHANGE AND MAN IN NORTHERN AFRICA (SAHARA-SAHEL) DURING THE LAST
TRANSITIONAL GLACIAL/INTERGLACIAL PERIOD
During the last glacial maximum (20—18 ka), the Saharo-Sahelian boundary was at 13°—14°N. During
the last warm optimum (8.5—6.5 ka), it was at 22°N. Thus, in a span of some 10,000 years, more than 4
million km2 switched from a desert environment to a liveable steppe where Neolithic man settled.
Petruso, K. (see Ellwood, B.) |70|
Petruso, K. (see Harrold, F.) |9|
Pettigrew, Richard (INFOTEC Research) and Craig Skinner (INFOTEC Research)
[83] OBSIDIAN HYDRATION STUDIES IN THE CENTRAL OREGON CORRIDOR: RESULTS OF THE
FIRST CUT
Over 6,500 obsidian artifacts from 84 central Oregon archacological sites were chemically characterized
and examined for obsidian hydration rims during the PGT-PH&E Pipeline Expansion Project. Carbon for
‘ radiocarbon determinations is often lacking and obsidian hydration data often provide the only available
chronometric avenue. This initial examination primarily addresses four topics: (1) relative hydration rates
of different sources (using Mazama tephra as a temporal control ); (2) preliminary calculated rates for several
sources; (3) effects of sample size on hydration results and their implications in developing sampling
strategics, and (4) anomalous hydration measurements associated with the 1450-year old Big Obsidian Flow
in Newberry Caldera.
Phillips, D. (see Blinman, E.) | 19)
Phillips, Jr.. David A. (SWCA, Inc.) and Thomas N. Motsinger (SWCA, Inc.)
[104] PREDICTING LOCATIONS OF PREHISTORIC AK-CHIN FARMS: AN EXAMPLE FROM
SOUTHERN ARIZONA
Excavations at the Maja Site in Arizona's Avra Valicy revealed a Classic period Hohokam field house on
the edge of the northern bajada of the Sicrrita Mountains. Evaluation of conventional acrial and infrared
satellite images indicates that the Maja Site and other sites in this part of the valley are located on alluvial
fans where the potential for ak-chin style floodwater farming is greatest. By using similar remote-sensing
data, it may be possible to predict the locations of open-desert farming communities in southern Arizona
Phillips, Laura S$. (Larson Antbropological/Archaeological Services) and Lynn L. Larson
(Larson Anthropological/Archaeological Services)
[18] WEST POINT SUBSISTENCE ORGANIZATION: INSIGHTS FROM BOTANICAL, FISH BONE, AND
SHELLFISH STUDIES
Results from specialist studies of fish bonc, botanical, and shellfish assemblages are reviewed. Botanical
analysis documents high sample carbon content and taxa diversity compared to other sites in the region.
, Pitblado, Bonnie 111
Abundance of conifer bark and hardwoods used as fuel suggests importance of shellfish drying/smoking.
Seeds and fruit pits indicate summer plant collecting activities. The fish bone assemblage has freshwater
and marine species. Increases in salmon abundance through time may indicate changes in procurement
practices or be due to taphonomic processes. Shellfish species preferred for drying cthnographically may
demonstrate shifts in shellfish procurement patterns and importance of storage.
Pierce, C. (see Adams, K.) |19|
Pike-Tay, Anne (Vassar College) and Randall White (New York University)
{30} ARCHAEOLOGICAL SEASONALITY AND PREY DEMOGRAPHY: CONTRIBUTIONS FROM
DENTAL ANNULI ANALYSIS OF THE KAMINURIAK CONTROL SAMPLE
A brief summary of current results of a long term research project investigating the microscopically visible
seasonal-annular bands in the teeth of a thoroughly documented control sample of nearly 1000 Canadian
barrenground “Rangifer tarandus” (caribou/reindeer ) individuals of all ages, both sexes, and representing
@ seasons of death, is presented. Due to the size of the control sample from this highly seasonal environment,
tech the limitations and potential of Dental Annuli Analysis for informing archaeologists of the scasonality
end age profiles of a wide range of prehistoric faunas are made explicit
Pillion, M. (see McMabon, N.) [73]
Pillsbury, Joanne (East Anglia)
120] RECENT FIELDWORK AT CHAN CHAN, PERU
This research report is a brief overview of the principal findings of a survey of the architectural sculpture
=e Chan Chan, a Late Intermediate Period site on the north coast of Peru. The survey, conducted in 1990-
$1 included the documentation and conservation of the major adobe reliefs and their architectural contexts
= part of a larger investigation of the use of the visual arts in the late pre-Hispanic period in the Andes.
Among other aspects, the investigation has yielded new data with bearing on the chronological sequence
of the site, based on an analysis of the construction techniques used to create the architectural reliefs.
Fanally, the report will conclude with a discussion of a heretofore unreported relief depicting Spondylus
sbell divers uncovered in Ciudadela Uhile.
Pinto, Diana G. (Greenwood and Associates) and Joan S. Schneider (California-Riverside)
$85) MILLING-IMPLEMENT QUARRYING AND PRODUCTION BORDERING THE LOWER
COLORADO AND GILA RIVERS: ARCHAEOLOGICAL, ETHNOGRAPHIC, AND HISTORICAL
EVIDENCE FOR AN ABORIGINAL INDUSTRY
Recent work along the Lower Gila and Lower Colorado Rivers has identified extensive arcas where
ending stones, handstones, and pestles were produced using stone quarried from certain bedrock outcrops.
Processing tools played such an important part of the subsistence systems of the aboriginal groups that
eed in the area, that a high cnergy investment was made in the production of those tools using specific
@ene of optimal quality. Data is presented that supports long-distance transport of quarried material. A
Sypothesis is proposed regarding the routes and method of transport.
Piperno, D. (see Pearsall, D.) |25| 1
Piperno, Dolores (Smithsonian Institution)
§e8] EARLY FORAGING AND FARMING IN THE LOWLAND TROPICAL FOREST OF PANAMA
Phytolith, pollen, carbon, and diatom studies of lake sediments are used to reconstruct subsistence
@eactices and associated environmental changes in lowland Pacific Panama from 11,000 B.P. until 4,000 BP.
Te close of the Pleistocene brought changes in climate and vegetation no less profound than those which
Securred at higher latitudes, and which have long have been associated with major economic shifts elsewhere
© the world. Human modification of the watershed evergreen forest through frequent burning and creation
of small clearings is evident at this time. Evidence for slash and burn cultivation is present by 6,000 B.P.
Seraging and farming have deep antiquity in the lowland Panamanian forest. }
Pippin, Lonnie C. (Desert Research Institute)
175) ABORIGINAL POTABLE WATER RESOURCES IN THE SOUTHERN GREAT BASIN
Potable water was a vital resource for the aboriginal hunters and gatherers who occupied the arid regions
o@f the Desert West. This paper reviews the nature of water resources that were available to aboriginal
epalations in a portion of the southern Great Basin, categorizes these resources in terms of their sensitivity
© climatic variables and consequently their overall reliability, and finally, examines how variability in these
qmsources may have influenced aboriginal cultural behavior and assesses the importance of water in shaping
Ge cultural adaptations in the southern Great Basin.
@blado, Bonnie (Arizona)
6) GETTING TO THE POINT: A ‘BIG PICTURE’ LOOK AT ROCKY MOUNTAIN PALEOINDIAN
TRADITIONS
i ts suggested that a fundamental dichotomy exists between Great Basin and Plains Paleoindian traditions.
Tks dichotomy, reflected in projectile point technology, can be related to differences in subsistence strategy.
, 112 Pitulko, Vladimir
Rocky Mountain Paleoindian material in general, and an assemblage from southwest Colorado in particular,
is viewed as more closely related to Paleoindian occupation of the Great Basin than to occupation of the
Plains.
Pitulko, Viadimir (Institute of the History of Material Culture)
[94] AN EARLY HOLOCENE SITE IN THE SIBERIAN HIGH ARCTIC

The results of excavations at an carly Holocene site on Zhokov Island in the DeLong Archipelago of the
Siberian High Arctic are reported. The site's terrain and paleogeographic characteristics are discussed.
Thirteen semisubterrancan house pits have been identified and excavations have been made in two of these.
Artifacts reflect a Mesolithic association, with microblades, bone and antler inset tools, and goundstonc
adzes. Radiocarbon determinations indicate a date of about 7900 B.P. Faunal remains indicate a hunting
economy relying mainly upon reindeer and polar bears. The significance of the site in terms of the early
penetration of the High Arctic by a continental hunting culture is discussed, with commentary on the state
of knowledge about early Holocene cultural complexes in Northeast Siberia.
Plew, M. (see Gould, R.) (G61
Plunket, P. (see Urunuela, G.) | 40|
Plunket, Patricia (Universidad de Las Americas) and Gabriela Uruftiuela (Universidad de
Las Americas)
[30] IN SEARCH OF THE TEMPLE OF QUETZALCOATL: CHOLULA'S SACRED PRECINCT

During the Postclassic period, Cholula's Temple of Quetzalcoat! was one of the most important shrines
of Mesoamerica, a place where kings were crowned and a center to which pilgrims flocked. Recent excava-
tions on the grounds of the Convent of San Gabricl, where according to tradition the temple was located,
have revealed a construction sequence that begins in the Classic period. This paper will detail the major
findings of these explorations and discuss their relevance to the transition from Classic to Postclassic in the
Valicy of Pucbla and the development of the Postclassic ceremonial center of Cholula.
Pobl, M. (see Pope, K.) [76]
Pobl, Mary (Florida State), Kevin Pope (Geo Eco Arc Research), Jobn Jones (Smithsonian
Tropical Research Institute), Fred Valdez (Texas-Austin), and Ray Neck (Houston Museum of
Science)
[76] MALZE AGRICULTURE IN MESOAMERICA: THE LOWLAND MAYA CASE

Our program of excavation and coring in northern Belize in 1991-93 revealed that maize appeared about
2500 B.C. and was accompanied by significant deforestation. Excavation of settiement contemporancous
with early agriculture revealed that activity focused on the margins of wetlands where inhabitants continued
to hunt. Cultivation intensified after 1400 B.C. when environmental changes resulted in higher water levels
and the formation of a fertile black soil in wetlands. We propose that the adoption of maize agriculture in
wetlands facilitated political competitiveness and set the stage for the emergence of centralized political

. control after LOOO B.C.
Pokines, James (Chicago)
[84] FORM, FUNCTION, AND CONTEXT IN CANTABRIAN LOWER MAGDALENIAN ANTLER
PROJECTILE POINTS

A category of Cantabrian (Spain) Lower Magdalenian (and Solutrean) antler point possessing an arc-
shaped longitudinal profile, with a fattened area in its midsection probably used for hafting, may have
functioned as a barbed point in the hunting kits of its manufacturers. As such, these points may have been
precursors to the more elaborate multiply-barbed antler harpoons that, by definition, mark the Upper
Magdalenian in Cantabria. Both a replication experiment and the archacological context of this artifact type
elucidate its probable hunting function: the spearing and subsequent holding of prey.
Pookajorn, Surin (Silpakorn University)
[56] HUMAN ACTIVITIES AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES DURING THE LATE PLEISTOCENE TO

MIDDLE HOLOCENE IN SOUTHERN THAILAND AND THE MALAY PENINSULA

Recent excavations at Moh Khiew and Sakai caves are part of the “Hoabinhian Research Project in Thailand
(Phase 2)." The data generated from Moh Khiew Cave provide new insights on Southeast Asian prehistory.
They reveal the long term habitation and activities of prehistoric people from the Late Paleolithic to the
Late Neolithic, around 25,000 to 4,300 B.P, Furthermore, the burials found may help fill the gap in the study
of human cvyolution in Southeast Asia. More importantly, the data from this cave excavation suggest a new
point of view on stone tool traditions, nutrition, and environmental change.
Pool, K. (see Metcalf, M.) |66|
Pope, K. (see Phol, M.) |76|
, Powis, Terry and Bobbi Hohmann 113

Pope, Kevin (Geo Eco Arc Research), Mary Pobl (Florida State), Jobn Jacob (Texas AGM

University), Jobn Jones (Smithsonian Institution), and David Lentz (Mississippi)

[76] THE ORIGIN, EVOLUTION, AND DEMISE OF MAYA WETLAND AGRICULTURE IN NORTHERN
BELIZE

Polygonal features in the swamps of Belize have been interpreted as ancient Maya wetland fields for two
@ecades, Research by the Rio Hondo Project reveals that these features are of complex origin, including
human modifications of a hummocky surface and true canal construction. Wetland agriculture focussed
epon swamp soils that became dry enough to cultivate without canals during an episode of a lowered water
table ca. 1400 B.C. Water levels rose again ca. 110 B.C. to A.D. 200, apparently forcing the Maya to ditch,and
whtimately abandon, their fields. Water table fluctuations are linked to regional sea level changes.

Polter, D. (see Black, S.) {19|

Potter, James (Arizona State)

(89] THE IDENTIFICATION OF COMMUNAL RITUAL WITH FAUNAL REMAINS: A CASE STUDY
FROM THE DOLORES ANASAZI

Communal ritual is undoubtedly one of the most important yet archacologically elusive components of
middic-range societies. Faunal remains, and the use of several quantitative techniques, including computer
samulation, are argued to be effective in the identification of communal ritual in the prehistoric record.
Published faunal data from McPhee Village, an aggregated Pucblo I Anasazi community located in the Dolores
region, and dating to the ninth century AD., are used to test several ethnographically derived faunal
expectations. Two types of ritual behavior are identified, communal feasting and the use of fauna for ritual
paraphernalia.

Powell, Mary Lucas (Kentucky) and Valerie Haskins (Kentucky Heritage Council)
59] TRADING OLD ACHES FOR NEW PAINS: CHANGING PATTERNS OF PALEOPATHOLOGY IN
THE EASTERN WOODLANDS

The change from hunting/gathering to sedentary village life in the Eastern Woodlands exacted specific
biological penalties: increased mortality for all ages, particularly weanlings; increase in bacterial diseases
due to increased pathogen exchanges and a decline in community sanitation; a rise in chronic iron-deficiency
anemia in response to infection and parasite loads and iron-poor dicts; and the appearance of mycotic’
Powers, R. (see Orcutt, J.) (58)

Powers, William Roger (Alaska-Fairbanks)
[56] SIBERIA IN THE LATE GLACIAL AND EARLY POST-GLACIAL

This paper examines environmental and cultural changes in Siberia during the Pleistocene-Holocenc
eransition. During the early part of this interval, areas cast of the Yenisei contain late Paleolithic Dyuktai-
tke assemblages. In northeast Siberia, non-Dyuktai assemblages are found. Between 10,000 and 11,000 years
ago, Dyuktai-like industries spread to the northeast and refijlaced the earlier industry. By 10,000 B-P.,
Sumnagin industries appear in interior Siberia, while Dyuktai-like industries remain in the northeast and the
south. The implications for the peopling of Beringea and the Americas are discussed.
Powers-jJones, Alix (Cambridge)

125] PHYTOLITHS: A PROCESS-DRIVEN APPROACH? '

This paper explores an alternative approach to phytolith studies: examination and identification of the
processes involved in the accumulation of phytolith suites, rather than basic plant identification. | do not
decry plant identification as a powerful, essential tool in the archacologist’s repertoire, but stress the ae
for a parallel, process-driven approach. Understanding the processes by which ecofacts are deposit within
2 particular site can provide us with information about resource utilization and social organization, in
circumstances where this information would otherwise be lost. Analyses of prehistoric sites in the Outer
Hebrides of Scotland illustrate successful applications of this approach.

Powis, Terry (Trent) and Bobbi Hobmann (New Mexico)
{60] MIDDLE FORMATIVE ARCHITECTURE IN THE PERIPHERY OF CAHAL PECH, BELIZE: THE
CASE OF TWO CIRCULAR PLATFORMS AT THE TOLOK GROUP

The discovery of two low circular platforms at the Tolok Group in the periphery of Cahal Pech may shed
new light on late Middle Formative architectural techniques and practices. Evidence of several Late Formative
and Late Classic period burials on these structures demonstrate their ritual importance to the community
throughout the history of the Group. Also, the question arises as to whether round structures should be
considered rare forms of architecture, as more of them are increasingly being found in close proximity to
the surface and in various spatial contexts, particularly within the Belize Valley.
, 114 Pozorski, Shelia and Thomas Pozorski
Pozorski, Shelia (Texas-Pan American) and Thomas Pozorski (Texas-Pan American)
[10] THE SECHIN ALTO COMPLEX: THE VARIATIONS AND INTERRELATIONSHIPS OF EARLY
MONUMENTAL ARCHITECTURE
The Sechin Alto Complex, 10 square km in area, is the largest Initial Period (1800-900 B.C.) site cluster
known in Peru, Although the complex was previously believed to comprise a /ate Initial Period polity within
the Casma Valley, recent excavations at the component site of Taukachi-Konkan revealed that it dates
considerably earlier. These new data indicate that the major early Casma Valley sites existed simultaneously
and interacted extensively. This revised scenario provides a unique opportunity to assess both the varied
functions that characterized discrete units of monumental architecture within the polity and the nature of
interactions among sites and site clusters.
Pozorski, T. (see Pozorski, S.) | 10)
Prentiss, William (Frontier Archaeology, Inc.), Patrick F. Light (Frontier Archaeology, Inc.),
James M. Welch (Frontier Archaeology, Inc.), and David D. Day, Jr. (Frontier Archaeology,
Inc.)
[105] LITHIC DEBITAGE AND FLAKE TOOL ASSEMBLAGE FORMATION AT TWO HIGH ALTITUDE
SITES IN NORTHERN WYOMING
Flake utility indices are used to model and help explain the formation of complex lithic debitage and
flake tool assemblages from two quarry related sites in the Big Horn Mountains of northern Wyoming.
Mathematically derived experimental assemblage formation sequences are used to simulate the effects of
reduction strategies, taphonomic agents, flake removal processes, and flake tool use/rcuse sequences on the
final appearance of archaeological assemblages. Archaeological data are interpreted as the result of dynamic,
often complex behavioral and natural processes.
Price, Barry (INFOTEC Research) and Timoiby Canaday (INFOTEC Research)
[83] PREDICTIVE MODELS AND SITE SURVEY: A 1,000-MILE TRANSECT
In the carly planning stages of the PGT-PG&E Pipeline Expansion Project, INFOTEC Research, Inc. (IRI)
developed a sensitivity model for predicting the distribution of historical and prehistoric cultural resources
along the Project route. The model was based on historical, archacological, and cthnographic surveys and
related data available at that time ( 1988 ) Prior efforts to model site distribution in particular geographic zones
were also considered, and the available data were combined to predict the types and spatial distributions of
cultural resources expected in various environmental contexts along the pipeline corridor. The components
of IRI’s sensitivity model are evaluated, and predictions of site types, locations, and distributions are compared
with data gencrated during the intensive survey.
Price, Heather (California-Berkeley)
[9] CONTEXT AND VARIABILITY IN UPPER PALEOLITHIC VISUAL IMAGERY: PRELIMINARY
FINDINGS
Within a given time period and between populations exhibiting essentially the same general hunter-
a gatherer cultural adaptations, what is the significance of regional scale variation in the amount and kinds
of cave wall and portable art? I will first establish the nature of Upper Paleolithic art in the Aude region of
southern France. | will then consider various environmental, demographic and social explanations for why
this evidence varies from that of neighboring regions such as the Perigord and the Pyrences.
Price, J. (see Goodman, D.) \63)
Price, T. Douglas (Wisconsin-Madison) | Discussant 54]
Price, T. Douglas (Wisconsin-Madison) and Anne Birgitte Gebauer (Wisconsin-Madison)
[47] THE MOBILITY MYTH: AN EXAMPLE FROM MESOLITHIC NORTHERN EUROPE
The appearance of permanent settlement is thought to be one of the important thresholds on the pathway
to more complex society. The assumption that hunter-gatherers were highly mobile until the Holocene has
dominated archacological perspectives for many years and strongly biased interpretation of the archacological
record. Evidence from Holocene northern Europe and clsewhere, however, suggests that settlement occupa-
tions may well haye been sedentary far earlier than previously thought. This presentation will make the
argument that sedentism may well have been the norm for human groups in coastal and other non-marginal
zones deep into prehistory.
Pritchard-Parker, Mari A. (California-Riverside) and Jobn Torres (California-Riverside and
INFOTEC Research)
[33] CAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR ASSOCIATED WITH MILLING EQUIPMENT BE
DETERMINED FROM THE ANALYSIS OF ANOMALOUS DEBITAGE?
The surfaces of milling equipment, which become slick through use by the abrasive forces of the mano
against the metate, were mitigated prehistorically be re-roughening of the implement surfaces. It has been
, Rahemtulla, Farid 115
assumed that this was accomplished through the use of a prepared, flaked stone edge. Our previous research
shows this to be unnecessary (though it does not preclude it either). Analysis of the debitage produced
during the re-roughening of experimental metates using various hammerstones was compared with that
from archacological specimens in an effort to characterize the re-roughening behaviors associated with
milling equipment.
Purdue, J. (see Chambers, K.) (35|
Pyburn, K. Anne | Discussant 38]
Quilter, Jeffrey (Ripon College)
[32] THE RIVAS SITE PROJECT, 1992-1994
Three field seasons at the Riva site have revealed a scale and complexity of occupation previously
eadocumented for sites in southern Costa Rica. Two phases of monumental construction, extensive areas
of artificial fill, and great amounts of pottery from outside the region have been encountered for an occupation
fom circa A.D. 900-1300. This paper will review significant finds to date, their implications for understanding
che culture history of prehistoric Costa Rica, and their significance regarding the socio-political nature and
@ynamics of areas previously considered as “marginal” to Nuclear America.
Quintanilla, [figénia (National Museum of Costa Rica)
§32] CHRONOLOGY, SETTLEMENT PATTERNS, AND SUBSISTENCE IN THE SIERPE-TERRABA
DELTA, COSTA RICA
A regional project in the Sierpe—Terraba Delta of southern Costa Rica has documented human occupations
there from 1000 B.C. to A.D. 1500. These occupations show settlement patterns different than those of the
wibutaries and intermontane valicys in the upper and middle Terraba Valley. They also show the exploitation
of estuarine and tropical forest resources in addition to mixed agriculture subsistence practices. These
S&ctors, in combination with unique elements of material culture, such as stone spheres, anthropomorphic
and zoomorphic statues, and metallurgy, suggest that the Delta can be considered as a cultural unit within
the Chiriqui archacological region.
Quitmyer, Irvy R. (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[41] MOLLUSCAN FAUNA AS AN INDICATOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE AT THE PALEO-
INDIAN SITE OF PAGE-LADSON (8JE591), AUCILLA RIVER, FLORIDA
The Page Ladson Site (8)E591 ), located in the Aucilla River of west Florida, represents a stratified section
sting to the late Pleistocene—carly Holocene epochs. This deposit contains the remains of plants and
aeumals associated with Paleo-Indians living around the site. Aquatic molluscan fauna excavated from Page-
Ladson are sensitive indicators of environmental change. Quantified samples of 12 taxa of mollusk indicate
Suctuations in water chemistry, water depth and the energy of the river over a 12,000 year period. The
molluscan data coupled with the identification of other well-preserved plant and animal remains from Page-
Ladson provide a record of the local environment and how it changed at the end of the Pleistocene.
Raab, L. Mark (California State-Nortbridge)
$92] REASSESSING THE AGE AND IMPORTANCE OF SQUTHERN CALIFORNIA MARITIME
SOCIETIES AMONG ARCHAIC-STAGE CULTURAL ADAPTATIONS
Research during the last decade demonstrates occupation of the southern California coast as carly as
11,000 cal years BP. Scores of sites are now known with ages ranging between 8,000 and 10,000 cal years
S&P. with many of the earliest dates in the California Channa Islands. Complex maritime economics and
cultural interaction spheres linking the Channel Islands and the mainland existed at least as carly as 5,000
pears B.P. These data require re-examination of the marginal role traditionally assigned to maritime cultures
@ the development of Archaic-stage adaptations,
Rafferty, Kevin (Community College of Soutbern Nevada) ’
175] GEOGLYPHS AND GROUND FEATURES IN THE SOUTHERN NEVADA REGION
Geoglyphs and ground features are being recorded with greater frequency in the southern Nevada region.
Although geoglyphs, such as those associated with the Mojave/Patayan cultural tradition, are the most
spectacular, other ground figures, including linear features and abstract designs, have also been encountered.
This paper discusses several such features recorded in the last five years in southern Nevada, dealing with
swch questions as age, morphology, cultural affiliation, and potential significance as religious structures or
serritorial markers for groups that lived in the region.
Rabemtulla, Farid (Simon Fraser)
(30) TECHNOLOGICAL ORGANIZATION STRATEGIES IN THE EARLY PERIOD AT NAMU, ON THE
CENTRAL COAST OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
Research on the early prehistory of the Northwest Coast has generally focused on delineating initial
culrural-historical concerns. Recently, a mass analysis was conducted on lithic debitage from an Early Period
, 116 Ramenofsky, Ann F. —
(11,000-7,000 B.P.) component at Namu, on the central coast of British Columbia. Results are presented,
and preliminary interpretations on technological organization are discussed.

Ramenofsky, Ann F. (New Mexico)

[58} INFECTIOUS DISEASES AND NATIVE POPULATION CHANGE IN NORTHERN NEW MEXICO

Scholars working in the Spanish Borderlands outside the Southwest have demonstrated repeatedly that
infectious diseases were powerful selective agents in the earliest centuries of European contact. In appropriate
contexts, native populations suffered significant, if not terminal, population loss that affected the structure
of native societies. In New Mexico, however, the survival and cultural vigor of native peoples suggests that
the disease history may have been fundamentally different; these differences contributed to native persistence.
The issue of whether or not infectious diseases caused significant population loss prior to 1680 is discussed.
Rautman, Alison (Michigan State)

[37] REGIONAL IMPLICATIONS OF LOCAL SUBSISTENCE CHANGE: THE PITHOUSE-TO-PUEBLO
TRANSITION IN CENTRAL NEW MEXICO

Excavations at LA-2091, a thirteenth century pueblo in central New Mexico, show that change to puebloan
architecture during this time period is associated with greater reliance on agricultural production. It is
proposed that this change in economic organization altered the cultural perception of environmental
conditions, affecting the definition of local resource stress as well as the utility of prior adaptive strategies
for coping with that stress. During this time period, previously established social contacts (and ceramic
exchanges ) with groups in the Sierra Blanca region are supplemented by increased contact with groups in
additional areas, particularly the Rio Grande region.

Ravesloot, J. (see Simon, A.) [42]

Ravesloot, Jobn C. (Gila River Indian Community)

[85] ARCHITECTURAL PLANNING AND DESIGN: SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS SYMBOLS OF POWER
AT CASAS GRANDES

The prehistoric site of Casas Grandes located in northern Chihuahua, Mexico, is presumed to have served
as the focal point of a complex regional system during the Medio period (A.D. 1200 to 1450) where political,
economic, and religious activities were coordinated. The city's plan which included the construction of
public, domestic, and religious architecture suggests a carefully thought out and controlled architectural
design. This paper discusses how the Casas Grandes clite used architecture, in particular the placement and
design of the mortuary complex and other religious structures, to communicate and legitimize ideas about
the social order to the local populace.

Raymond, Christopber B. (Kansas) and R. Jeffrey Frost (State Historical Society of Wisconsin)
[32] STONE TOOLS AND ASSOCIATED MATERIALS AT THE RIVAS SITE

While the Rivas site has spectacular architecture and an inventory of ceramics, including a high proportion
of fancy wares, the stone tool assemblage is not impressive at first view. Chipped stone tool remains are
crude in manufacturing techniques while ground stone tools are few in number. However, these patterns

e reflect distinct adaptive strategies of tropical forest cultures as well as the unique activities that occurred
in the monumental sector of the site. The nature of the Rivas stone tool assemblage, variability in its
characteristics, and implications for the understanding of Rivas society and culture will be explored in this
presentation.

Read, Dwight (California-Los Angeles)
[96] WHAT DO WE NEED TO KNOW TO DO QUANTITATIVE ARCHAEOLOGY?

The cultural materialist framework assumes the answer to understanding the past lies in external relation-
ships framed in terms of universal concepts such as rationality and optimality, The contextual, interpretive
framework finds importance in the particularistic, symbolic framing of internal relationships. These perspec:
tives find convergence in a properly framed quantitative archacology. The quantitative approach requires
homogenious data sets, which reflect the particular distinctions imposed on a continuous, natural world by
a given group. What are those imposed, context specific relationships, and how do they map onto objects?
An approach to this question, based on classification of utilized flakes, will be presented.

Reanier, Richard E. (Reanier & Associates), Daniel H. Mann (Alaska-Fairbanks), and
Michael L. Kunz (Bureau of Land Management)
[74] ARCTIC PALEOINDIANS AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE

The recently documented Northern Paleoindian presence at the Mesa site in arctic Alaska has led to a
re-examination of the potential effects of climate and environmental change on these carly cultures. Using
palynological, plant macrofossil, geological, and ice core data, this paper reviews evidence for rapid climatic
and environmental change in the region during the Paleoindian period, and summarizes new lines of evidence
being gathered by the Mesa Project. The chronologies of the paleoenvironmental and archaeological records
, Reese-Taylor, K., D. Walker, F. Valdez, Jr., and K. Liss 117
@t compared in order to demonstrate possible environmental constraints on high-latirude human occupation
@t the Picistocene/Holocene boundary.
@echtman, Robert (California State-Dominguez Hills)
94) FIIAN ARCHAEOLOGY AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF VILLAGE-LEVEL SOCIAL
HIERARCHIES
Ethnohistorical information in conjunction with archacological data recovered from the excavation of
ewe fortified villages on Wakaya Island, Fiji are used to assess material and organizational correlates of social
cank The correlates include the organization of village space, a housing hierarchy, and a hierarchy in
mortuary ritual. Such hierarchies are identified, reflecting the existence of multiple levels within the society.
Uferther suggest that the spatial relations documented in the archacological record represent and reproduce
te social relations that existed among the village residents.
Bedding, Richard W. (Michigan)
4) THE ORIGIN OF FOOD PRODUCTION IN ANATOLIA: A TEST OF “FOREIGN” IDEAS
During the last ten years considerations of the origin of food production in the Middle East have focused
= data from the Levant. Recent excavations in Anatolia have provided a new data sect to examine some of
Ge ideas about the process of and explanations for the origin of food production. The Anatolian data are
== important rest set because the environment differs from that of most of the Levant. The Anatolian data
seovide insight on the relation of sedentism to food production and the function of domesticates in the
eartiest phases of this important shift in human subsistence behavior.
@edman, Charles L. (Arizona State) | Discussant 26]
@edman, Charles L. (Arizona State)
6] DECISION-MAKING, COMPLEX SOCIETIES, AND ENVIRONMENTAL IMPOVERISHMENT
Archacological information from several regions of the world is reviewed as it informs on human impact
= the environment. The late prehistoric Southwest and carly historic period in Mesopotamia are discussed
@ detail in an attempt to formulate general propositions relating to decision-making within a complex
secety and impacts to the surrounding environment.
Redman, Charles L. (Arizona State)
39] INTRODUCTION TO THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF GLOBAL CHANGE
Redmond, Louis A. (Nebraska National Forest) |Forum Participant 95}
Reed. D. (see Merriwetber, D.) | 106)
Reed, D. (see Whittington, S.) | 106|
eed, Paul (Navajo Nation Archaeology Department)
a) THE COVE COMMUNITY: A PUEBLO I-Il ANASAZI SETTLEMENT IN RED VALLEY,
NORTHEASTERN ARIZONA 4
@esearch undertaken in conjunction with the Cove-Red Valley Archaeological Project in northeastern
‘emona has revealed the presence of a large Anasazi community. The community dates to the Pueblo I-1
pened, encompasses at least 40 distinct habitation structures, and is centered on a Great House and Great
Sa. This community, henceforth known as the Cove Community, is unique given its isolated location
emween the Lukachukai and Carrizo mountains. This paper characterizes the Cove Community and places
© wethin a cultural, economic, and sociopolitical context vis-a-vis other Anasazi communities and Chacoan
Detliers of the San Juan Basin,
Reese, R. (see Rowe, M.) | 103) }
@eese-Taylor, K. (see Walker, D.) | 10)
'
@eese-Taylor, Kathryn (Texas-Austin), Debra Walker (Florida International), Fred Valdez,
» (Texas-Austin), and Kenneth Liss (Minnesota)
4] EVIDENCE FOR A SYMBOLIC BALLCOURT AT CERROS, BELIZE
Recent excavations from the site of Cerros revealed a miniature ballcourt on the central plaza. Because
@ & size, the ballgame could not have been played on this diminutive ballcourt. Therefore, we explore
@emnate functions related to symbolic interpretations. Metaphorical references to raised fields and clefts
® mountains place the Cerros ballcourt within the prevailing Mesoamerican cosmology, Archaeological
seeiience indicates that the balicourt may have directed the flow of traffic during ritual processions. In
whdition, data suggest that all ballcourts at Cerros may have channeled the flow of water from the interior
@ the civic center to the surrounding drainage canal.
, 118 Regan, Marcia, Joel D. Irish, and Christy G. Turner, II
Regan, Marcia (Arizona State), Joel D. Irish (Arizona State), and Christy G, Turner, I
(Arizona State)
[98] SKELETAL AND DENTAL INDICATORS OF HEALTH AMONG THE SALADO FROM TONTO
BASIN, ARIZONA
Preliminary skeletal and dental analyses of human remains recovered near Roosevelt Lake, Arizona, imply
that the —prchistoric Salado enjoyed superior health relative to other contemporary Southwest populations.
Comparatively low occurrences of cribra orbitalia, porotic hyperostosis, dental caries, calculus deposition,
enamel hypoplasia, and alveolar resorption suggest that the Salado had a well-balanced diet, perhaps consisting
of large amounts of wild foods (¢.g., game and native plants ) in addition to maize. Relatively tall adult stature
also indicates good (childhood ) nutrition. These findings support the concept of the Tonto Basin as an area
rich in natural resources and agricultural potential.
Reid, Dawn M.
[5] SACBEOB (ROADWAYS) AND INTERACTION IN THE NORTHERN MAYA LOWLANDS: INITIAL
INVESTIGATIONS IN THE YALAHAU REGION
Maya sacheob, or roadways, are extremely important in the reconstruction of political systems in the
Northern lowlands of Mexico, where inscriptions describing alliances are scarce. Investigations at the Early
Classic site of Naranjal revealed both inter- and intra-site roadways, which are described and compared to
others in the region. Evidence of a political hierarchy within the site and interaction with neighboring sites
and centers in the northern lowlands is discussed.
Reid, J. (see Montgomery, B.) |42|
Reilly, Frank K., [lI (Southwest Texas State)
[55] COSMOLOGY AND POLITICAL POWER WITHIN THE OTOMANGUEAN AREAS OF THE
MIDDLE FORMATIVE MEXICAN HIGHLANDS
The artifacts, symbols, and motifs created in the Olmec style during the Middle Formative Period should
be classified as ritual objects that functioned in a geographically dispersed ceremonial complex, This Middle
Formative Ceremonial Complex (MFCC) is defined as the shared thematic focus through which ideology
and rulership were visually expressed throughout Middie Formative Mesoamerica. The symbols incised on
a green stone figure from the Oaxaca area clearly demonstrates that the Otomangucan speaking peoples of
the Mexican highlands contributed significantly to the development of both the art and ideology of the
Middle Formative Ceremonial Complex.
Reinbard, Karl (Nebraska) and Jobn Dendy (Washington Untversity)
[22] DIET AND DISEASE AMONG THE CHINCHORRO: COPROLITE EVIDENCE
Previous analysis of Chinchorro diet indicated that this culture was almost exclusively marine dependent.
Analysis of coprolites recovered from mummics shows that although marine dependent for animal protein,
_the Chinchorro had a well-developed, broad-scale foraging strategy for wild plants. This aspect of subsistence
had not previously been detailed. The dependence on marine fish resulted in parasitism with Dipbyllobo-
: thrium pacificum, a fish tapeworm.
Reitz, Elizabeth (Georgia) and Elizabeth S. Wing (Florida)
[65] RICE RATS OF THE NORTHERN LESSER ANTILLES
Rice rats, Oryzomyine, were intensively exploited in the Lesser Antilles during prehistoric times, though
they are now extinct throughout the West Indies. Comparison of the relative abundance of rice rats in
assemblages, measurements of skeletal elements, and estimates of individuals’ ages provide insights into the
importance of this resource. Particular emphasis is placed on the relationship between size and the intensity
of predation on these density-dependent rodents. Evidence for the transport and management of this resource
will also be presented. This research is based on faunal samples from the following islands: Montserrat, St
Martin, St. Eustatius, Nevis, and St. Kitts.
Renken, L. (see Creamer, W.) |58|
Rhodd, Benjamin (State of South Dakota Archaeological Research Center) |Forum Participant 95}
Rhode, David (Desert Research Institute)
[37] OBSIDIAN STUDIES AT YUCCA MOUNTAIN, NEVADA: SOURCING AND REGIONAL
CHRONOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
Obsidian artifacts from Yucca Mountain, Nevada, are used (0 examine diachronic regional patterns of
artifact transport and chronology of landscape use. Eight known obsidian sources are represented: most
obsidian was obtained locally, but some came from sources several hundred km distant. The greatest diversity
of sources is from Early and Middle Archaic contexts; Late Archaic artifacts are almost exclusively locally
derived. Chronology of regional landscape use is developed using obsidian hydration. An important constraint
, Riseman, William 119
© the temporal resolution attainable by this method. Measurement of variables relevant to hydration rate
allows estimation of the temporal resolution possibic.
Rice, Don S. (Southern Illinois University)
(89) THE HUMAN IMPACT ON LOWLAND MESOAMERICAN ENVIRONMENTS
The population history of the Mesoamerican lowlands provides a rich foundation for study of the human
ele in environmental change. Al several important chronological junctures it is possible to chart the impact
ef colonization and later population growth on biodiversity throughout the region. The implications of
seadying long-term human impact on the environment are significant to a variety of biodiversity studics
earrently underway. The results of archacological work indicate direct and sustained human modification
of entire ecosystems. These results will require biologists to modify their models of floral and faunal diversity
and interaction.
Rice, G. (see Jacobs, D.) | 26|
Bice. G. (see Lincoln, T.) |50)
Bice, Glen (Arizona State) and David Jacobs (Arizona State)
58] SALADO PLATFORM MOUNDS AND SETTLEMENT NETWORKS IN CENTRAL ARIZONA
Setticment pattern data are used to estimate changes in the size and organization of the prehistoric Salado
‘= AD. 1270 to 1450) population in Tonto Basin, Arizona. Salado platform mounds functioned as centers
Se werworks of related settlements. Of about a dozen networks in the valley, three were particularly successful
vough time. These three mound centers were rebuilt and expanded, and large satellite communities were
esmablished in the surrounding areas. Elsewhere networks collapsed into single, large communities or were
sempletely abandoned. Explanations are sought for the success of some networks and the apparent abandon-
wae of others.
B@ichards, R. (see Stafford, C.) (97)
@icklis, Robert A. (Coastal Archaeological Research)
2] TRACKING THE EFFECTS OF SEA LEVEL CHANGE ON BIOTIC ECOSYSTEMS AND HUMAN
ADAPTATIONS ON THE TEXAS GULF COAST
The chronology of stratigraphically discrete shell midden components on the central Texas Coast suggests
‘Ge the region saw three major periods of human occupation and exploitation of shoreline resources: ca.
400-7000 B.P., 5900-4200 B.P. and after 3000 B.P. These periods correspond to times of postulated
Webocenc sea level stillstand, whereas the intervening periods correspond to times of rapidly rising sea level,
eetulated independently on the basis of geologic data. Drawing upon fundamental biophysical principles of
ssmarine ecology, it is inferred that rapidly rising sea level adversely affected estuarine productivity, rendering
Seestal estuaries unattractive for human occupation.
@icks, Mary F. (Portland State)
1) ROCK ART AS ARTIFACT: THE WARNER VALLEY ROCK ART INVENTORY
Warner Valley, Oregon offers an exceptional laboratory, for the study of Northern Great Basin rock art.
“data base, incorporating information about rock art anf its archacological context in 150 valley sites,
lees rock art to be treated as artifact. The data base facilitates analysis of spatial distribution of rock art
e®es and design styles, and allows examination of relationships between rock art and other artifacts within
Ge sites. Rock art is most dense and most diverse in sites which appear to have been occupied by relatively
Seper groups over extended time periods, and usually appeag to serve a public function.
‘Rindos, David
7] MODELING COLONIZATION: ADAPTATION, VARIABILITY, AND CULTURAL CHANGE IN
AMERICA AND SAHUL
The mode and tempo of the initial human colonization of continental regions is a controversial topic in
echacology. A Darwinian model is developed which reconsiders colonization in a unified manner. I suggest
at selection would favor demes with subsistence strategy leading to low extractive rates and, hence, low
sealized environmental carrying capacities, This strategy would have btought about fast colonization. The
model, developed for the Pleistocene colonization of Sahul, is tested against data from Clovis Period North
weectica, where temporal imprecision is substantially smaller and the speed of colonization may be considered
@emg with modes of adaptation.
Pingle, W. (see Hanson, C.) |76}
Bingle, William (Davidson College) | Discussant 5)
@ieman, William (William Riseman Associates)
7] }-D COMPUTER RECONSTRUCTIONS: CREATING VIRTUAL ANCIENT BUILT ENVIRONMENTS
This demonstration is intended to demystify the use of computer-aided visualization techniques in archacol-
ey. Among the techniques to be discussed are: scanning, tracing, and enhancing photographs, 3-D vector
, 120 Ritter, Eric
modeling; and 3-D solid model rendering. The presentation will focus on the ancient cultural landscapes
of Egypt and Nubia, and conclude with an animated and interactive, 3-D computer-generated, virtual ancient
built environment.

Ritter, Eric (Bureau of Land Management)

[57] EXPLAINING REGIONAL DIFFERENTIATION IN CENTRAL BAJA CALIFORNIA'S ROCK ART

Ethnographically the Central Desert of Baja California, Mexico was occupied by the Cochimi who linguisti-
cally have been divided into northern and southern dialectal regions. Late prehistoric pictograph motif
complexes, probably manufactured by proto-Cochimi peoples, appear to vary by dialectal region with the
naturalistic Great Mural art found to the south and the Northern Baja California Abstract art occurring in
the north, This separation of style and context in the principal central peninsula rock art is hypothesized
as an outgrowth of internal societal variation and changes in demography and mobility/residence patterns
berween related peoples of relatively richer (south) and poorer (north) upland resource zones.

Robb, Jobn E. (Michigan)
[91] EVOLUTIONARY CONSEQUENCES OF A SYMBOLIC CURRENCY: THE CASE OF LATE
NEOLITHIC ITALY

In Tribal social dynamics, what is critical is not prestige per se but rather its symbolic organization. The
formation of a “symbolic currency,” symbolically interdependent with ideologies of gender and personal
identity and generalized to apply to multiple situations, is a key threshold between Great Man to Big Man
societies. In Late Neolithic-Bronze Age Italy, a symbolic currency based upon male gender ideology provided
new motivations for exchange and production intensification, linked individuals in new group formations,
and made possible new settlement systems. The resulting interconvertibility of prestige from varicd activities
also allowed the rise of centrally placed social brokers.

Robertson, lan G. (Arizona State)
[63] GIS-ASSISTED ANALYSIS OF TEOTIHUACAN DATA

Spatial, artifactual, and architectural information gencrated in the 1960s by René Millon's intensive survey
of the prehispanic urban center of Teotihuacan have been integrated in a commercial GIS program called
MapInfo. Analyses of the new data base have so far concentrated on the use of Empirical Bayesian statistical
methods to refine intrasite frequency estimates of diagnostic ceramics, including Thin Orange ware, and
especially where small assemblages are involved. MapIinfo's graphic display methods are allowing us to make
rapid, preliminary assessments of a variety of new hypotheses, with a degree of spatial resolution that has
not been previously available.

Robinson, C. (see Breternitz, C.) |7|
Rogers, Anne F. (Western Carolina University) and Jane L. Brown (Western Carolina
University)
[35] RANGE AND VARIABILITY IN HISTORIC ARTIFACTS FROM THE PEACHTREE MOUND AND

: VILLAGE SITE (31CE1)

Re-analysis of artifacts excavated in 1933-34 at the Peachtree Mound and Village site (31CE1 ) has provided —
new insight into the range and variability of materials recovered there. Artifacts which date from historic —
times include objects of both Native American and European manufacture. Among these are utilitarian, —
decorative, and ceremonial artifacts, extending in temporal assignment from the carly Contact period through —
the time of Removal. This re-analysis has provided a better understanding of the role of this site in historic
as well as prehistoric times,

Rogers, J. D. (see Goodman, D.) (63)
Rogers, J. D. (see Nishimura, Y.) (63)

Rolett, Barry (Hawaii), Eric Conte (Universite Francaise du Pacifique), and Erik Peartbree
(Hawati)

[6] PATTERNS AND PROCESSES OF PREHISTORIC MARQUESAN VOYAGING |

Located near the limits of human dispersal into the Pacific Ocean, the Marquesas are among the most —
geographically isolated islands in the world. Polynesian navigators eminently skilled in long-distance voyaging
settled the Marquesas ca. 2000 B.P. but voyaging canoes and traditions had nearly vanished by Captain
Cook's arrival in 1774, Prehistorians infer that voyaging spheres contracted through time but lack the —
archacological evidence needed to test this hypothesis. This study presents results for X-ray fluorescence
analysis of lithic artifacts from recent excavations in the Marquesas, providing the first empirical data
documenting processes and patterns of prehistoric interisland exchange.
Roosevelt, Anna (Field Museum of Natural History) (Discussant 81|
, Roveland, B. 121
Roosevelt, Anna (Field Museum of Natural History)
159] THE RISE OF VILLAGE LIFE IN AMAZONIA

Village life appears to have begun early along rivers, Foragers migrated in about 11,000 B.P. and left
Searths, finely flaked points and scrapers, paintings, fruit pits, and rare fishbones and shells in caves. About
7500 B.P., foragers intensified fishing and shelifishing. Their settlements have post-structures and hearths
and large heaps of shells and fishbones, Among their artifacts are pottery vessels, worked bones and shells, and
stone flakes. Later peoples further intensified foraging, took up cultivation, claborated crafts, and established
eemetcrics, population centers, and mounds in some areas.
Root, M. (see Abler, S.) (97|
Rosales-Lépez, Alfonso (Centro Regional del Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia)
and Harumi Fujita (Centro Regional del Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia)
)57] EVIDENCE FOR CHANGING SUBSISTENCE STRATEGIES AT ENSENADA LOS ARIPES, BAJA

CALIFORNIA SUR, MEXICO

in 1992, investigations were carried out at the site of Ensenada Los Aripes located along La Paz Bay, Baja
California Sur, Mexico. Excavation data indicate two periods of site occupation with distinct subsistence
@rategies. The first, 4000-2200 B.P., was oricnted primarily towards the exploitation of terrestrial resources
while the second, 2200 B.P.-1700 A_D., was directed mainly towards the collection of shellfish. Evidence is
ao presented for climatic changes over the last 18,000 years that have been inferred from an analysis of
segional geomorphology. A previously unknown burial type for Baja California will also be reported.
Bese, Jobn R. (see Hammond, N.) |60|
Rosenberg, Michael (Delaware)
14) HALLAN CEMI AND LATE 11TH MILLENNIUM SETTLED VILLAGE LIFE ALONG THE TAURUS-

ZAGROS FLANKS

Three seasons (1991-1993) of excavation at Hallan Cemi have produced a body of data pertaining to
catty settled village life in eastern Anatolia that is considerably at odds with prior expectations. The data
weggcst that fully sedentary socicties, dependent on only wild resources, existed along the Upper Tigris
@ainage at least as carly as the mid-11th millennium B.P. Moreover, the emerging picture is that these
secietics exhibited a remarkable degree of social complexity in the context of a cultural tradition quite
w@etependenr of that which gave rise to the Levantine Neolithic cultures.
@emb, Barbara (Tierra Services)
th) SEDENTARY PERIOD HOHOKAM OCCUPATION OF NONRIVERINE ENVIRONMENTS IN THE

TUCSON BASIN

Much of what we known about the Sedentary Period Hohokam is derived from sites located along the
q@umjor desert waterways. However, recent surveys and excavations in the Tucson Basin have documented
= sbstantial Sedentary Period ( Rincon phasc ) presence in nonriverine settings, specifically the upper bajada
ren Seer reer recheck cect ees eee
eecupation of nonriverine environments in terms of existing -subsistence models, It is argued
Gat these data must be considered in any discussion of the changes that occurred in the Hohokam region
@ering the Sedentary Period.
Bethman, Mitchell S. (Widener University) ‘
124] THE VIEW FROM THE HIGHLAND BORDER LANDS

Our understanding of Cultural Evolution in the Middle East has been determined by developments in the
eptimal agricultural zones of the southern alluvium and the open steppes of Mesopotamia. However, the
sow pronc and agriculturally marginal high mountain zones of eastern Turkey surrounding Lake Vamwere
tSerderiands to four of the great culture areas of the ancient Middle East: Mesopotamia, Central Anatolia,
western Iran and Trans-Caucasia. This paper will discuss the interaction of these culture areas and, as
S=portantly, developments in these borderlands from the 3rd to ist millennia B.C., based on new survey
on
@oush, Laura
) FISH PROCESSING AT XALTOCAN: AN ETHNOARCHAEOLOGICAL STUDY

During the twentieth century, residents of Xaltocan witnessed the desiccation of their lake, Still, many
persue livelihoods bound up with the lake. At present, roughly half the village’s households acquire and
process lacustrine foods, adjusting techniques handed down possibly from prehispanic times. This paper
wl describe the methods used recently to process fish, shrimp, frogs, algac, and aquatic insects in Xaltocan
aed neighboring villages, along with some local accounts of pre-drainage techniques.
Boweland, B. (see Brennan, S.) |34|
, 122 Roveland, Blythe E.
Roveland, Blythe E, (Massachusetts-Amberst)
[34] IMAGINING PALEOLITHIC CHILDREN THROUGH FICTION
Archaeologists have rarely made the study of children in the past a research priority, On the other hand,
and not surprisingly, writers and illustrators of juvenile prehistoric fiction have included children in their
visualizations of the past. This paper presents the results of a survey of juvenile fiction with palcolithic
themes in which children are featured in pivotal roles. | argue that fiction, as one medium through which
children “learn” about prehistory, merits serious consideration. Furthermore, fiction may provide useful
lessons for archacologists by helping us imagine and reconstruct pasts in which children as well as adults
were active participants.
Rowe, Marvin W. (Texas A&M University), Marian Hyman (Texas AGM University), Ronnie L.
Reese (Texas AGM University), James N. Derr (Texas AGM University), and Scott K. Davis
(Texas AGM University)
[103] ANCIENT DNA IN TEXAS PICTOGRAPHS
We utilized polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and phylogenetic DNA analysis to aid in the identification
of the organic binders/vehicles used in the 3000—4000 year old pictographs painted on shelter walls in
Seminole Canyon, Texas. Because very little DNA is expected to remain after several millennia, and the
small fraction which does survive will be seriously degraded, the ultra-sensitive method PCR is required.
It amplifies DNA and can produce millions of DNA copies from only a few enduring DNA fragments. The
replicated DNA can then be sequenced and information concerning the source derived. We extracted
ancient DNA from two pictograph samples and subjected it to PCR.
Rowlett, Ralpb M. (Missourt-Columbia)
[34] EARLY LA TENE EAST MARNIAN CHILDREN
The transmission of cultural and learned social behaviors to children occupies a key role in neo-cvolution-
ary processes. Children therefore must be a concern in archacological studies. Juveniles known from
cemeteries and habitations of the La Tene East Marnian Group in northeast France provide interesting
insight into “child culture” in an Lron Age chiefdom society, Social classes are as marked as among adults,
Enculturation into adult roles can be traced in the equipment and toys supplied to children.
Ruble, E. (see Guderjan, T.) |60|
Rudwick, Martin (California-San Diego) |Discussant 40)
Ruff, Christopber (Jobns Hopkins University School of Medicine)
[90] SKELETAL STRUCTURE AND BEHAVIORAL PATTERNS OF PREHISTORIC GREAT BASIN
POPULATIONS
A structural analysis is carried out of prehistoric human long bones recovered from the Great Salt Lake,
Stillwater Marsh and Malheur Lake regions of the Great Basin. Bone cross-sectional properties of 67 individuals
were Obtained through CT scanning and analyzed using enginecring principles. Measures of articular size —
and other structural dimensions were also collected. Results are compared between regions and with samples
‘ of Amerindians from other regions and subsistence types. All three Great Basin samples group best with
hunter-gatherers in terms of mobility and sexual division of labor, and show evidence of a rigorous, demanding
lifestyle.
Rubl, Donna (Florida)
[101] FROM APALACHEE TO GUALE: SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES IN THE
ARCHAEOBOTANY OF THE MISSIONS OF SPANISH FLORIDA
Archaeobotanical assemblages generated from seventeenth century Spanish missions and associated Native
American villages have revealed an admixture of Old and New World plant foods, continued use of certain
“special” plants for religious and daily purposes by cach group, and possibly additional native plant husbandry
practices not previously validated by Historic or archacological data. Ongoing research indicates some
similarities of plants utilized at Spanish Mission sites across La Florida but differences in quantities and
overall assemblages are beginning to reveal disparities between the missions and villages of western Apalachee
and the eastern provinces of Guale and Timucua. Both lean and prosperous periods/missions have been
indicated temporally and topographically for the Missions of Spanish Florida.
Ruscavage-Barz, Samantha (Washington State)
[80] GROUND STONE ASSEMBLAGES AS MONITORS OF CHANGING HOHOKAM SUBSISTENCE
STRATEGIES: CONTINUITY AND CHANGE DURING THE TERMINAL CLASSIC PERIOD
The Classic to Post-Classic transition in the Hohokam area appears to be marked by a decrease in
agricultural intensity coupled with an increasing reliance on wild resources. This change in the subsistence
regime may be represented in ground stone assemblages from Classic and Post-Classic Period sites. Certain
technological and morphological characteristics of ground stone objects are indicative of the type of food
|
, Sandweiss, Daniel H. 123
sesources being processed at a given site. With this in mind, Classic Period ground stone assemblages are
examined and contrasted with Pre-Classic assemblages in order to assess the correlation between ground
smome technology/morphology and changing subsistence regimes during the Terminal Classic Period.
B@ussell, G. (see Leonard, B.) (|77|

Sabloff, Jeremy A. (Pittsburgh) {Discussant 93)

Sebloff, Jeremy A. (Pittsburgh) [Forum Participant 13]

Suadler, J. (see Amorosi, T.) [79]

Sebexar, FE. (see Glascock, M.) {19}

Seleado, S. (see Fletcher, L.) (32|

Serewelson, Ann (William Self Associates)

[Sl WHO WERE THE MAYA POTTERS?

This paper examines the characteristics of PreColumbian Maya potters through archaeological evidence
wed ethnographic inference. Were potters primarily female, male or both? Did individual potters join
serkshops, work alone or was pottery manufacture an art involving whole families? Were the characteristics
eed situation of a maker of crude pottery different from that of a maker of ine pottery? Did skilled potters
amt their own pots? Did the dynamics of pottery manufacture change over time? These and other questions
eegerding the make-up of Maya potters will be looked at in this paper.

Seechez, Julia (California-Los Angeles)
WS) POCKET GOPHER DECIDUOUS TEETH: DISTINGUISHING INTRUSIVE REMAINS FROM
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES

Seemature specimens of Pocket gopher (Thomomrys bottae) with deciduous teeth were identified from
eeu prehistoric sites in southern California: Malibu (LAN-264 ) and an undesignated site in Long Beach (TSN
2) Gophers lose their deciduous teeth when they are three weeks old, too young to leave their burrow.
hese tecth are quite different from adult teeth and were unrecognizable to several experienced analysts;
seme were not aware that gophers had deciduous teeth. At this time, no other reports of deciduous gopher
‘ecth arc known from this area. Gophers were used prehistorically for food in this area, and their remains
ee mot assumed to be intrusive, so these teeth have profound implications for how this faunal assemblage,
@® well as furure analyses from this area are viewed.

Seeechez-Garcia, L. (Centro Regional del Instituto Nactional de Antropologia e Historia)
|] RECONSTRUCTED GENETIC RELATIONSHIPS AMONG THE PREHISTORIC GROUPS OF THE
CAPE REGION, BAJA CALIFORNIA SUR, MEXICO

Exhnohistoric sources mention the existence of different linguistic groups inhabiting the Cape region of
Sete California. There exist, however, numerous discrepancies with respect to the number of these groups
eed the degree of their relatedness. Multivariate analysis of osteometric data from skeletal remains recovered
em recent archacological excavations has been carried out RE er eee aera
g@@meng the prehistoric populations of the Cape region. These results and their implications for Baja prehistory
@e presented.

Senders, Donald (J. Paul Getty Trust)
"| THEORETICAL AND COMPUTER-AIDED MODELING OF 4NCIENT BUILT ENVIRONMENTS

Analyses of ancient built environments using methods and theories borrowed from environmental psychol-
ay and semiotics yield unexpected and illuminating results, including insight into past behavior, in turn
generating new hypotheses about the architectural evidence, When coupled with 3-D computer graphics
eechniques, deductions about the past become more plausible and verifiable; behavior is ina
@reec-dimensional spatial environment, and the archacologist experiences complete ideas
qeere intimately than has been permitted by traditional reliance on drawings and photographs. Thus, comput-
er aided visualizations can alter our fundamental preconceptions about thearchacological record and its
emetations.

Sendilin, J. (see Bey, G.) (60
Sendweiss, Daniel H. (Maine)
$65] RITUAL RODENTS: THE GUINEA PIGS OF CHINCHA, PERU

Guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus) play an important role in Andean culture today as they did in the past.
Not only are they highly prized as food; they also serve important functions in curing ceremonies and in
ether rituals. After summarizing the ethnographic and ethnohistoric data on Andean guinea pig use, | will
present the guinea pigs from Lo Demas, Chincha, a late prehispanic fishing village on the south coast of
Peru. The bodies of eight intact or nearly intact guinea pigs were excavated at this site, along with numerous
, 124 Sarris, Apostolos
disarticulated bones and dried Cavia feces. The context and condition of the archacologically recovered
rodent remains indicate their use as food, sacrifices, and diagnostic devices in indigenous medical practice—
all of the roles these animals play today,
Sarris, Apostolos (Hellenic Air Force)
[19] MAGNETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY SURVEYING IN ANCIENT MANTINEIA GREECE

Magnetic susceptibility surveying was part of the different geophysical techniques applied in ancient
Mantineia. The susceptibility “spectrum” was small for all the soil samples collected, most of which consisted
of low frequency dependent SD/MD grains. The low frequency susceptibility map was similar to the map
of the frequency dependent susceptibility. A trend to high values for both variables was shown at the SW
end of the surveyed area, in agreement with the rest of the geophysical maps that indicated an intensive
occupation at this part of the city, Heating experiments in oxygen environment confirmed the above results.
Saul, Frank P.(Medical College of Obio) and Julie Mather Saul (Lucas County Coroner's
Office)
[106] THE PRECLASSIC SKELETONS FROM CUELLO

The Maya site of Cucllo, Belize, has yicided the largest Preclassic skeletal series to date. In addition to
the 122 individuals we described in Cuello, An Early Maya Community in Belize, (edited by Norman
Hammond ), excavations in 1990, 1992, and 1993 have brought the total to approximately 180 individuals,
with almost one-third of these dating to Early/Middle Formative. Although preservation of bones and tecth
at Cuello has been recognized as “the worst ever seen, anywhere”, intensive reconstruction and analysis
has produced useful information on population composition, health status, cultural modifications and burial
practices.
Saul, J. (see Saul, F.) | 106|
Saunders, Rebecca (Loutsiana State)
{101] MODEL BEHAVIOR: EXAMPLES FROM THE MISSION PERIOD IN LA FLORIDA

Beginning in 1968, the Florida Division of Historical Resources sponsored several inspired (but limited)
testing programs of Spanish mission sites in northern Florida. The model of mission period settlement
structure that emerged from those excavations has tended to be imposed rather than tested on subsequently
excavated sites. Previously unreported information on the site settlement plan of the carly 17th century
San Martin mission in Columbia County, Florida, is particularly relevant to this point. Additional information
from two later 17th century missions on Amelia Island, Florida, is also germane. Taken together, the sites
indicate considerable diversity in mission period settlements in both space and time.
Schaefer, Jerry (Brian F. Mooney Associates)
[86] AN UPDATE ON CERAMICS ANALYSIS IN THE COLORADO DESERT

More than a decade of archacological research in the Colorado Desert has transpired since Michael Waters
published his Patayan buff ware ceramic sequence, These new studics provide both substantiation and
revisions to his examination of Malcolm Rogers’ ceramic series and regional type collections. Several new
types and variants of established types are proposed, based on reported dates and geographical distributions
ofknown types. Potential research approaches are also discussed to show how ceramics analysis can address
fundamental questions of chronology, cultural affiliation, mobility, and trade in the Colorado Desert and
lower Colorado River region.
Schafer, David (Massachusetts, Amberst)
[8] ABOVE OR BELOW GROUND RESEARCH DESIGNS? EXAMINING THE OBSIDIAN INDUSTRY AT

XALTOCAN

Lithic data from extensive surface collections and stratigraphic test pits provide insights into some
limitations and benefits of different data gathering methods. The obsidian industry of Xaltocan is examined
for patterns and changes over time and through space. Lithic tool production and use are investigated and
related to the larger economic and social changes that affected this community.
Schalk, Randall (INPOTEC Research) and Clayton G. Lebow (INFOTEC Research)
[83] HOLOCENE LAND-USE SYSTEMS IN NORTH-CENTRAL OREGON

Various models have been proposed to account for the prehistoric transition from mobile to semi-sedentary
systems of land use on the Columbia Plateau. This paper examines the utility of those models in the light
of Pipeline Expansion Project ( PEP ) archacological data from north-central Oregon. The PEP corridor crosses
diverse physiographic zones with high site densitics and considerable variability in site type and setting.
Assemblages recovered from these diverse settings are examined and implications for understanding hunter-
gatherer mobility are discussed.
Schambach, Frank (Arkansas Archeological Survey)
[35] A PROBABLE SPIROAN ENTREPOT IN THE RED RIVER VALLEY IN NORTHEAST TEXAS

There is good circumstantial evidence that the Sanders site, traditionally considered merely a “divergent”
Spiro-related Caddoan site in northeast Texas, was actually an important Red River Valley entrepot operated
, Schneider, Joan S. 125

oy long-distance traders from Spiro. These traders were probably mainly interested in exchanging Middle

Mississippian prestige goods with the Caddo for powerful, locally made, bows of Osage orange or bois d’arc,

which they then traded to Plains tribes for buffalo products.

Scbele, Linda (Texas) (Discussant 55]

Sebaff, Ann M. (California-Berkeley)

[11] NATIVE/RUSSIAN ENCOUNTERS AT FORT ROSS, CALIFORNIA IN (WORLD-SYSTEMS)
PERSPECTIVE

This paper examines the impact of Russian-American Company activities in the carly 19th century on
Native Californians in the Fort Ross region. Pre and post contact periods will be cxamined, focusing on
exchange and continuity in settlement patterns and subsistence activities as evidenced in the archacological
aed ethnohistoric record. A central-based village model will be compared and contrasted to an alternative
core’periphery world-systems model
Sebiffer, Michael (Arizona) and James Skibo (Illinois State)

[71] A BEHAVIORAL MODEL FOR THE ORIGIN OF “STYLISTIC” VARIATION

One of archacology’s long-standing questions concerns the causes of culture-historical distinctivencss—
“syle"—among artifact types having apparently identical techno-functions, Recent approaches to this prob-
tem, based on social-interaction or symbolic models, have not supplied convincing answers. In this paper,
we present another model, arguing that such differences can arise a5 people arrive at different solutions to
oractical, activity-related problems in contexts of varying initial and contingent behavioral-material condi-
sons. The maturation of this perspective has awaited the development of principles on the complicx
selationships between technical choices and performance characteristics now being produced by ethnoar-
ctecologists and, especially, experimental archacology. The behavioral model is illustrated with the clay
cooking pot.

Schild, Romuald (Polish Academy of Sciences)
145] ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE CENTRAL PART OF NORTH EUROPEAN PLAIN AND EASTERN SUB-
BALTICUM BETWEEN 12,000 AND 9,000 B.P.

In the Late Glacial and Early Holocene the North European Plain underwent several profound environmen-
cal changes that deeply affected cultural and demographic systems of the time. The most dramatic shift in the
cultural system happened in the carly Holocene, around 9,600-9,500 B_P_ It was expressed by demographic
movements, basic changes in technologies and raw material economies as well as by the shrinkage of the
setworks of information. A relative stabilization of the system took place at ca. 9,300 BLP.

Seblanger, S. (see Larralde, §.) |33}

Schlanger, Sarab H. (Museum of New Mexico)

[33] FOOD PROCESSING, MEALING ROOMS, AND THE ORGANIZATION OF PREHISTORIC
SOCIETY IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST.

The archacological record of the coevolution of processing technology and agriculture in the prehistoric
Te oe nt ioe Ceara ance plicient Ie ‘cilan sal SHESERiD atabneala ea
foodstuffs subjected to heavy processing. This paper explores the profound implications of another develop-
@ent at the juncture of technology and society: the construction of new rooms entirely devoted to food
processing. These “mealing rooms” come into being when the traditional all-in-one house fissions into a
dedicated food processing room and a “kiva" space for nonsecular actiyitics. Their appearance marks a
fundamental reorganization of workloads, workspaces, and gender relations.
Schmader, Mattbew (Open Space Division, City of Albuquerque)

[103] SPATIAL ANALYSIS OF ROCK ART SITES, PETROGLYPH NATIONAL MONUMENT

Spatial analyses have been used to objectively investigate artifact or site distributions. Although rock art }
studies assume symbols found at sites are internally related, there have been few attempts to quantify these
eelationships. Standard spatial statistics (nearest ncighbor; K-means) have not been satisfactory. Simple
measures of spatial association used to analyze a rock art site will show: (1) some symbol types are found
closer together than other symbols; (2) certain symbol categories are found closer to each other than to
other types. Thus, symbols are meaningfully arranged at sites and differences within and between sites can
be shown through spatial analysis.

Seimeider, J. (see Pinto, D.) |86|

Schneider, Joan S. (California-Riverside)

[33] AN ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE ON THE ORGANIZATION OF PRODUCTION AT ABORIGINAL
MILLING-IMPLEMENT QUARRY SITES

The organization of standardized milling stone and pestle production at Antelope Hill, a large sandstone
milling-implement quarry on the Gila River in southwestern Arizona, is discussed. Locations and types of
, 126 Schoeninger, Margaret
work areas refiect hill topography and accessibility of bedrock. The number of production attempts and
failure and success rates are extrapolated from data gathered within sample tracts. Experimental replication
allows estimates of energy and time expenditures. The great economic importance of Antelope Hill sandstone
tools in Lower Colorado River subsistence systems is suggested in the ethnographic and historical literature.
Thin-section petrography supports long-distance transport of Antelope Hill implements.
Schoeninger, Margaret (Wisconsin)
[90] DIETARY RECONSTRUCTION IN THE PREHISTORIC CARSON DESERT: STABLE CARBON AND
NITROGEN ISOTOPIC ANALYSIS
Samples for stable isotope analysis were taken from thirty-nine human skeletons, seven plants, and twenty
animal skeletons from this wetlands arca within the Great Basin. There was no partitioning according to
site, Sex, or age group, but the range of isotope values (almost 6% in nitrogen and over 4% in carbon)
indicates that these people ate a variety of foods. Indirect evidence suggests that people had distinctly
different dicts at various times throughout the occupation of the area although the general lack of temporal
associations between individuals used in this study does not permit direct assessment of this possibility.
The isotope data do not refute a model suggesting that people remained year round in the vicinity of the
marsh. Pifion, a non local plant analyzed in this study, was probably not a very important food source.
Schoeninger, Margaret (Wisconsin)
[54] PALEOENVIRONMENT RECONSTRUCTION: CONSTRAINTS ON EARLY HOMINID DIETS |
Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope ratios are invaluable probes for reconstructing dicts but the food
items available must be delineated independently. For carly hominids such delineation is limited by the
accuracy of palcoenvironmental reconstructions. These have been based on non-primate faunal composition
often from arcas separate from the hominid fossils, sediment analysis, and temperature estimates from oxygen
stable isotope ratios of carbonates mainly from deep sea ocean cores. Another promising method uses the
oxygen stable isotope ratios in animal bone phosphate. The advantages over other methods are that the
local climate is recorded and the humidity may be estimated in addition to temperature.
Schortman, Edward (Kenyon College) and Patricia A. Urban (Kenyon College)
[29] THOUGHTS ON THE PERIPHERTY: THE IDEOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES OF CORE-
PERIPHERY RELATIONS
The burgeoning archacological literature on core-periphery relations focuses on trade among distinct
polities and the creation of economic dependencies. Generally ignored are the ideological components of
intersocictal contacts. Drawing on data from the Late Classic (A.D. G00-950) Naco valley, NW Honduras
this paper addresses the question of why and under what conditions peripheral elites adopt ritual systems
associated with core rulers and what affects such adoptions have on local dynamics of political competition.
Schreiber, Katharina J.(California-Santa Barbara)
[36] THE EMERGENCE OF SOCIOPOLITICAL COMPLEXITY IN NASCA, PERU: SETTLEMENT
PATTERN EVIDENCE
This poster session presents settlement data from the Nasca region of the south coast of Peru. Maps of
7 settlement distributions are shown for periods beginning in the early horizon and ending with the Inca
occupation. It is seen that there is lite evidence of political centralization in early Nasca times (FIP 2-4).
In Nasca 5 times there was a new trend toward larger sites in newly opened resource zones. In late Nasca
(EIP 6-7) population aggregation and political centralization are evidenced for the first time. Finally, Nasca
society was completely disrupted at about the time that the Wari Empire made its appearance.
Schroth, Adella (California-Riverside)
[61] ARCHAEOMETRIC DATING OF THE PINTO POINT TYPE SITES: IMPLICATIONS FOR GREAT
BASIN PREHISTORY
The results of radiocarbon determinations and obsidian hydration measures for the two Great Basin Pinto
point type sites, the Stahl site at Little Lake and the Pinto Basin sites, are presented. These results are then
compared with other determinations throughout the Great Basin and the implications for the prehistory of
the region are discussed. The use of the Pinto Basin series and the Little Lake series for placing surface sites
in a chronological framework is widespread. The cumulative errors based on the assumed time frames for
the occupations of these sites need to be rectified.
Schuckel, H. (see Dent, R.) [19
Schwartz, Glenn M. (obns Hopkins University)
[73] SPATIAL ANALYSIS OF A THIRD MILLENNIUM SYRIAN VILLAGE
The spatial/functional organization of the village of Tell al-Raga’t level 3 in northeastern Syria, ca. 2600 B.C,
excavated almost in its entirety, is examined with the goal of investigating the socio-cconomic configuration of
a small community during the development of carly urban and state systems. Patterns in the distribution
, ;
Senior, Louise 127
wo architecture, associated installations, and artifacts suggest a dichotomy of social and/or professional groups
© an economically-specialized community, The analysis provides a holistic perspective of the activities of
== entire community, rather than the usual view obtained from a small sample.
Schweger, C. (see McGovern, T.) | 46)
Seow, Barbara G. (Minnesota)
164] THE NORTHERN ISLES AND VIKING MIGRATION

There is a growing body of archacological cvidence for the initial Norse contact with the Northern Isles
@ Scotland, although the historical sources are silent on this period. Using the archaeological material in
eemjunction with linguistic, literary and historical evidence from the period of the medieval Norse earldom
wm Orkney can heip us to investigate a proto-historic example of migration to and settlement in an already
@emupied landscape.

Sebastian, Lynne (State Historic Preservation Division, New Mexico)
5) RELATIONS OF SOCIAL POWER IN CHACOAN SOCIETY

Evolutionary/typological studies of developmental change tend to be ahistorical and atemporal. They
etamine change along one or more organizational dimensions through cross-cultural Comparisons rather
Gham examining change through time in a single historical case. The purpose of such studics is to develop
generalizations about culture change; their ability to explain change in any particular case is extremely
Sited because they do not take into account the historical context and material and social relationships
of that case. This paper attempss to account for sociopolitical change in Chacoan society by examining the
Setory and context of relationships of social power in the prehistoric Southwest,

Seddon, Matthew T. (Chicago) and Jobn Janusek (Chicago)
$43] RECENT RESEARCH ON THE ORGANIZATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION IN THE RIO
CATARI BASIN, BOLIVIA

The organization of agricultural production in the Andean altiplano has recently become the subject of
@mense debate. Intensive excavation and survey was carried out in 1993 in the Rio Catari basin of the
Geirian altiplano with the goal of assessing the relationship between extensive agricultural raised ficlds
seed Tiwanaku and post-Tiwanaku societies in this region. The preliminary results of this investigation shed
Sehr on historical changes in the organization of raised field systems in the Andean altiplano.

Seeman, Mark F. (Kent State), Larry Morris, and Garry L. Summers
88] REFITTING PALEOINDIAN TOOLS FROM NOBLES POND; METHODOLOGICAL LESSONS AND
PROSPECTS.

Nobies Pond ( 33ST357 ) is a large, plow-disturbed carly Paleoindian site in northeastern Ohio. A systematic
rogram for refitting broken tool fragments and debitage recovered from the South Field portion of the site
‘Ses resulted in over 300 successful refits. This paper will discuss comparatively the methods used in refitting,
ed will focus particularly on the importance of systematic evaluation of the sample, and of multiple refit
Skt. The results of the study as they bear on the issues of 10 tool curation, and 2) site structure will be
semmarized and evaluated.

Setiet, Frederic (Southern Methodist University) and George Frison (Wyoming)
774] HELL GAP REVISITED

The Hell Gap site complex is one of the richestgyet least known North American Palcoindian sites.
SEER. in Gard br a ecimk font Uedveceliy od Wredeing acid Warerd Univeshy, (el Cagy yielded a
seecession of Palcoindian occupations, going from Goshen to Lusk (including, Folsom, Midland, Agate Basin,
Well Gap, Alberta, Cody, and Frederick), that helped establish the Paleoindian chrono-cultural sequence of
the High Plains, This paper re-evaluates the cultural sequence originally described by tha excavators through
= Close examination of the field-notes as well as through a lithic analysis.

Semakten, Jr., Holmes | Discussant 65] ‘
Sewtor, Louise (Arizona)
151) BABES IN THE "HOOD: A DISCUSSION OF INFANT AND CHILD BURIAL PRACTICES

Burials of infants and children are frequently encountered during excavations of domestic architecture.
Generally, these finds are thought to be cither iconoclastic or particularistic products of ancient cultures.
Workiwide differential treatment of infant versus adult remains suggests that these practices are neither
eandom nor especially particularistic, Rather, their differential patterning indicates that infants/children
ere not frequently accepted as full members of their communities, Near Eastern, Indian, Classical and
Swuthwestern archacological examples and relevant ethnographic literature on “personhood” are discussed.
Sechacology may thus comment on the “Pro-Choice/Pro-Life" controversy since infant (and fetal) life has
@et been consistently valued until modern times.
, 128 Seymour, Deni
Seymour, Deni (Marish Associates)
[81] BOUNDING ECONOMICALLY COOPERATING GROUPS: THE ORGANIZATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT OF A HOHOKAM COMMUNITY
Communities are composed of different types of economically cooperating social units. Using the prehis-
toric Hohokam as a case study, group boundaries are identified archacologically on the basis of configurations
of intramural space and in the spatial patterning of structures, artifacts, and features, Cooperating groups
are distinguished by the types of activities performed, the size of work groups, and the types and spatial
distinction of use-areas. The reconfiguration of socio-economic boundaries and the incipient development
of economic inequality are visible through changes in group size and storage capacity, formalization of
distinctive residential clusters, proximity to public architecture, and access to valued items.
Sbhackel, Paul (Harpers Ferry National Historical Park)
[62] TRANSFORMING CRAFT TO INDUSTRY: THE MATERIAL CONSEQUENCES OF NEW
SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGIES IN NINETEENTH-CENTURY HARPERS FERRY
The Harpers Ferry armory developed in the first decade of the nineteenth century as a craft-oriented
industry. By the late 1820s new surveillance technologies were introduced that affected both factory work
and domestic life in an attempt to implement a modern industrial order. Factory layout, town plan redesign,
workers’ housing, and everyday domestic consumer goods became more orderly, disciplined, and structured.
This new industrial order and the implementation of new surveillance technologies did not go uncontested
by Harpers Ferry’s residents, Various forms of resistance strategies occurred at the factory and domestic
levels. By the 1840s the craft-oriented society became subordinate to a system of industrial capitalism.
Shafer, H. (see Brewington, R.) |89|
Shafer, Harry J. (Texas AGM University) {Discussant 104]
Shafer, Harry J. (Texas AGM University) and Robbie L. Brewington (Texas AGM University)
[87] THE PRECERAMIC LITHIC ASSEMBLAGE AT COLHA, BELIZE: OPERATION 4046
The technology and assemblage composition of the Preceramic lithic collection from Operation 4046 is
presented. The lithic sample is derived from in situ quarrying of high quality chert. Macro cores, flakes,
and blades dominate the assemblage, but some production of bifaces and unifacial implements occurred at
the quarry location. Comparisons with similar artifact complexes in northern Belize suggest the Colha
assemblage is part of a regional pattern ticd to initial settlements of the lowlands by formative, non-pottery
using peoples. Technological continuities in the lithic assemblage favor the theory that these people were
the ancestors of the ccramic-using Maya.
Shaffer, Brian (North Texas) and Karen M. Gardner (Prewitt and Associates, Inc.)
[72] “KODAK MOMENTS”: POTTERY MOTIFS BY THE MIMBRES PEOPLE, DEPICTING HUMAN
AND ANIMAL INTERACTION
Much of the information on prehistoric animal use must be inferred from archacological deposits. The
< Mimbres-Mogolion of the southwest are known for their claborate pottery, many vessels of which depict
naturalistic motifs. Examination of the more than 6000 Mimbres Archives housed at the Maxwell Museum,
University of New Mexico, and other records revealed less than 60 bowls that depict humans or human
artifacts, and animals together. Of these vessels, very detailed motifs of hunting (tracking, drives, netting),
fishing (weirs, nets, lines), trapping, ceremonies, and domestication are depicted. These vessels represent
the Mimbres’ own documentation of these activities.
Sharp, Nancy (INFOTEC Research)
[83] FAUNAL EXPLOITATION AND LAND-USE PATTERNING ALONG THE PIPELINE CORRIDOR
During the Pipeline Expansion Project, faunal remains were recovered from 120 archaeological sites
along a 1000-mile corridor from Canada to central California. Data recovery excavations from 1991 to 1993
yielded over 79,000 faunal specimens from 39 prehistoric sites in Idaho, Washington, Oregon, and California.
These archaeological faunas show distinct geographic patterning in assemblage size and diversity, which
can be related to predicted regional variation in hunter-gatherer mobility and resource selection.
Shea, Jobn (New York-Stony Brook)
[84] HUNTING TECHNOLOGY IN THE MIDDLE PALEOLITHIC/MIDDLE STONE AGE: AN INTER-
REGIONAL PERSPECTIVE
Pointed stone artifacts from the Levantine Mousterian preserve wear traces and exhibit patterned geo-
graphic variation consistent with their having been used as hafted stone spear points. Points are more
common in assemblages from the arid interior and southern Levant and less common in assemblages from
cooler northern Levant and coastal lowlands. Plausible stone spear points exist in African Middle Stone Age
industries, but European evidence is equivocal until carty Upper Palcolithic times.
, Shott, Michael J. 129
Sbeets, Payson (Colorado) and Monica Barnes (Cornell University)
[48] THE MAIZE CYCLE AT CEREN, EL SALVADOR
The Ceren village’s sudden burial, 1400 years ago, fortuitously preserved evidence of maize from planting,
through storage and processing, to consumption. Ficlds were ridged and drained, and multiple seeds were
planted together. Maize was stored doubled-over in milpas, and in structures. Most metates were clevated
on “horquetas”. Maize was consumed in various ways. This paper describes the full cycle, and compares it
with archaeological, ethnohistorical, and ethnographic data. Clearly maize was the staple, supplying the
majority of calories and contributing to protein and fat needs, yet numerous other domesticated and wild
species were cultivated or collected.
Shennan, Stepben J. (Southampton)
(99] THE EMERGENCE OF STRUCTURE IN REGIONAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISTRIBUTIONS
Patterning in the distributions of artefact attributes is still largely assumed to be a reflection of other
anderlying causal factors, such as ecological variation or social boundaries, While these may certainly be
relevant in particular situations, they represent special cases of a more general phenomenon, the transmission
of cultural information under the influence of the various factors which affect it. Transmission, at least in
son-literate contexts, operates at the level of micro-scale inter-individual interactions which can have self-
organizing propertics at larger spatiotemporal scales. A cellular automotan model is used to explore these
Gsucs.
Sbeppard, Peter (Auckland), Walter Richard (Otago), and Robin Parker (Auckland)
06) LITHIC RAW MATERIAL SOURCING IN THE SOUTHERN COOK ISLANDS
Results of a program of research on the sourcing of lithic materials used to manufacture adzes in the
Seuthern Cook Islands is presented. This includes the characterization of stonc from Rarotonga, Aitutaki,
Attu, Ma’uke and Mitiaro by thin section petrography and wavelength dispersive XRF and the analysis by
amilar means of samples taken from the adze collection of the Cook Islands Museum in Rarotonga. The
emplications of these analyses in respect of prehistoric inter-island voyaging is discussed.
Shick, K. (see Jabren, H.) (25)
Sbifrin, L. (see Abler, S.) (97)
Sbimada, Izumi (Harvard University) and Adriana Maguina (Catholic University of Peru)
115] A NEW VISION OF THE GALLINAZO CULTURE AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO THE MOCHE
CULTURE
Recent data from survey and excavation in the Lambayeque region of the Peruvian North Coast call for
gnificant revision of long-held views of the Gallinazo culture and its relationship with the contemporaneous
Moche based on data from the southern North Coast. The Lambayeque region had a significant Gallinazo
Secupation including various monumental constructions. It coexisted with the northern Moche polity
perhaps into the fifth century A.D. Both polities to have been incorporated into a pan-North Coast
cs actshdished toy fic sedtniza Woche earth tn‘the-ktiah céninry
Shoocongdej, Rasmi (Michigan)
193) COLONIALISM AND NATIONALISM IN SOUTHEAST ASIAN ARCHAEOLOGY VIEWED
THROUGH NATIVE EYES
in Third World Archaeology today, Western Colonialism continues while Native Nationalism is becoming
@ercasingly important. In both cases, the past is used to serve the present. This paper examines the
epistemological underpinning of Colonialism and Nationalism and how these affect the nature of archacologi-
cal research. It suggests that both Colonialism and Nationalism can lead sare ysis enya in
preconceived directions and that both types of bias should be seriously evaluated. M Southeast Asia
provides a good illustration of the problem.
Sbott, Michael (Northern [owa) | Discussant 74] ,
Shott, Michael J. (Nortbern Iowa)
4] CONTINUOUS VARIATION IN POINT SIZE AND FORM; EXAMPLES FROM THE AMERICAN
MIDWEST
Projectile points were more than simple functional devices or markers of ethnic affinity. Their size and
fem were determined, to some extent, by performance requirements like range, accuracy, and delivered
energy. As such requirements Changed continuously, so too could the size and form of projectiles and their
peints. This paper interprets continuous variation in Palco-Indian and Woodland points from the American
Midwest from this perspective, suggesting that major technological transition may have occurred more
@adually than often thought.
, 4 [29] The Maya Lowlands: Pan-Mesoamerican Contacts

failures of efforts to protect archacological resources. Presentations will be followed by discussion including

the participants and the audience.

[29] Symposium: THE MAYA LOWLANDS: PAN-MESOAMERICAN CONTACTS IN THE POST-
TEOTIHUACAN ERA

Focused on the Maya lowlands, this symposium features recent work by American and Mexican archacolo-
gists that integrates new data into the macroscale framework of World Systems Theory. The empirical focus
of this session is the changing panorama of the Mesoamerican world from the decline of Teotihuacan through
the carly Colonial period. Investigations at the pan-Mesoamerican scale are an important step for research
in the Maya lowlands, since they broaden our understanding beyond the traditional site-specific focus that
has long predominated in the area, and add a new perspective that compliments the recent trend towards
regional studies.

[32] Symposium: NEW INSIGHTS INTO SOCIAL COMPLEXITY IN LOWER CENTRAL AMERICA:
THE RIVAS SITE AND ITS NEIGHBORS

Recent research in Lower Central America indicates greater socio-political complexity for some regions
in later prehistory (ca. A.D. 1000-1500) than previously known. Investigations of art, subsistence economics,
settlement patterns, and long distance exchange that include new theoretical and methodological approaches
for many areas of the region have contributed to these new views. This symposium will highlight such
research. Special attention will be given to the Rivas Site, Costa Rica, where the discovery of monumental
architecture and evidence for extensive long distance exchange exemplifies general trends in the greater
region.

[33] Symposium: THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC DIMENSIONS OF PROCESSING IMPLEMENTS AND
GROUND TOOLS: A SYMPOSIUM IN HONOR OF RICHARD B. WOODBURY

Richard B. Woodbury is a pioneer in the archacological interpretation of “ground stone” tools of the
prehistoric Southwest. Building on this foundation of carlier work, this symposium refocuses ground stone
analysis from description to explanation. Except for agricultural dependence, ground stone assemblages
have long been overlooked as indicators of wide-scale socio-economic patterns. Recent work demonstrates
that these artifacts may be used to make broader inferences about regional dynamics, including social
organization, gender relations, and the organization of technology. By including several temporal, geographi-
cal, and cultural settings, these papers demonstrate the possibilities for archacological interpretation based
on the importance of these tools in the culture within which they functioned.

[34] Symposium; PREHISTORY'S CHILDREN AND CHILDREN’S PREHISTORIES

Children are generally neglected in the archacological literature, yet they are significant producers and
consumers of prehistory. This symposium addresses the roles of children as cither agents or audiences.
Some papers consider the ways in which children of the past can be made visible in the archaeological
record. Other contributions examine non-archacological realms (c.g., fiction, primate research ) as vehicles

‘ for imagining the roles of children in the past. Finally, some papers deal with children as consumers of
prehistory by discussing how the past is presented to children in different media.
[38] Sponsored Forum: PRINCIPLES OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL ETHICS (SAA Committee on Ethics
in Archacology)

The Ethics of Archacology Committee was formed in 1991 to review and update the ethics policy of the
Society for American Archaeology. The Committee is dedicated to a process of open discussion that will
encourage wide participation. To facilitate discussion and policy development, the Committee obtained
grants from the National Park Service and the National Science Foundation to sponsor a workshop at the
Cultural Resource Management Policy Institute, University of Nevada-Reno. Eighteen participants represent-
ing a wide range of different backgrounds and viewpoints, attended the three-day event in November, 1993.
During highly productive discussions, the participants developed a series of principles identifying the
stewardship responsibilities of archacologists. These principles are described in position papers. The session
will include comments from four discussants, and invite questions/comments from the membership.

[39] Plenary Symposium: THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF GLOBAL CHANGE

For decades archacologists have devoted considerable effort to exploring the nature of human interaction
with diverse cnvironments. Yet, most archaeologists have neglected to consider their work within the
context of contemporary concerns about deterioration of the global environment. This has contributed to
poor interdisciplinary communication and a tendency to minimize the relevance of long-term human impact
on the environment in the broader arena of biodiversity studies. In the plenary symposium participants
consider the human role in ecosystem change in different regions and the position archacologists should
play in the scientific agendas relating to biodiversity and global change.
, [47] Towards Village Life: Affluent Foragers 5

[40] Symposium: VISUALIZATION IN ARCHAEOLOGY: THE ROLE OF IMAGERY IN
INTERPRETING PAST LIFEWAYS

In recent years there has been an explosion of interest in the different ways in which archacological
knowledge is produced and communicated. One area that has been relatively neglected is the way in which
archaeologists use visual images to present their ideas and arguments. This session will bring together a
range of approaches that examine how our discipline has utilized visual forms of communication. The
subjects being addressed include human evolution, the iconography of indigenous peoples and how that
has shaped archacological illustrations and interpretations, paleolithic archaeology and the archaeology of
architecture.

[41] Symposium: PREHISTORIC UNDERWATER ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES OF THE NORTH
AMERICAN CONTINENTAL SHELF AND NEAR-COASTAL WATERWAYS

Archaeological sites on the continental shelf of North America are critical to better understanding late
Pleistocene and early Holocene populations. Without better representation of currendly inundated coastal
sites dating to these periods, important questions such as the distribution of Pleistocene and carly Holocene
peoples, use of marine resources by coastal groups, and changes in coastal resource-related technologies
will remain unanswered. This symposium brings together site information on inundated land sites from coastal
Florida, British Columbia, and abroad, beginning with a review of current sea level data and presentations on
processes that contribute to the formation of currently inundated sites. Proposals will be made for increasing
communication among the limited number of prehistoric, underwater archacologists on a world-wide scale
to improve information sharing, awareness of common problems, and potential avenues of research.

[42] Symposium: ANTHROPOLOGICAL INTERPRETATIONS FROM ARCHAEOLOGICAL
CERAMIC STUDIES: CASE STUDIES IN PREHISTORIC SOCIAL ORGANIZATION IN THE
AMERICAN SOUTHWEST

Even though ceramic analysis has been de rigueur in the American Southwest for decades, many studies
are now going well beyond the level of classification or provenience determination. Several ongoing projects
have made significant interpretive steps by examining issucs of prehistoric social organization using ccramic
evidence, Case studies from central Arizona and the Colorado Plateau are presented that focus on prehistoric
social relationships in adjacent regions during times of population movement and aggregation (A.D. 1100-
1400). This group of studies has achieved these results because each has established a substantial database
and has integrated data from a suite of complementary research methods.

[45] Sponsored Symposium: THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE PLEISTOCENE-HOLOCENE
TRANSITION IN AFRICA, THE NEAR EAST AND EUROPE (International Quaternary Union-
INQUA)

This symposium will explore the diversity of human responses to the environmental changes between 13-
8 ka B.P., that constituted the Pleistocene-Holocene transition, particularly regarding subsistence stratcgics.
Hominids in Africa, Near East and Europe had adapted to glacial/interglacial transitions before the Oxygen
Ree ee er ers Sree rt ee eee
range of biotopes, at often relatively high populati ; and 3) endowed with complex technologies.
Sweeping fluctuations in the physical landscape and in food resources led to a wide variety of human
reactions. These will be compared on a continental scale, to try to understand causes and Consequences,
including the variable rates and times at which food production was adopted in different regions.

[46] Invited Symposium: PREHISTORIC HUMAN IMPACTS ON THE ENVIRONMENT: A GLOBAL
PERSPECTIVE

Human cultures at different levels of technological and societal development in prehistory had substantial
impacts on their environments resulting in deforestation, loss of habitat, resource , extinctions of
To ae dienes lat atacesncaat slaacheas hv tater anieicgaigeac Bcvioomaantah cael: By contrast,
conservationists and ccological scientists often consider the “natural environment” as pristine prior to
modern degradation and ignore these past impacts. Three issues rom various regions of the world are
examined by interdisciplinary researchers in this symposium: 1) short-term effects and long-term conse-
quences of human-induced prehistoric impacts on the environment; 2) patterns that can be evaluated from
one region to another; and 3) lessons from the past that can be applied to the present and furure.

[47] Symposium: TOWARDS VILLAGE LIFE: AFFLUENT FORAGERS

The most significant transition in the history of human culture was the shift from mobile settlements to
sedentary villages. This transition is often seen among hunters-gatherers in the development of complex
political forms and it is accompanied by a shift from kin-based settlements to multi-kingroup amalgamations
and coalitions. It further witnesses economic shifts such as the intensification of fishing and sea mammal
hunting on the coasts of North America, Peru, and Northern Europe or the intensification of gathering as
seen in the western Great Basin and the Near East. Through an intercontinental and interdisciplinary focus,
, 130 Siegel, Peter E.
Siegel, Peter E. Jobn Milner Associates)
[81] IDEOLOGY AND CULTURE CHANGE: A VIEW FROM THE COMMUNITY

Amerindian settlements in lowland South America are physical models of the cosmos. Social behavior,
political relationships, and activity organization are structured by how the participants interact with and
interpret cosmology. Culture change in the Amazon Basin and the West Indies is rooted in increasingly
asymmetrical power relationships and control over ideology. In this paper, I explore linkages between the
archacological record at the community level and ideology to discuss culture change in the West Indies.
Anthropological theory, cthnohistoric documents, ethnographic observations, and archacological data inform
this analysis.
Stiegel-Causey, D. (see Corbett, D.) [79
Silverman, Helaine (Illinots-Urbana)
[77] COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVES ON THE EARLY INTERMEDIATE PERIOD FROM THE SOUTH

COAST

Dramatic changes occurred in the valicys of the south coast at the end of the Early Horizon, most notably
in Ica, Chincha, and Pisco with the Rio Grande de Nazca lagging far behind in sociopolitical integration and
economic organization. The demise of the Chavin interaction sphere created conditions for competitive
political growth leading to the coalescence of the florescent Paracas-Ocucaje, Paracas-Cavernas, Paracas-
Necropolis (Topara ), Nasca, and still poorly known Carmen social formations, Toward the end of the Early
Intermediate Period the south coast entered and/or was forced into intensive contact with the expanding
Wari state, resulting in new political strategies and cultural reconfigurations.
Simmons, Alan (Nevada-Las Vegas)
[23] SURFACE FRAGMENTS, BURIED HIPPOS

In the Old World, surface information frequently is considered inferior to excavation data. Recently,
however, surveys with careful surface control have led to substantial inferences of past activities. While
this trend is desirable, caution still must be used because correspondence berween surface and subsurface
materials may be illusory. Examples from Cyprus and Jordan show there is no guarantee that buried deposits
can be predicted accurately from surface analysis; therefore, cultural or management conclusions from
surface materials can be misicading. The inferential potential of surface materials must be carefully assessed
and, as discussed, gcoarchacology can aid in these efforts.
Simmons, Scott (Colorado)
[48] CEREMONIALISM AT THE CEREN SITE, EL SALVADOR: THE EVIDENCE FROM STRUCTURE 12

The archacological evidence for ceremonialism or ritual behavior is often clusive. Such is not the case
at the Ceren site. This paper focuses on how artifactual and architectural information on Structure 12
indicate its status as a building with a ritualistic function, The structure contained an unusual assemblage
of artifacts uncharactcristic of those found in domestic house structures. Architectural details are also
indicative of the special function of the building within the community. This paper presents the evidence

. for this belief and explores other archacological and ethnographic information on the relationships among
structures in a community and that community's ceremonial systems.
Simms, Steven R. (Utah State)
[90] FARMERS AND FORAGERS IN THE GREAT SALT LAKE WETLANDS AT THE FREMONT TO
LATE PREHISTORIC TRANSITION

A large archacological data set, innovative artifact analyses, and the recovery/dating of human skcictal
remains of 86 individuals, all from the eastern shores of the Great Salt Lake, Utah, provide context for
bioarchacological studies in this symposium. Interaction with the Northwestern Band of the Shoshoni nation
led to state legislation for reburial in a vault and support for the bioarchacological analyses. Archacology
has focused on mobility and adaptive diversity. The period from A.D. 900-——1600 features a farmer-forager
system of increasing adaptive diversity after A.D, 1000 -1100, By A.D. 1350—1400, farming is abandoned
or rare. Transgressive lake levels by the early 1600s made the locale uninhabitable.
Simon, A. (see Burton, J.) |42|
Simon, Arleyn (Arizona State), Jobn C. Ravesloot (Gila River Indian Community), and James
H. Burton (Wisconsin-Madison)
[42] CERAMIC OFFERINGS IN SALADO BURIALS AND PREHISTORIC SOCIAL STATUS

Archacologists studying prehistoric southwestern burial populations have traditionally assumed that there
is a correlation between the number and types of ceramic vessel accompaniments and the social standing
of personal wealth of the deceased. This direct correlate is an oversimplification and subjective measure
of social differentiation. Alternatively, these vessel accompaniments may represent possessions of the
deceased or gifts from relatives and others with social relationships. A compositional analysis was conducted
, Smith, Kevin P. and John D. Holland 131

of a ceramic assemblage from Salado cemeteries in the Tonto Basin. These results suggest that the pots and

their placement reflect the social relationships of the deceased within the larger community.

Stmon, Brona G. (Massachusetts Historical Commission) | Discussant 3]

Simon, J. (see Dorn, R.) (103)

Sisk, Caleen (Wintu Tribe) [Forum Participant 95]

Sitney, L. (see Blinman, E.) |19|

Skibo, J. (see Schiffer, M.) |71|

Skinner, C. (see Hugbes, R.) [83]

Skinner, C. (see Pettigrew, R.) |83|

Skowronek, Russell K. (Santa Clara University) | Discussant 101 |

Small, David B. (Lebigh University)

§67] PARLOR AND ASSEMBLY: PUBLIC/PRIVATE SPATIAL CHANGE AND THE DYNAMICS OF
SOCIAL NEGOTIATION AT POMPEII

The negotiation of social status within a community often integrates many contexts of social interaction,
making them mutually sensitive to status sceking. A change in one context can engender proportionate
changes in others. Spatial studies offer a unique opportunity to study both specific linked configurations of
eeetexts within identified social strategies and the dynamics of change within these configurations. In
Pompeii the introduction of new people changed the public acgotiation of social status (new hierarchical
sating in public assembly ), which in turn engendered the spatial transformation of more private contexts
of social negotiation within individual houses.

Smith, Adam (Arizona)
151] COMMUNICATIVE SPACES

Present approaches to space consider it an analytical category only in so far as it hosts directed, purposeful
behaviors. This paper argues that the built environment, and the spaces which it defines, communicate
meanings and are thus deeply involved in ideological representations and factional negotiations over political,
economic, and symbolic power. Central to this type of analysis is a consideration of circulation, architectonics
and spatial production, This approach will be illustrated with a discussion of Urartian and Neo-Assyrian
communicative spaces.

Smith, Charlotte A. (ArcbaeoFacts)
167] PREHISPANIC ARCHITECTURE AND SOCIAL ORGANIZATION IN OAXACA

PC-based computer mapping techniques greatly increase our ability to manipulate graphic representations
of architectural features that have been recorded archacologically. Digitized maps readily allow both inter-
cee ne ee ee of
architectural features with traditional structural/fun@ional classifications. With digitized maps, classes of
data can be selectively viewed and maps can be readily rescaled. Maps from a 1990 intensive survey in the
mountains of Oaxaca, Mexico, show how architecture reflects aspects of social organization and settlement
hierarchy. Brief comparisons are made with architectural data from other geographic arcas.

Smith, KC (Museum of Florida History) ‘
[52] CAN'T JUDGE A BOOK BY ITS COVER!

Shortly after its organization, the Formal Education Subcommittee of the SAA Public Education Committee
checaliAdndinhytlacwerkef eabtiarrercierses benobcetaptel ear see ead
ogy education programs and activities. Subcommittee members developed a series of lines that can
be applied to existing resource materials, or to resources in the process of being developed, to determine
whether fundamental concepts of anthropology and archacology, basic educational elements, and required
curriculum components are included. The composition of these guidelines and examples of their application
will be the focus of this presentation, in hopes that archaeologists and educators will derive information
uscful for their own attempts to select and develop teaching materials.

Smith, Kevin P. (Buffalo Museum of Science) and Jobn D. Holland (Buffalo Museum of

Science)

[88] WANDERERS OF THE WETLANDS? THE LATE PLEISTOCENE OCCUPATION OF WESTERN
NEW YORK

The Niagara Frontier region of western New York and adjacent Ontario appears to be unexpectedly rich
in Paleoindian sites, most of which have only been identified in the past ten years. Data obtained from
recent surveys and excavations, coupled with examination of older collections, suggests that Paleoindian
, 132 Smith, L.
occupation and processing sites in this region are strongly associated with the rapidiy-shifting margins of
Late Pleistocene lakes and wetlands. Patterns of Paleoindian settlement distribution, lithic resource utilization,
and typology suggest a strong Early Paleoindian occupation and less evidence for a strong Late Paleoindian
presence
Smith, L. (see Nickens, P.) (35)
Smith, Michael E. (State University of New York-Albany) and Cynthia Heath-Smith (State
University of New York-Albany)
[10] EXCAVATIONS OF AZTEC HOUSES AT YAUTEPEC, MORELOS, MEXICO
Seven houses plus 12 other contexts were excavated in 1993 at the Late Postclassic urban center of
Yautepec, Morelos. This paper describes the excavations and preliminary results of the project, The houses
exhibit great architectural variability, from small structures to large palatial compounds. Their spatial distribu-
tion does not appear to conform to a model of discrete status districts or barrios. Evidence for craft
production is widespread throughout the site (¢.g. obsidian cores, figurine molds, spindle whorts), but we
did not encounter any dense concentrations suggesting workshops. The Yautepec data have implications
for models of Aztec urbanism and sociocconomic organization.
Smyth, Michael P. (Kentucky)
[23] SURFACE ARCHAEOLOGY, SITE ORGANIZATION, AND SAYIL: NEW METHODS FOR
STUDYING MAYA COMMUNITIES
Few studies of surface archacology in the Maya Lowlands have been attempted. It is often argued that
surface vegetation and soil deposition in lowland tropical environments prohibit the recovery of meaningful
surface patterning across site landscapes. Instead, most archacological investigations have focused on archi-
tectural remains to guide excavation strategies. Terminal Classic (A.D. 800-1000) Sayil in northern Yucatan
has recently undergone an intensive site-scale systematic surface-collection. Results show that surface survey
produces representative archaeological data that can reveal significant insights into the activity organization
of Prehispanic Maya communities unattainable by traditional approaches emphasizing architectural mapping
and excavation.
Snarskis, Michael J. (Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture) | Discussant 32|
Sobolik, Kristin D. (Maine)
[65] DIRECT EVIDENCE FOR THE IMPORTANCE OF SMALL ANIMALS TO PREHISTORIC DIETS: A
REVIEW OF COPROLITE STUDIES
Researchers tend to underestimate or ignore the importance of small animals to the prehistoric diet due
to the difficulty of separating cultural from noncultural faunal debris excavated from sites. Human coprolite
analyses indicate prehistoric dietary consumption of small animals. The large number of coprolites analyzed
from North America reveals direct ingestion of smal! animals and indicates that small animal remains from
sites indeed reflect human dietary patterns. The coprolites reveal that reptiles, birds, bats, and a large variety
of rodents were an important and prevalent component of the prehistoric dict.
5 Solimano, Paul (Larson Antbropological/Archaeological Services) and Paula G. Jobnson
(Larson Antbropological/Archaeological Services)
[18] AN OVERVIEW OF THE METRO WEST POINT ARCHAEOLOGICAL PROJECT
In February, 1992 cultural deposits were discovered 15 feet below contemporary sea level at the METRO
West Point Sewage Treatment Plant situated on the north side of Discovery Park in Seattle, Washington.
Data recovery excavations were conducted in the area immediately to accommodate tight construction
schedules. Archaeologists monitoring construction activities over the next year and one-half identified six
additional areas with intact hunter-gatherer materials. Distribution patterns of archacological deposits across
the West Point landform are summarized and approaches to construction monitoring, testing, evaluation,
and data recovery are reviewed.
Spaulding, W. Geoffrey (Dames and Moore)
[75] TOWARD A COMPREHENSIVE UNDERSTANDING OF POSTGLACIAL ENVIRONMENTS IN THE
SOUTHERN GREAT BASIN
Data accumulated as a result of paleoenvironmental investigations in southern Nevada and adjacent regions
have greatly improved our understanding of postglacial environments in the area. These findings include
(1) a chronology of activation and senescence of valley-bottom springs that may be regionally applicable,
(2) conclusive evidence for an arid “Altithermal," between ca. 7,000 and 5,000 BP. and (3) physical and
biotic evidence for increased precipitation during both the Neoglaciation and the Little Ice Age. Assertions
that postglacial climatic change was negligible can be based only on a complacent record, or stem from a
disregard of available data.
Snead, J. (see Kolb, M.) |81|
, Stafford, C. R., R. L. Richards, and C. M. Anslinger 133
Snead, James E. (California-Los Angeles and School of American Research)
[93) “KNOW AMERICA FIRST”: ARCHAEOLOGY AND IDENTITY IN THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST
DURING THE TERRITORIAL PERIOD
The development of archaeology in the American Southwest was strongly conditioned by the complex
sociopolitical environment of the region after 1850. As an ambiguously defined “territory” of the United
States, New Mexico in particular presented circumstances unparalleled elsewhere in the nation. These
included conflicting federal policies, the intellectual colonialism of large Eastern institutions, and the interests
of a small immigrant class seeking legitimacy for its position of dominance over a much larger indigenous
population. This paper examines the role of archacology and archacologists in this nationalistic and regionalis-
tic social climate and its importance for the history of the discipline.
Snider, Julianne (IMinots State Museum)
[69] CONSERVATION OF SUBFOSSIL VERTEBRATE MATERIAL IN SITU AND BEYOND MEZHIRICH
DWELLING #4
Mezhirich Dwelling #4 is predominately subfossil mammoth bone and ivory partially excavated though
left in situ. Subfossil bone, not being fully mineralized, is susceptible to environmentally induced stresses.
Proboscidean elements cxamined include massive and complex, dense compact bone, porous cancellous
tissue, extensive, intra-osteal sinuses, ivory, enamel, dentine, and cementum. The character and composition
of the deposits combined with the conservation materials and facilities available in Ukraine led to some
interesting challenges. Elements remaining semi-in situ have accumulated a patina of dirt obscuring exposed
surfaces and whatever archaeological and taphonomic information those surfaces may hold. Conservation
of these subfossils will allow examination of presently unexposed surfaces and provide new information.
Snow, Elizabeth (Department of Canadian Heritage)
{3] ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT: STRATEGIES FOR THE 21ST CENTURY
Since 1991, a new paradigm has emerged in Canada, at least at the federal level, for the protection and
management of archacological heritage. The new policy environment is requiring federal archaeological
resource managers to adopt new strategies in the face of increased Aboriginal involvement, stakeholder
activism, budget cutbacks, and a new legal framework emerging in Aboriginal claims legislation. Strategies
for repositioning archacological resources within a continuum of cultural and heritage considerations are
discussed.
Snow, Susan (lowa)
[48] CLOUDS, STARS AND CONSTRUCTED IMAGES IN THE NEW WORLD TROPICS
This paper will examine the interrelationship between meteorological and astronomical phenomena in
the cosmology of cultures within the New World Tropics. Specifically, it will look at how related images
and clusters of images are constructed based on these phenomena. Some of the interrelationships are based
on scientific data while others are based on the symbolic interpretation of the different cultures or a
combination of these ideas. The variability of the clusters of constructed images between different cultures
within the New World Tropics will be summarized and discussed in light of the historical relationships
Snyder, D. (see Manson, J.) {102|
Snyder, H. (see Lillios, K.) [91|
Saffer, O. (see Adovasio, J.) (69| '
Soffer, Olga (Illinois) and N.L. Kornietz (Ukranian Academy of Sciences)
[69] MEZHIRICH CA. 15,000 B.P.
scaranapelede iad neem se Mine me emniniita nent ako hath webetrtbese
European Plain. Previous research, focused on the excavation of cultural features, the presence of
four round or oval mammoth-bone dwellings (represented by remains of more than 149 individuals)
surrounded by pits, hearths, and interior and exterior work areas.yOur current work on Dwelling #4 and
its environs is directed towards understanding the human use of the site. including the use or deposition
types of pits. The two types of pits found at the site to date suggest the use of pits to store meat as well as
for garbage dumps.
Stafford, C. Russell (Indiana State), Ronald L. Richards (Indiana State Museum), and C.
Michael Anslinger (Indiana State)
[97] A VIEW OF MIDDLE ARCHAIC FORAGING FROM AN UPLAND BASE CAMP/CEMETERY IN
SOUTHWESTERN INDIANA
Reduced mobility during the Middle Archaic (after 7000 B.P,) in the midcontinental U.S. has often been
linked to an increased use of resource-rich habitats in major river valleys, The Bluegrass site, a base camp
and cemetery occupied between 5300 and 5000 B.P., is in an upland lacustrine plain setting in southwestern
, 134 Stafford, T.
indiana. Analysis of well preserved faunal remains indicates that a diverse set of terrestrial mammals and
birds were exploited. Implications for Middle Archaic dictary models and foraging strategies are discussed.
Stafford, T. (see Coltrain, J.) {54|
Stanish, Charles (Field Museum of Natural History)
[14] THE TITICACA BASIN: LATE-INTERMEDIATE-PERIOD ORGANIZATION FROM A SETTLEMENT
PERSPECTIVE
This paper will assess the impact of Tiwanaku state collapse on local Late-Intermediate-Period population
in the SW Lake Titicaca Basin. Settlement data permit a definition of population changes and political
restructuring in the wake of imperial collapse. | will assess models of migration, internal structural changes,
and secondary state formation for the Lupaga area of southern Peru.
Stark, M. (see Heidke, J.) |42|
Stark, Miriam T. (Arizona)
[12] SPECIALIZED TECHNOLOGY IN SOCIAL CONTEXT: THE POTTERS’ CRAFT IN A KALINGA
VILLAGE
The recent emergence of specialized pottery production in the Kalinga village of Dalupa reflects a dynamic
interaction between social milicu and craft technology. Pottery production for exchange is one economic
solution for houscholds faced with limited economic resources. A nexus of social, economic and political
factors promote productive intensification among some Dalupa potters. This study explores a social environ-
ment which encourages potters to specialize. It also evaluates the material correlates of this system of
intensified production. Product standardization is studied with respect to production scale and intensity in
an ethnoarchacological context, where both behavior and material patterning can be documented.
Standing, M. (see Ball, T.) [25]
Stein, Gil (Northwestern University)
[24] ETHNICITY, EXCHANGE, AND EMULATION: MESOPOTAMIAN-ANATOLIAN INTERACTION AT
HACINEBI, TURKEY
Traditionally, most researchers have interpreted the presence of Uruk style material culrure at Anatolian
sites as evidence for the physical presence of Mesopotamian merchants or colonists in this area during the
fourth millennium B.C. Excavations at the site of Hacinebi, in the Euphrates valicy of southeast Turkey,
allow us to examine this model of interaction between Uruk Mesopotamia and local Anatolian cultures.
Spatial and temporal patterning in the Hacincbi ceramics, lithics, bone, and architecture suggest a more
complex picture in which social processes such as exchange and emulation also affect the composition of
the archacological record.
Stein, Julie K. (Wasbingion)
[92] SHELL MIDDEN STRATIGRAPHY: LINKING LAYERS AND DATA
Shell middens frequently have complex stratigraphy. Changes in artifacts, fauna, and lithology occur, but
4 usually at different stratigraphic boundaries, A technique for analyzing data from stratigraphically complex
sites has been developed for a Northwest Coast shell midden (British Camp 455/24, Washington). The
technique uses Harris matrices to graphically display the depositional units of excavation, linked to a data
spread sheet where is stored all analytical data recorded for the material from the depositional units. The
pluralistic stratigraphic approach is very powerful for tracking and interpreting changes in deposition in
stratigraphically complex sites,
Stepbens, Douglas (Nortbern Arizona University) and Martha Lee (Nortbern Arizona
Untversity)
[70] VISITOR EXPERIENCES AND MOTIVATIONS AT CULTURAL SITES
A sample of visitors at three cultural parks in the southwestern US. were interviewed to determine what
their motives were for visiting and how park attributes affected expericnees being sought. Results show a
diversity regarding public perceptions of cultural resources, Such variability suggest that there is a need
for cultural sites to be managed with concern for a broad spectrum of visitors. We argue that such an
approach would be most effective on an area wide rather than site specific scale.
Stevenson, Christopher M. (Archaeological Services) and Thomas L. Jackson (Biosystems
Anatysis)
[8] ESTIMATION OF HYDRATION RATES FROM CHEMICAL COMPOSITION: A CASE EXAMPLE
FROM XALTOCAN, MEXICO
Recent research has demonstrated a strong relationship between the rate of hydration and hydroxyl (OH)
concentration contained within the obsidian. The ability of this calibration to provide accurate calendar
dates was evaluated with ten radiocarbon dated contexts from the Postclassic site of Xaltocan. Infrared
, Stokes, Robert 135
| spectroscopic analysis was used to determine the OH concentration of obsidian blades identificd through
x-ray fluorescence analysis as originating from the Pachuca source. Results of the IR analysis documented
a small but significant variation in OH concentration. The chronometric obsidian dates from ten radiocarbon
dated contexts showed good agreement with the C'* dates in five cases and supported the ability of current
laboratory methods and calibrations to produce accurate calendar dates.
Stevenson, Joe (Washington State)
[9] PRELIMINARY ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF A CENTRAL AFRICAN TROPICAL
FOREST CAVE: MBUYA RAPIDS CAVE, CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

An archaeological survey conducted in the Central African Republic's tropical forest, near the Lobaye
River, discovered several caves. These caves were tested for archacological significance. One of these caves,
the Mbuya Rapids Cave ( Latitude North three degrees, forty-six hours, zero minutes, Longitude East seventeen
degrees, fifty-one hours, nine point six minutes) provided a substantial number of artifacts, quantities of
charcoal and well preserved faunal remains. These artifacts are thought to represent at least three separate
periods of human occupation, including an lron Age occupation, a Ceramic/lithic occupation and a pre-
ceramic/lithic occupation.

Stewart, Andrew (Royal Ontario Museum)
[104] EFFECT OF FOOD SHORTAGES ON SETTLEMENT PATTERNS AMONG THE CARIBOU INUIT
IN THE CANADIAN ARCTIC

Among interior-<dwelling Caribou [nuit during the 20th century, communal caribou hunting remained a
primary focus of subsistence and seulement organization despite an increase in annual shortfalls of caribou.
Evidence for smaller, more looscly organized fall aggregation sites, less reoccupation of sites, and changes
in spatial association among hunting-related features suggest that regular seasonal aggregations declined in
favor of smaller camps. This conclusion accords with the prediction, based on theory drawn from behavioral
ecology, that independent foraging, involving greater variance in subsistence outcome, replace aggregated
settlement and communal foraging in the context of annual subsistence shortfalls.

Stewart, J. (see Adams, K.) |19|

Stiner, M. (see Kubn, S.) |2|

Stiner, Mary C. (Loyola-Chicago) Stepben Weiner (Weizmann Institute of Science), Ofer Bar-

Yosef (Harvard University), and Steven L. Kubn (Loyola-Chicago)

[19] DIFFERENTIAL BURNING, RECRYSTALIZATION, AND FRAGMENTATION OF
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BONE

The poster presents research on the conditions under which progressive levels of burning may occur on
archaeological bone,and how burning changes bones’ susceptibility to fragmentation. In experimental fires,
bones buried up to 6 cm below firebeds were carbonized, but calcination occurred only with direct exposure
to coals. Analysis of specimens by infrared spectroscopy reveals the changes that accompany macroscopic
transformations, Recrystallization greatly affects, for example, the potential durability of fire-altered bone,
especially in the calcined state. These findings hat implications for the spatial associations of burned
material and the archacological visibility of some types of burning damage overall.

Stokes, Anne (Florida) and William F. Keegan (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[54] STABLE ISOTOPES VERSUS ENVIRONMENTAL ARCHAEOLOGY IN RECONSTRUCTING WEST
INDIAN DIETS '

This study addresses the discrepancies obtained from results of environmental archacological studies and
stable isotope studies of prehistoric human diet. Both human bone collagen, which refiects the origin of
the protein in the diet, and human bone carbonate from apatite, which Se tees cis cae ate
the dict, were analyzed for individuals from several sites in the West Indies. Collagen indicate that
a majority of the protein in the dict was derived from terrestrial sources, However, the carbonate values
indicate that a large proportion of the diet was obtained from a C, plant food.

Stokes, Robert (Eastern New Mexico University)
[36] A CRITICAL LOOK AT MIMBRES-MOGOLLON SETTLEMENT PATTERNING: THE SAPILLO
VALLEY SURVEY PROJECT, 1993

This paper describes the relationship between site location and landform type in the Sapillo Valley,
southwestern New Mexico. The Sapillo Valley is located adjacent to the Mimbres Valicy. A generalized
Mimbres-Mogollon regional settlement pattern has been established that specifies a relationship between
site location and landform type. This model is based on site location data through time from the Mimbres
Valley. The Sapillo data is assessed in terms of the generalized Mimbres-Mogollon settlement model. The
conclusion of this assessment is that, very coarsely, the generalized model fits the Sapillo Valley survey data,
although significant refinements are suggested.
, 136 Stone, Glenn, T. J. Wilkinson, and M. J. Mortimore
Stone, Glenn (Columbia), T. J. Wilkinson (Chicago), and M. J. Mortimore (African Drylands
Research)
[9] REFUSE SCATTER AND AGRICULTURAL INTENSIFICATION: AN ETHNOARCHAEOLOGICAL
EXAMPLE FROM KANO, NIGERIA
A promising indicator of the location and degree of ancient agricultural intensification are artifact scatters
around towns. Wilkinson proposes that urban detritus was incorporated in organic refuse brought from
towns as fertilizer. This very process is described for Kano, a Nigerian city surrounded by highly intensive
farming. Goat and sheep dung, collected from Kano streets along with refuse, is carried by donkey-cart to
farms where it is sold. The loads are then sorted by farmers, leaving distinctive rings of urban refuse in the
countryside, The density of urban refuse declines with distance from Kano.
Stone, Tammy (Colorado-Denver) | Discussant 53]
Stone, Tammy (Colorado-Denver)
[66] SHIFTS IN RESOURCE PROCUREMENT AND REGIONAL ORGANIZATION DURING THE
ARCHAIC PERIOD IN THE HOGBACK VALLEY, COLORADO
The Crescent Rockshelter (5JF148) is located in the Hogback Valley, an intermontane zone west of
Denver, Colorado. The site contains over two meters of deposits representing approximately G000 years
of deposition, beginning with the Late Palcoindian-Early Archaic transition. This paper will discuss the
chipped stone material recovered from deep stratigraphic units with regards to changes in resource procure-
ment strategics through time. This study will aid in understanding the changes in regional organization
patterns that were precipitated by changes in mobility, subsistence patterns, and demographics in the area
over the 6000 years of occupation of the site.
Storck, Peter L. (Royal Ontario Museum), P. Julig (Laurentian University, Sudbury), T.
Anderson (Geological Survey of Canada, Ottawa), P. Barnett (Ontario Geological Survey,
Sudbury), and W. Mabaney (York University, Toronto)
[74] IS THERE A PRE-CLOVIS COMPONENT AT THE SHEGUIANDAH SITE, ONTARIO?—NEW
GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE
The Sheguiandah site on Manitoulin Island, Ontario, was discovered and excavated in the carly 1950s by
Thomas Lee and interpreted to contain two strata of mid-Wisconsinan glacial till with incorporated artifacts
representing human occupation older than 30,000 years. Recent multidisciplinary studies on the site, the
first conducted since Lee's work, indicate that the alleged tills are probably re-worked beach deposits. The
Pleistocene stratigraphy of the region and the clevation of the site suggest that these deposits are of postglacial
age and that the earliest human occupation occurred ca. 9500 years ago by Late Paleoindian peoples.
Storey, Rebecca (Houston)
[106] CHILDREN OF PRIVILEGE AND STRESS IN LATE CLASSIC COPAN
9n-8 is a Late Classic elite compound at Copan, Honduras. The skeletal population included 122 subadults.
Their age distribution of deaths has high proportions from ages 1-9. If this pattern reflects mortality rates, there
9 should be corroborating information from paleopathological indicators. Enamel defects in the deciduous and
permanent dentitions reveal that physiological stress that disturbs normal growth is very common. The ages
at which stress occurred and how these relate to ages at death will be presented. The various implications
of these defects for characterizing child health among the Copan elite before the Classic Maya Collapse will
be discussed.
Stotbert, Karen (Trinity University)
[15] PATTERNS OF PRODUCTION AND EXCHANGE VIEWED FROM THE COLONCHE HILLS OF
SOUTHWEST ECUADOR
New research in a previously unexplored region of Ecuador reveals patterns of community craft specializa-
tion and inter-regional exchange during two prehistoric periods. Interpretations are based on recent excava-
tion in the dry tropical forest of the Colonche Hills, about 40 km inland from the coast. An early (c. 2000
B.P.) Guangala workshop for the manufacture of grindstones is described; and for the late prehistoric period
(c, 1000 to 500 B.P.), large Manteno kilns for the production of domestic pottery are described.
Strand, Jennifer G. (Arizona)
[37] A PRELIMINARY STUDY OF THE POST-PLEISTOCENE DISTRIBUTION OF ABERT'S SQUIRREL
IN THE SOUTHWESTERN UNITED STATES AND THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS
Recently it has been proposed that post-Pleistocene dispersal played an important role in the modern
distribution of ponderosa pine and Abert's squirrel. Archaeological site reports and collections from the
northern region of Abert’s distribution are cxamined to determine if the proposed dispersal is visibic. To
establish identification criteria post-cranial elements from modern Sciurids are examined, measured and the
Wilcoxon test performed. Site records/collections were used to determine their presence geographically and
, Sweeney, Maria T. K., Patty J. Conte, and Michael J. Kolg 137
chronologically, The direction of environmental change indicated may have modified prehistoric subsistence
choices.
Straus, Lawrence (New Mexico)
(45) THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE PLEISTOCENE-HOLOCENE TRANSITION IN SW EUROPE
SW Europe saw great interregional differences in human responses to the environmental changes of the
period between 13-8 ka B.P. In some regions major climatic, vegetative and faunistic disruptions led to abrupt,
stgnificant changes in settlement-subsistence systems. But in Iberia subsistence intensification ( including both
overall diversification and situational specialization, best shown in Cantabria ) began carly (Upper Picnigiacial
and Tardigiacial ) and climatic fluctuations after 16 ka B.P. were relatively attenuated (especially in E. Spain
and Portugal), so that adaptive changes were gradual. In S. France general specialization in herd ungulate
bunting (c.g, rcindecr) and open vegetation conditions ended abruptly, with marked consequences for
humans.
Stright, Melanie J. (Minerals Management Service)
[41] SYNTHESIS OF LATE WISCONSINAN RELATIVE SEA LEVEL DATA FOR NORTH AMERICA: THE
CHANGING SHAPE OF THE PREHISTORIC LANDMASS
The custatic fluctuations and isostatic adjustments caused by the building and waning of the late Wiscon-
sinan glacicrs resulted in a continual shifting of the extent of the North American landmass above sea level.
Questions of prehistoric human migrations, adaptations and subsistence strategies can hardly be addressed
without first considering the total extent of the prehistoric landmass. This paper includes a review of
published relative sca level curves for North America for the period 13,000 B.P, to present. These curves
are used to define the changing coastline of the North American landmass from 13,000 B.P. to present. The
effect of this bias on the archacological record will be discussed.
Strong, D. (see Hilton, M.) |69)|
Stuart, Glen (Arizona State) and Suzanne K. Fish (Arizona)
[98] POLLEN PATTERNS AND REGIONAL SUBSISTENCE IN THE TONTO BASIN
Archacological pollen of cultivated and wild resources exhibits strong horizontal and topographic pattern-
ing across the Tonto Basin in Central Arizona. The data set consists of more than 500 samples that arc well
distributed over time, space, environmental zones and site types. Geographic analysis of results at this scale
represents new methodological challenges in the archacological palynology of the Southwest. Contextual
information is used to evaluate the roll of environmental versus behavioral factors in basin-wide patterns,
such as the concentration of many resource pollen types in valley bottom sites. Conclusions provide an
economic backdrop for processes of aggregation.
Sullivan, A. (see Tolonen, A.) | 23]
Summers, G. (see Seeman, M.) [88]
Sutton, Mark Q. (Colorado State-Bakersfield)
[65] RODENT UTILIZATION IN THE GREAT BASIN: ETHNOGRAPHIC AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL
PERSPECTIVES
Current views of Great Basin cultural ecolog#are heavily influenced by the general anthropological bias
on the importance of large game. As this perspective evolves through diminishing ethnocentrism and
advances in archacological methods and analyses, it is becoming clear that small animals formed a very
significant aspect of the aboriginal dict in the Great Basin (and elsewhere). A review of the ethnographic
and archacological data is presented and it is argueg that rodent use was important throughout the human
occupation of the Great Basin.
Sweely, Tracy (Colorado)
[51] ADVERSE EFFECTS OF A TRADITIONAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE ON PREHISTORIC
CONSTRUCTIONS OF GENDER AND THE POTENTIAL FOR RESOLUTION }
Archaeology developed within an historical context. Researchers using traditional categories have uninten-
tionally biased the representations of prehistoric peoples by overstating the roles of male members while
understating the roles of female members, This approach to &archacological information reflects traditional,
historically constructed “ideals”, and cannot be considered applicable to all prehistoric culrures. I use the case
study, “The Ceren Site” by Payson D. Sheets, to demonstrate the ways this perspective affects archacological
representations of gender. To conclude, | show that the abandonment of this practice is not a problem for
interpretation and can be replaced by a more balanced perspective.
Sweeney, Maria T. K. (Hawai’l-Manoa), Patty J. Conte (State of Hawati Historic Preservation
Division), and Michael J. Kolg (State of Hawaii Historic Preservation Division)
[100] ROLES AND REFLECTIONS: MONUMENTAL ARCHITECTURE AND EXPLANATORY THEORY
IN HAWAIT
The ongoing debate concerning the social role of monumental architecture in Hawaiian society is explored
together with concurrent attempts to employ scientific or evolutionary theory in the study of ritual land-
, 138 Swink, C
scapes. Archacologists have traditionally used monuments as indicators of hegemony and view them :;
expressions of socio-political complexity. They also represent an important link between the past an
present. An environmentally based model to explain the presence and persistence of large-scale structure
across the archipelago is examined using alternative histories derived from cthnohistoric sources.
Swink, C. (see Blinman, E.) |19|
Szuter, Christine (Arizona)
[65] WOMAN THE HUNTRESS
The role of women and children as hunters in the prehistoric record has been overlooked for sever.
reasons, Hunting is often narrowly defined as the actual killing of large game. The importance and significanc
of hunting small game, therefore, are diminished in discussions of subsistence strategies. Hunting involve
more than killing the animal. The supportive activities associated with the hunt, for example, making net
working a drive, processing the animal, often go unnoticed. This paper presents arguments on the role «
women and children in hunting small game in the prehistoric and ethnographic record.
Taborin, Yvette (Université de Paris 1) and Monique Olive (Université de Paris 1)
[16] LITHIC AND SHELL RAW MATERIAL ACQUISITION AT ETIOLLES AND COMPARISON WITH
OTHER GROUPS
The lithic material acquisition system at Etiolles (Esonne, France) is marked by the near presence «
abundant and exceptional flint banks. The limits of the territory visited by the Magdalenian populations :
Eriolles, as well as their movements in this area, can be determined according to the fossil shells they hav
gathered and also the lithic tools that they have taken with them. Etiolles seems to belong to a large
network of Magdalcnian period mobility in the Paris Basin.
Tainter, Joseph (USDA Forest Service) | Discussant 23|
Tankersley, Kenneth (SUNY-Brockport)
[74] 0321.0, SI—CLOVIS MASTICS: A STICKY SUBJECT
Mastics have been found on the haft element of fluted projectile points from a number of Clovis site
in Oregon, Utah, Wyoming. Chemical analysis and high-magnification microscopy have identified sever,
compounds on these artifacts including an amber-like substance, pitch (plant resin), and iron oxide (re
ochre ). Similar compounds have been identified on the haft elements of Early Paleoindian stone tools an
ivory objects in Eastern North America. AMS age determinations on carbon extracted from these artifac
may provide a direct means of chronometrically dating the Eastern Fluted Point Complex.
Tapia-Recillas, Horacio (Universidad Auténoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa) and Emily
McClung de Tapia (Universidad Auténoma Metropolitana de México)
[10] NEW APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN REGIONAL
SETTLEMENT PATTERNS IN THE TEOTIHUACAN VALLEY, MEXICO
Ecological factors have long been a topic of interest insofar as development and decline of Teotihuaca
are concerned. Many of the hypotheses formulated on the basis of intensive survey in the valley surroundin
the urban center can be re-examined in the light of new data and new techniques. Soil profiles in the regio
are studied using GIS techniques and other mathematical approaches, together with new '*C determinatior
in order to better understand the dynamics of geomorphological changes in relation to prehistoric huma
activities.
Taube, K. (see Fedick, S.) |5|
Taube, Karl A. (California-Riverside)
[5] THE MEGALITHIC STYLE OF THE NORTHERN MAYA LOWLANDS: THE MONUMENTAL
ARCHITECTURE OF NARANJAL AND TRES LAGUNAS, QUINTANA ROO
This study examines the important but little studied Early Classic megalithic style of the northern lowland
Although best known for Yucatecan sites of Ake and Izamal, this paper documents the occurrence of th
megalithic style far to the cast, at the sites of Naranjal and Tres Lagunas. The newly documented presenc
of the megalithic style in northwestern Quintana Roo not only reveals its broad distribution, but also reaffirm
and amplifies its distinctive architectural traits. The many striking architectural features shared between th
megalithic sites of Quintana Roo and Yucatan suggest that there was considerable interaction across th
northern peninsula.
Taylor, R.E. (California-Riverside) and Geoffrey Cunnar (Andover Foundation), and
Richard S. McNetsh (Andover Foundation)
[97] CRITICAL EVALUATION OF THE RADIOCARBON CHRONOLOGY AT PENDEJO CAVE, NEW
MEXICO
More than 50 radiocarbon determinations on largely wood and charcoal from a stratified cave deposit :
Pendejo Cave, New Mexico indicate that the age of the sediments ranges from cssentially modern (35
, ‘ Todd, Lawrence 139
As RCY BP.) to at least 55,000 years (greater than 55,000 RCY B.P.). A critical evaluation of the radiocarbon
d evidence in light of geomorphological data will be presented. Also, the results of direct radiocarbon determi-
S nations on materials with unambiguous human attribution from levels currently dated by associated charcoal/
wood radiocarbon determinations in excess of 13,000 RCY B.P. will be presented.
Terrell, Jobn (Field Museum of Natural History)
[79] THE POSTPONED AGENDA: ARCHAEOLOGY AND SCIENCE IN THE 21ST CENTURY
As later reported in Science, the Wenner-Gren Smithsonian Conference on Human Biogeography was
al held exactly twenty years ago in conjunction with the 1974 SAA meetings in Washington, D.C. The conference
c surveyed the application of modern procedures, concepts, and theoretical developments in population
-$ biology and biogeography to the archacological and anthropological study of human populations. Subsequent
s, reactions within anthropology against sociobiology and against science postponed the research agenda of
of human biogeography, The research achievements of the Ficld Museum's 1993-94 A.B. Lewis Expedition to
the North Coast of New Guinea illustrate that it is time to “come on home” to science as a way of looking
at the world.
Thacker, Paul (Soutbern Methodist University)
[16] RAW MATERIAL PROCUREMENT, LITHIC TECHNOLOGY, AND SETTLEMENT PATTERNS:
of APPLYING MODELS OF HUNTER-GATHERER SYSTEMS TO THE UPPER PALEOLITHIC OF
ut PORTUGAL
c Lithic economy can be fully explained only within the broader context of hunter-gatherer subsistence
T systems, This paper tests numerous middle-range expectations regarding mobility and lithic technology
using data from Gravettian and Magdalenian periods in castern Portuguese Estremadura. Current models of
hunter-gatherer systems fail (0 encompass variability in these lithic assemblages. Explanations of change
must account for the interrelationships of raw material selection and procurement with mobility and
technology. A preliminary attempt to expand models of lithic economy and respective linking arguments
is undertaken,
7 Thomas, David Hurst (American Museum of Natural History)
d [101] NATIVE AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY AT MISSION SANTA CATALINA DE GUALE, GEORGIA
d This paper discusses the Latest iteration of our fifteen year-long project at Mission Santa Catalina de Guale
s (ca. 1566-1680), St. Catherines Island, Georgia. Using a combination of regional randomized sampling and
remote sensing, archaeologists from unc American Museum of Natural History discovered this site in 1981;
for the next dozen years, we concentrated upon the central Hispanic mission compound, particularly the
church, cemetery, kitchen, and convento, Three years ago, we launched a new program of geophysical
prospection and correlative limited excavation to investigate the Guale Indian pucblo at Santa Catalina. We
believe that, thoughtfully utilized, such low-impact approaches both conserve archacological resources and
permit archacologists to explore intra-site patterning at a scale previously unavailable through conventional
; excavation techniques.
n Thompson, Robert G. (Minnesota-Minnékpolis) and Susan C. Mulbolland (Minnensota-
is Duluth)
n [25] OPAL PHYTOLITH ANALYSIS PROVIDES A METHOD FOR TRACING THE USE OF POTTERY
VESSELS TO PREPARE CORN
Food residues recovered from prehistoric cerafnics directly reflect the foods cooked in the pottery, Opal
phytoliths extracted from food residues provide an assemblage reflecting the plants cooked in a pot. Using
the method developed by Mulholland in a study of sediments at the Big Hidatsa site, the assemblage of
phytoliths representing corn cob chaff and cob fragments incorporated into food cooked in pottery was
: recognized at the Shea sites (42CS101). The utility of this method of tracing com use was confirmed on
5 food residues from Peru, which were also shown to contain corn by carbon isotope analysis.
c Todd, Lawrence (Colorado State) '
Ss (74] QUARRIES, COMMUNAL KILLS, AND MULTI-ANIMAL MASS MORTALITIES:
ec INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES AND INTERPRETATIONS OF BISON BONEBEDS
< Paleoindian archacology in western North America has relied heavily on sites where stone tools are
associated with large animal bones. For nearly 50 years, these bonebeds were interpreted as cither (1)
quarries for recovery of extinct animals and Paleoindian artifacts (boncbeds as quarries), or (2) fossilized
instants of human behavior ( bonebeds as artifacts ). Recent work emphasizing an interdisciplinary/taphonomic
approach demonstrates that neither perspective is appropriate for interpreting human hunting and processing
activities. Multi-animal bonebeds contain a complex and diverse palcoccological data set and the human
it actions that have traditionally been the interpretative focus (killing, butchering, processing) are seldom the
0 primary cause of documented archaeological patterns.
, 140 Tolonen, Anthony and Alan Sullivan
Tolonen, Anthony (Cincinnati) and Alan Sullivan (Cincinnati)
[23] DIVERSITY MEASURES AND SURFACE ASSEMBLAGES

Because some measures of assemblage diversity, such as evenness, are considered unreliable, richness
has become increasingly popular in diversity studies. However, critics cite a strong positive correlation
between type variety and sample size as evidence that richness measures are flawed, thereby affecting the
validity of richness-based inferences. If true, such a situation would affect intersite comparisons of assemblage
diversity that rely upon type inventories—the basis of richness calculations. Surface archaeological data
from the Grand Canyon are used to evaluate these viewpoints demonstrating, in the process, that such data
can contribute to the development of methodology and regional prehistory.

Torres, J. (see Pritchard-Parker, M.) [43]

Toth, N. (see Jabren, H.) | 25|

Toth, Nicholas (Indiana)

[2] DECIPHERING THE EARLY STONE AGE: SEARCHING FOR ACTUALISTIC ROSETTA STONES

The archacology of the Early Stone Age provides important clues pertaining to the behavioral and biological
evolution of Plio-Pleistocenc hominids. This paper examines various avenues of inquiry into our understand.
ing of the Early Stone Age, including the analysis and comparison of excavated archaeological assemblages,
actualistic studies (experimental archacology, primatology, cthnoarchacology, gcoarchacology ), and palaeo-
neurological studies. Based upon such studies, a more realistic picture of the nature and complexity of Early
Stone Age hominids is made possible, and new directions for future archacological research are presented.
Tourtellot, G. (see Hammond, N.) (60)

Towner, Ronald H. (Arizona)
[37] BIG BEAD MESA (LA 15231) IN REGIONAL PERSPECTIVE

Big Bad Mesa (LA 15231) is one of the most significant sites in the history of Navajo archacology.
Pioneering work by Keur (1941 ) placed the site in temporal perspective, but her research has never been
augmented by additional studies. Recent tree-ring and ceramic analyses confirm the temporal and cultural
site affiliation. Additional analyses indicate that, although outside the Navajo homeland of Dinctah, Big Bead
Mesa was part of a larger 18th century Navajo community of defensive habitations. Similar sites are spread
throughout the Rio Puerco Valicy and belie a large Navajo community unassociated with the contemporary
Navajo expansion to the west.

Triadan, Daniela (Freie Universitat Berlin)
[89] WHITE MOUNTAIN REDWARE: AN EXOTIC TRADE ITEM OR A LOCAL COMMODITY?
PERSPECTIVES FROM THE GRASSHOPPER REGION, ARIZONA

White Mountain Redware, a decorated pottery ware from the southern Colorado Plateau, has been used
frequently to reconstruct socio-political and socio-economic structures and to evaluate trade routes and
exchange patterns in the Southwest. It becomes a prominent decorated ware in the Grasshopper Region

7 during the aggregation phase of the 14th century, Neutron-activation analysis on a large sample of reconstruct-
ible vessels and sherds from Grasshopper Pueblo and contemporary sites of the region sheds new light on
the production and circulation of White Mountain Redware in the east-central Arizona mountains during
the 14th century.

Tringbam, Ruth (California-Berkeley)
[40] VISUAL IMAGES OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL ARCHITECTURE

The ambiguity of the archacological record and the multiplicity of its interpretations have come under
sharp and critical examination in the recent archaeological practice of the elite academic world. This paper
explores the popularization of these concepts through the powerful medium of visual imagery. It focuses
on computer-aided constructions, juxtapositions, and “virtual realities” of the archacological record of
prehistoric architecture in Europe.

Truncer, James (Washington)
[50] A MINERALOGICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF MIDDLE ATLANTIC STEATITE QUARRIES
USING ENERGY DISPERSIVE SPECTROSCOPY (EDS)

Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) has been used to assess the mineralogy of prehistoric steatite
quarries in the Middle Atlantic region. EDS provides a fast method to identify mineralogical composition
with a high degree of accuracy and precision. Mineralogical identification, when used in combination with
chemical analyses, increases the likelihood that these quarries can be individually characterized and that
artifacts can be attributed to them.

Turner, C. (see Regan, M.) (98)
, Valdez, Jr., Fred 141

Terpin, Solveig (Texas-Austin) and H. H., Eling, Jr. (Texas-Austin)

$03] ROCK ART AS PROPAGANDA: SPANISH AND NATIVE AMERICAN PICTOGRAPHS IN THE
BOLSON DE MAPIMI, MEXICO

For three centuries after Spanish expansion into northern Mexico, the Bolson de Mapimi served as a
ecfuge for displaced Native American groups who systematically raided the ranches and settled communities
ef Coahuila, Chihuahua, and their southern neighbors. After initial explorations proved the intractability of
te landscape, Spanish expeditions were largely retaliatory and punitive attempts to dislodge the hostile
shesmen from their mountain hideouts. This conflict is perpetuated in native pictographs and Spanish
sscriptions, both intended to advise the opposition of their presence in the region, Thus, rock art that once
served as propaganda now identifies camps and routes through the desert from waterhole to waterhole.
Treskov, M. (see Byram, R.) (35)

Tytot, Robert H. (Harvard University)
91] NEOLITHISATION IN THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN ISLANDS

The islands of Sardinia, Corsica, and Sicily played a central role both geographically and economically in
see ncolithisation of the western Mediterranean. New chronological and other data concerning the Mesolithic
serticment of Sardinia and Corsica, the early use of ceramics, the exploitation of obsidian and greenstone,
and the appearance of domesticated plants and animals suggest that the neolithisation process was neither
spatially nor temporally uniform and that a generic “neolithic package” derived from the Near East was not
simply “adopted”. A more complex explanatory model based on indigenous adaptations and developments
& proposed for this important transition in Mediterranean prehistory.

Urban, P. (see Bell, E.) (19|

Urban, P. (see Schortman, E.) (29|

Urban, Patricia (Kenyon College)

[48] COUNTING HEADS: LATE CLASSIC DEMOGRAPHY OF THE NACO VALLEY, NW HONDURAS

Recent discussion of prehistoric demography for the Classic Maya area has highlighted a series of deranging
@ctors which render difficult the assessment of prehistoric population size and change through time. This
paper examines whether such factors—non-contemporancity of structures assigned to phases; reuse and
abandonment of structures; functional differentiation among buildings; and hidden/invisible-to-survey struc-
tures, among others—are operative in a non-Maya portion of SE Mesoamerica. Also examined are the
problems produced by differences in wealth, power, and site location. Finally, estimates for Late Classic
population and a discussion of its distribution are presented.

Urcid, J. (see Bray, T.) {19}

Ureid, Javier (Smithsonian Institution)

[55] MOUND J AT MONTE ALBAN AND ZAPOTEC POLITICAL GEOGRAPHY DURING PERIOD I
(200 B.C.-A.D. 200).

This paper outlines the complex ee a of Mound J at Monte Alban. These data are presented
as background in order to discuss the manner which the inscribed “conquest slabs" were originally
displayed. Methodological shortcomings in previous interpretations of the epigraphy on the slabs are consid-
ered. An alternative approach to the study of Zapotec hicroglyphic place names is presented.

Urunuela, G. (see Plunket, P.) |30| i

Urunuela, Gabriela (Universidad de Las Americas), Patricia Plunkett (Universidad de Las
Americas), Gilda Hernandez (Universidad de Las Americas), and Juan Albaitero
(Universidad de Las Americas)

[30] BI-CONICAL GOD FIGURINES AND THE CODICES OF THE BORGIA GRO@P

Archacological explorations in Cholula, Puebla, often encounter bi-conical mold-made figurines of different
deities. An analysis of a cache of this type of artifact found during rescue work on the campus of the
University of the Americas suggests that these figurines provide an important link between Cholula and the
codices of the Borgia Group.

Valdes, J. (see Demarest, A.) | 76}

Valdez, F. (see Phol, M.) (76|

Valdez, F. (see Reese-Taylor, K.) |44|

Valdez, Jr., Fred (Texas-Austin)

[87] THE EARLIEST MAYA IN CURRENT CONTEXT

Material remains of the “earliest Maya” are currently dated to ca. 1000 B.C. Recent investigations in Belize
have shown human presence in the lowlands back to the Paleo-Indian era with evidence for a widespread
, 142 Valentin, B.
Archaic. Especially interesting is a “pre-ceramic” occupation at the site of Colha where proto-Maya develop-
ments may be in evidence. Data from Belize and surrounding areas are used to present a model for the
presence and development(s) of carly occupation and settled life in the Maya lowlands,
Valentin, B. (see Julien, M_) | 16)
VanderHoek, R. (see Holmes, C.) {| 30]
van der Merwe, Nikolaas J. (Harvard Untversity)
[54] ISOTOPIC BONE CHEMISTRY AND THE DIETS OF THE MAYA

A carbon and nitrogen isotope study of human and animal bone from Cucllo, Belize provides a window
on pre-Classic Maya dict and environment. Maize was an important but not overwhelming staple in the pre-
Classic; the dict was varied, and included wild animal protein. Data from other Maya sites show that maize
increased in dictary importance through the pre-Classic and Early Classic (presumably duc to higher-yield
varicties ), then declined steadily to a nadir in the Terminal Classic (presumably duc to population increases ).
During the post-Classic/Historic times, the Maya were totally dependent on maize, and the dict lacked
variety.
VanPool, C. (see VanPool, T.) |70|
VanPool, Todd (New Mexico) and Christine VanPool
[70] SOLUTION PH AND OBSIDIAN HYDRATION DATING: AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY

Obsidian hydration dating has assumed an increasingly important roic in the construction of archacological
chronologies, However, several significant questions remain concerning the nature of the hydration process
and factors thar influence the rate of hydration. This paper reports the results of an experimental study of
the effect of solution pH on obsidian hydration rates. Specifically, obsidian from Glass Buttes, Oregon, has
been hydrated in solutions ranging from pH | to pH 11. The results of these experiments and their
implications for the archaeological use of obsidian hydration dating are examined.
Van West, Carla (Statistical Research) and Jeffery H. Altschul (Statistical Research)
[98] MODELING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY, CARRYING CAPACITY, AND CULTURAL

CHANGE IN THE TONTO BASIN: A CASE STUDY APPROACH

In 1992 Statistical Research constructed a model of potential agricultural production and carrying capacity
for the lower Tonto Basin using a tree-ring based reconstruction of climate. Estimates of potential maize
yield and population size were produced. Recently gathered archaeological data are used to evaluate our
predictions. Settlement pattern and demographic data generated from the Meddicr Mound and Schoolhouse
Mound studies are employed. The results are used to suggest modifications to the modcl, assess the modeling
approach, and evaluate cultural responses to risk in the highly variable environment inferred for the Basin
during the late pre-Classic and Classic periods.
Van Zandt, T. (see Orcutt, J.) (58|

‘ Varien, M. (see Kelley, J.) |37|

Vawser, A. (see Hartley, R.) | 103}
Velicbko, Andrei (Mercyburst College), J. M@. Adovasio (Mercyburst College), R. Buyce
(Mercyburst College)
[69] GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY AT MEZHIRICH; MACRO- AND MICRO-PERSPECTIVES

The site of Mezhirich is placed in a macro- and micro-cnvironmental context using traditional geological
methods and high-resolution geoarchacological techniques. The genesis, subsequent evolution, and ultimate
abandonment of the Mezhirich locality is examined. The bedrock geology, Pleistocene sediment package
with included paleosols, sedimentation and soil-formation mechanisms, and post-depositional site modifica-
tions are presented as an ever-changing backdrop to the human utilization of this arca in the Late Pleistocene.
Verano, Jobn W. (Smithsonian Institution) |Discussant 22]
Verbaaren, Bruce (Argonne National Laboratory)
[24] THE EFFECTS OF URBAN DECLINE ON A SMALL SETTLEMENT: A VIEW FROM THE

PERIPHERY

Kurban Héyiik, a site on the Euphrates in southeastern Anatolia, declined from a respectable walled town
in the mid-Third Millennium to a rather scruffy village by the beginning of the Second. Third Millennium
Kurban declined in size and complexity in concert with the broader scttlement system of which it was
part. Using a Geographic Information System as an intra-site analytical tool, this paper explores the evidence
for social and economic change found in the broad exposures of the mid-Third and Second Millennium
settlements at Kurban Héyiik and their implications for our understanding of contemporary regional changes.
, Walsh-Anduze, M. 143
Villalpando, Maria Elisa (Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia)
93] FROM PINART TO RODRIGUEZ: COLONIALIST VERSUS NATIONALIST INTERESTS IN
NORTHWESTERN MEXICO

The practice of archaeology and interpretation of prehistoric events differ not only according to theoretical
cus but interests within remnant native populations. Mexican archacology has a national legislature which
allows research all over the territory without consulting ethnic groups, Every one of us are “Mexicanos,”
therefore, there are no different rights for traditional ethnic territory. It is just cthics and social compromises
with native communities which guide our endeavor. Those particularities had impact on northwestern
archacology where colonialist interests had become a locus of struggle berween Mexicans and foreign
archacologists.
Vitelli, K. (see Watkins, J.) |33]
Voigt, Mary (College of William and Mary) |Discussant 4|
Voytek, Barbara (California-Berkeley)
[59] THE BALKAN NEOLITHIC: A STUDY IN SEDENTARY VILLAGE LIFE

Since the Dawn of European Civilization, the Balkan Neolithic has been viewed as the case study of village
life. Questions surrounding the reasons for sedentism are matched by questions dealing with the effects.
Was it irreversible? Were the Balkans really stalled in the Neolithic and there were no social and/or economic
changes during those 1000 odd years? This paper examines the dynamics of sedentary neolithic village life,
drawing on data from recent excavations in Yugoslavia.
Wailes, Bernard (Pennsylvania) |Forum Participant 14}
Wake, Thomas A. (California-Berkeley)
[11] EFFECTS OF EUROPEAN CONTACT ON NATIVE AMERICAN FOODWAYS AT COLONY ROSS,

CALIFORNIA

Vertebrate faunal remains recovered from recent archacological excavations in Fort Ross State Historic
Park, Sonoma County, California, provide important information concerning the effects of a European colonial
system on a diverse native American community in an carly nineteenth century Russian settlement. Historical
records show that this community consisted of native Alaskans, native Californians, native Russians, and a
number of mixed-race individuals. Analysis of vertebrate faunal remains recently recovered from outside
the stockade at Ross shows evidence of persistence of conservative, ethnically distinct foodways, as well as
the incorporation of non-traditional foods into the dict, Aspects of cultural continuity and change in the
native American population of Colony Ross are discussed.
Walkenborst, R. (see Curtis, R.) |8°|
Walker, D. (see Reese-Taylor, K.) |44|
Walker, Debra (Florida International University), Kathryn Reese-Taylor (Texas), and
Beverly Mitchum ah cngepimcihyer adie
[10] CERROS REVISITED: RESULTS OF THE 1993 VATIONS

Renewed research at Cerros, Belize began in June, 1993, in cooperation with a national tourist development
program. Survey and excavation in the site core encountered new features and amplified our understanding
of better known structures. Of particular interest is a well-preserved interior building, Structure 3A-2nd,
which exhibited a wide staircase and some preserved facading, Also of note is a small ballcourt-like structure
located near a grand staircase off the main plaza. Results of the 1993 excavations alter previous assessments
of the site’s development and offer new insights into the functions of Late Preclassic monumental architecture.
Walker, Phillip L. (California-Santa Barbara) and Francine Drayer eS se
Barbara)
[54] THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF ENAMEL AS AN INDEX OF DIETARY VARIATION

Dental enamel does not remodel once it is formed. As a result, its chemical composition provides
information on metabolic variation during childhood. Using an electron microprobe, we determined the
distribution of Ca, P, Sr, Mg, Zn, Fe and F in archaeological and modern teeth. The composition of surface
enamel was compared with that below the surface to assess the effects of diagenesis. Comparisons were
also made of enamel that formed during the prenatal, pre-weaning, and post-weaning periods. The results
suggest that high resolution microprobe data can provide useful information on temporal variation in dict.
Walker, W. (see Adams, E.) |85|
Wallace, H. (see Bernstein, D.) |92|
Wallace, H. (see Doelle, W.) |7|
Walsh-Anduze, M. (see Motsinger, T.) |7|
, 144 Walsh-Anduze, Mary-Ellen
Walsh-Anduze, Mary-Ellen (SWCA, Inc.)
[50] EVIDENCE FOR HOHOKAM CERAMIC PRODUCTION USING INDUCTIVELY COUPLED
PLASMA SPECTROSCOPY
A survey of potential temper sources used to produce Hohokam Red-on-buff ceramics led to the identifica-
tion, recording, and sampling of numerous quarries, presumably prehistoric. Inductively coupled plasma
spectroscopy was used to characterize the source material and a sample of sherds. Separate proveniences
for two sources were established, and results of statistical analyses led to the inference that the pottery was
produced from a single production locus.
Walter, R. (see Sheppard, P_) |6|
Wandsnider, LuAnn (Nebraska-Lincoln)
[23] LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE AND THE CHARACTER OF SURFACE ARCHAEOLOGICAL
DEPOSITS: INSIGHTS FROM A CONTEMPORARY INDIAN PASTORAL LANDSCAPE
Landscape elements with different qualities attract human visitations of varying amounts and kinds.
Archacologists have profitably analyzed landscape deposits according to landscape element qualities such
as landform, distance to ecotonc, distance to water, and so forth. Recent study of an intensively used
landscape in southern India points to other qualities of the landscape—especially its physical architecture
(size and shape of “habitable” space }—and how they influence recurrent construction of site facilities and,
hence, archacological structure, Archacological landscapes from the American West are analyzed according
to landscape clement architecture, demonstrating further the high information potential of surface archaco-
logical deposits.
Warner, Mark S. (Virginia)
[62] FOOD, FISHING, AND THE MARKETPLACE: AFRICAN-AMERICAN RESPONSES TO MASS
CONSUMER SOCIETY
The regimentation of individual lives has been an increasingly all-pervasive process since the eighteenth
century. Due to technological limitations, however, food-production industries did not become standardized
in the manner that other consumer goods such as bottles and ceramics did until the second half of the
nineteenth century. This paper explores the reactions of an African-American household to the rise of a
commercial food industry. Faunal remains from the Maynard-Burgess houschold, in Annapolis, Maryland,
illustrate one family’s responses to an increasingly homogenous and anonymous industry, reflecting incorpo-
ration as well as resistance to a mass Consumer socicty.
Warren, Claude N. (Nevada-Las Vegas)
[75] ARTIODACTYLS TO TORTOISES: FOUR THOUSAND YEARS OF CHANGING SUBSISTENCE AT
ATLATL ROCK
Atlat) Rockshelter and two nearby sites in the Valley of Fire, Nevada, contain a record of ca. 4000 years
occupation. This paper describes the changes in the faunal remains and technology of these sites, revicws
» pertinent paleoclimatic evidence for the region, and discusses correlations of changes in faunal remains and
technology.
Warren, D. (see Haviill, L.) |106|
Warren, Diane (Indiana)
[35] CUTMARKS SUGGEST MORTUARY DEFLESHING AT BALDHILL SITE (32-BA-1), AN EARLY
CERAMIC PERIOD MOUND GROUP IN NORTH DAKOTA
Cutmarks are present on a minimum of ten of sixteen individuals whose disarticulated remains were
recovered from the Baldhill Mound B ossuary. Location of the cutmarks corresponds closely with muscle
attachment areas, suggesting remains were defleshed prior to interment. This interpretation is supported
by ethnographic analogy and by the presence of red ochre paint on bone surfaces covered in life by soft
tissuc. SEM appearance of the cutmarks is discussed.
Waters, Michael (Statistical Research)
(98] GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS IN THE TONTO BASIN, ARIZONA
Geoarchaeological investigations in the Tonto Basin, Arizona indicate that during the time of the Salado
occupation the landscape consisted of a number of stable Picistocene surfaces, two late Holocene terraces,
and an actively aggrading floodplain. Canal irrigation was practiced on the lowest Holocene terrace which
stood two meters above the streambed. Paleohydrological reconstructions indicate that ample water was
available for successful irrigation, however the amount of arable land was limited. The small amount of
arable land may have been the environmental factor that limited population growth and contributed to the
decline of the Salado.
, Wells, Peter S. 145
Watkins, Joe (Bureau of Indian Affairs), Lynne Goldstein (Wisconsin-Milwaukee), Karen D.
Vitelli (Indiana University), and Leigh Jenkins (Hopi Tribe)
[38] RESPONSIBILITIES OF ARCHAEOLOGISTS TO NON-ARCHAEOLOGICAL INTEREST GROUPS

At the Workshop on Ethics in Archaeology held in Reno, Nevada, in November of 1993, a series of
“Principles” were developed to help guide archaeologists and archaeology into the next century. One of
the key ethical principles in archaeology must focus on the nature of responsible archaeological research,
Responsible archacological research must include public accountability and a commitment to work with
affected groups ranging from Native Americans and other groups with biological or cultural affinity to the
people studied by archacology to local communities near sites of archacological interest. The paper discusses
the key terms and concepts within the principle, and includes a series of case studies and examples relevant
to cach.
Watson, Patty Jo (Washington University) | Discussant 40]
Wattenmaker, Patricia (Virginia)
[24] URBANISM IN UPPER MESOPOTAMIA: PERSPECTIVES FROM SOUTHEASTERN TURKEY

Third Millennium B.C. cities of southeast Turkey provide an opportunity to study origins in the dry-
farming zone of Mesopotamia. Traditionally, ancient settlements in southeast Turkey have been viewed as
smaller and less complex than those in other regions of upper Mesopotamia. Moreover, state and urban
formation in this area has been attributed to interaction with more complex socicties to the south. However,
recent research as Kazane HOyiik reveals that urbanism in the region followed a distinct long-term indigenous
process of development, and was on a scale similar to that documented elsewhere in north Mesopotamia.
Waytbomas, C. (see Butler, V.) (97|
Webb, S. David (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[41] LATE PLEISTOCENE ENVIRONMENTS IN THE MIDDLE AUCILLA RIVER

Paleoindian artifacts abound in submerged sites along west peninsular Florida. In the Aucilla River we
have excavated sedimentary sequences of late Pleistocene to early Holocene age which range from coarse
clastics to marls, peats, and muds. They produce not only lithics and bones, but also shells, wood, pollen,
and other plant remains. Some peats represent mastodon digesta containing steroids and epithelial cells.
Weber, Andrzej (University of Alberta)
{94] THE NEOLITHIC OF THE LAKE BAIKAL AND ANGARA RIVER REGION: A REVIEW OF PAST

AND PRESENT RESEARCH ADVANCES

The rich settlement and burial evidence available from the Baikal/Angara region in Central Siberia provides
one of the most promising opportunities to study Holocene foragers within the entire boreal forest. The
Neolithic prehistory of the region is best known to western scholars through only a few English translations
of A.P. Okladnikov's works and a few transcripts of his model by Western archaeologists (e.g, H.N. Michael
and C. Chard). This model, not unanimously accepted in Siberian archacology, was recently challenged by
SAAS ens SRE eeeeec. Sees ee sere ere ae SOAs AOe ree nee
the Lake Baikal Neolithic with the aid of a new approach analytical techniques,
Weiner, S. (see Stiner, M.) [19]
Weisler, Marsball 1, (Historic Preservation Office, Marsball Islands)
[6] LONG-DISTANCE INTERACTION IN PREHISTORIC POLYNESIA

The identification of exotic pottery and obsidian has played key roles in defining prehistoric long-distance
interaction networks in Melanesia. The limited occurrence of these commodities in the eastern Pacific has
hindered our ability in documenting external contacts between islands within Polynesia. The recent applica-
tion of geo-chemical techniques to Oceanic island basalt artifacts has greatly improved the ability to qcamine
external communication of previously thought isolated island societies. This paper explores the methodologi-
cal and theoretical advances made in Polynesian interaction studics.

t

Weiss, P. (see Guderjan, T.) |60|
Welch, J. (see Prentiss, W.) [105]
Wells, C. (see Williams, J.) (52
Wells, Peter S. (Minnesota)
[64] GERMANIC MIGRATIONS AND CELTIC RESPONSES

Ancient writers recorded migrations from northern Europe into central and southern regions by peoples
they called Cimbri and Teutoni, in and after 113 B.C. Material effects of these migrations have been difficult
to identify, and their impact has been unclear. New evidence pertaining to the establishment of large fortified
settlements in the Celtic regions of central Europe suggests a scenario of abrupt change in which the
, 146 Whalen, M.
migrations can be viewed as a decisive factor in major cultural change in the final phase of European
prehistory.
Whalen, M. (see Minnis, P.) |7|
Whalen, Norman (Southwest Texas State)
[9] PLEISTOCENE SITES IN SOUTHERN YEMEN

A survey in south Yemen in the fall months of 1992 resulted in the discovery of 37 Palcolithic sites, most
of them multicomponent. The sites were located on escarpments emanating from high mountains and
paralleling major wadis coursing south toward the Gulf of Aden. They were all surface sites and yielded
2,159 artifacts, Sixteen contained artifacts resembling the Developed Oldowan and 27 had typical Acheulean
assemblages. Both industrics appeared together on ten sites bur differed in various attributes. These sites
agree with others in suggesting an early occupation and settlement of the Arabian peninsula.
Wheat, Patricia (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center) and Joan Few (Houston-Clear Lake)
[52] IN THE CLASSROOM: A SURVEY OF TEACHERS IN TEXAS

Workshops about archacology—including archacological methods, cultural sequence and stewardship—
have been offered to Texas teachers. These sessions range from about 14% hours to 30 hours in length, with
activities inside and outside the classroom. A recent survey of teachers who have attended these workshops
asked, among other things: What message did the teacher hear? How does the “trained” teacher relate
archacological stewardship to his/her students? Are sites being vandalized by naive teachers? Do teachers
want more information or other resources? The results of the survey will be used to design workshop
sessions and develop new materials.
White, Christine (Western Ontario)
[106] DIETARY DENTAL PATHOLOGY AT LAMANAI

Previous stable isotope and trace clement analysis of human bone from Lamanai, Belize has demonstrated
significant dietary shifts occurring in association with cultural change from the Preclassic period to early
Colonial times (1250 B.C.-1670 A_D.). The human dentition can also provide a rcliable means of reconstruct-
ing food consumption in ancient populations. The favorable preservation of teeth makes them a particularly
important source of information for the tropical lowland Maya whose bones have been subject to the high
levels of degradation. In this study, an analysis of dental pathology on the entire Lamanai sample (N= 122)
is done to complement the earlier chemical study.
White, G. (see Fredrickson, D.)|11|
White, R. (see Pike-Tay, A.) {30|
White, Randall (New York University) {Discussant 16]
White, William G. (Bureau of Reclamation)
[75] 26CK4695—A DAM WORKER'S CAMP OR PROSPECTOR'S CAMP?

‘ The Hoover Dam landscape is covered with historic archacological sites associated with the construction
of Hoover Dam, Clark County, Nevada. Local oral history contends that a recently identified site, 26CK4695,
is a Campsite associated with job-seckers waiting to be hired as construction laborers during the early 1930s.
Artifact and archival evidence, however, suggests that this multi-component site is associated with localized
mineral prospecting activities and claim development prior to the construction of the dam.

Whitiey, D. (see Dorn, R.) | 103]
Whitley, David S. (California-Los Angeles)
[103] ORIGINS OF GREAT BASIN NUMIC POLITICAL DIFFERENTIATION
An old debate concerns the origin of Numic band headmanship. Julian Steward, using the Numic as the
foundation for his cultural-cvolutionary model, argued headmanship was a reaction to Euro-American contact.
Omer Stewart countered that it had prehistoric roots. Most now view the ethnographic evidence as equivocal
To resolve this impasse, | re-analyzed Numic social relations, and examined site survey and rock art data from
the Coso Range, California. This suggests that political differentiation appeared circa 1000 B.P., evidenced by
changes in; subsistence; logistical organization of the settlement pattern; and rock art iconography and
production rates,
Whitridge, Peter (Arizona State)
[105] THE RISE AND FALL OF A WINTER VILLAGE: QUANTIFYING THULE SITE STRUCTURE
Recent investigations at Pajs-2, in the Central Canadian Arctic, have documented an unusually large Classic
Thule occupation consisting of at least 57 winter houses. Interpretation of the village's social and economic
organization hinges on the notoriously difficult task of accurately assessing stability or change in settlement
size over time. An analysis of formal house attributes reveals robust patterning in the spatial distribution of
, Williams, Robert and Tim Albright 147
heuristic house “types” across the site. The implications of these results for modelling the organization and
growth of this and other Thule winter villages are discussed.

Whittington, Stepben (Maine) and David M, Reed (Pennsylvania State)

[106] “LET THEM EAT CAKE”: LOW-STATUS MAYA DIET AT COPAN, HONDURAS

The bones of low-status Maya who died during the Classic Period at Copan contain both direct and

indirect indicators of dict. Based on statistical analysis of the complex patterns reflected in dental diseases,

porotic hyperostosis, enamel hypoplasia, periosteal reactions, stable carbon and nitrogen isotope ratios in

collagen and demography, we suggest that the low-status residents of Copan were poorly nourished around

the time of the polity’s demographic collapse. Illnesses and diminished work capacity related to diet appear

to have been involved in the collapse, which began in the ninth century.

Whittlesey, S. (see Ciolek-Torrello, R.) |7|

Wicker, Nancy (Mankato Stite)

[64] MIGRATION OR ITINERANCY: MIGRATION PERIOD SCANDINAVIAN TYPE BRACTEATES
FOUND OUTSIDE SCANDINAVIA

The Migration Period, named for European population movements during the fifth and sixth centurics
A.D., seems apropos for a session on migration. Similarities in material culture have been explained as a
result of diffusion of skills, trade of objects, or even migration of peoples. This paper focuses on Scandinavian
bracteates to demonstrate two kinds of migrations: long-distance movements of populations and travels of
specific segments of populations such as craft workers and traders. Understanding the nature of contacts
that produced archacologically recognizable connections berween objects and peoples illuminates the
relationship between material culture and ethnicity.

Widmer, Randolph J. (Houston)
[92] THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS OF COASTAL ARCHAEOLOGY

Archacological studies in various coastal regions of the world have resulted in a broadening of our
understanding of human adaptation, the effect of environmental change on settlement and subsistence
strategies, and sociopolitical development. The theoretical implications of these works cannot be directly
paralleled in studies of terrestrial regions. It is argued that the study of coastal regions can bear important
independent lines of evidence for understanding cultural adaptation and cultural change. A series of theoreti-
cal problems, relevant to archaeology in general, will be presented, and the role in which using coastal
regions as databases for addressing these general problems will be discussed.

Wilk, Ricbard (Indiana University) |Discussant 38]

Wilkinson, T. (see Stone, G.) {9|

Wilkinson, Tony J. (Chicago)

[24] SETTLEMENT AND URBANIZATION IN SOUTHEAST ANATOLIA DURING THE BRONZE AGE:
A REGIONAL PERSPECTIVE

Results of recent surveys conducted in southeast olia will be used to demonstrate how urban settle-
ments became nucleated from smaller more eect; communities during the mid-third millennium B.C
Emphasis will be placed upon how much growth was related to change in land use and agricultural
production, and how, with increased urbanization, scttlement systems became more integrated into larger
economic entities. This which process did not occur in isolation and urbanization in southeast Anatolia will
be placed within the context of urban growth that chargcterized the entire rain-fed farming belt of upper
Mesopotamia.

William, J. (see Abler, S.) |97|

Williams, Joyce A. (Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville) and Christy L. We ors

Ilinots University-Edwardsville)

[52] WHAT WORKS AND DOESN'T WORK: AN EVALUATION OF A PRE-COLLEGE TEACHER
EDUCATIONAL FIELD SCHOOL '

The Contract Archacology Program at Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville has conducted an
Educational Ficld School at the World Heritage Cahokia Site for two summers. The Field School focuses on
teaching teachers about archacological preservation through development of classroom lessons based on
hands-on activities such as creating archacological sites. Changes in the original program were ongoing
based on participant feedback through surveys. In other words, what worked and what didn’t!
Williams, Robert (Old Catbolic Church in Texas) and Tim Albright (Texas-Austin)

[55] THE CLASSIFICATION & EXTENSION OF LINEAGE IN THE MIXTEC CODICES FROM |
POSTCLASSIC TIMES TO CA. 1565 A.D.

This paper will present the Mixtec scribal classification of four ancient lineages and trace the temporal

and geographic extension of one of them from its origination in Postclassic times at one locality and its
, 148 Willig, J.
extension to yet another location and its survival there until after the Conquest. These data will be collated
from three Mixtec Codices: Zouche-Nuttall, Side One, Vindobonensis Mexicanus I and Selden.
Willig, J. (see Horne, M.) |83}
Willig, Judith A. (INFOTEC Research)
[83] HOLOCENE CLIMATIC CHANGE AND HUMAN OCCUPATION: THE RECORD FROM WESTERN
PALEOSOLS
Large numbers of Pipeline Expansion Project sites have produced a broad spectrum of stratigraphic
sequences and paleosols associated with human occupation. The complex sequence of 35-JE-49 in north.
central Oregon is the most complete, with occupation episodes (including 25 hearth/pit/midden features)
from 11 major strata/paleosols dating from 9980 + -355 BP. Pre-Mazama paleosols represent five cycles of
wetter, colder, carly Holocene periods, corresponding to similar mesic episodes documented in the regional
climatic record. At southeastern Washington's 45-WW-100, a paleosol developed in bedded, fluvioglacial
flood sediments immediately below Glacier Peak ash dates 12,160 B.P., indicating a major soil formation
hiatus between flood cpisodes.
Wilsbusen, Richard (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center)
[89] A COMPARISON OF TWO PREHISTORIC ABANDONMENTS OF THE SAME REGION
The Mesa Verde region of the American Southwest has at least two major prehistoric abandonments—
one late in the ninth century A.D. (Pueblo 1) and another in the thirteenth century A.D. (Pueblo Ill). Priors
to both of these abandonments, settlement in the Mesa Verde region is characterized by high population
levels with population concentrated in villages of 100 to 600 rooms. In both periods abandonment is rapid
and regional in scale. Recent syntheses of data for all known Pueblo I and Pueblo III villages are used tc
compare settlement patterns, economic risks, and behavioral responses for the two abandonments.
Wing, E. (see Reitz, E.) (65|
Winslow, Diane Lynne (Desert Research Institute) and Susan R. Edwards (Desert Research
Institute)
[37] CORDAGE AND CERAMICS FROM PAHUTE MESA: EXAMINING PREHISTORIC TECHNOLOGY
IN THE SOUTHERN GREAT BASIN
Recent research at Pahute Mesa on the Nevada Test Site has produced new knowledge about prehistoric
cordage and ceramic technology, Cordage fragments, a rarity in the southern Great Basin, were discovered
during the excavation of a small rockshelter. Also, brownware ceramics from within the shelter and adjacent
occupation areas, have revealed vessel forms previously unknown for this region. This poster will summarize
and illustrate these recent discoverics.
Winter, M. (see Peeler, D.) [55]
Winzler, Susan (California-Riverside)
[S|] WATER RESOURCES AND ANCIENT MAYA WELLS OF NORTHERN QUINTANA ROO
Water resources are recognized as a major factor in the pattern of settlement within the northern Maya
‘ lowlands. The Holbox Fracture Zone of Quintana Roo represents a water-rich environment within the
generally arid northern lowlands. Investigations at the site of Naranjal and the surrounding local area
revealed numerous ancient wells which apparently provided for domestic water needs. The distribution
and characteristics of these wells are discussed in relation to the local terrain and settlement pattern. The
potential regional significance of hand-excavated wells is explored through the use of computer modeling
of water-table accessibility in the northern lowlands.
Wise, Alicia L. (North Carolina)
[13] INTRODUCTION TO DARE TO DOMINATE A DOMINEERING DISSERTATION
Wise, Karen (Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County)
[22] CHINCHORRO MORTUARY PRACTICES AND SETTLEMENT IN SOUTH COASTAL PERU
Ongoing research in the Ilo region of Peru demonstrates the presence of Chinchorro tradition extended
burials in haphazardly laid out cemeteries at sites dating to the Middle to Late Archaic Period. These sites
contain domestic and midden areas as well as cemeteries, and appear to represent sedentary or semi-
sedentary coastal villages near sources of fresh water. It is suggested that Chinchorro mortuary practices
represent ritual aspects of territorial behavior of small groups tied to certain choice locations with access
to both marine resources and fresh water along the desert coast of the south-central Andes.
Wobst, H. (see Brennan, S.) (34)
Wobst, H. Martin (Massachusetts-Amberst)
[96] ANTI-PARADIGMATIC TYPOLOGY, OR THE REPRESSION OF VARIATION IN ARCHAEOLOGY
Regardicss of paradigm, archacological typology and classification have proceeded as if they did not
matter. When it comes to typology and classification, modernist and post-modern archacologists tend to
, Wylie, A. 149
) contradict their most basic assumptions. Much of the variation which they want to account for gets inadves-
tently classified away. The paper illustrates that, in ethnographic contexts, typologies and classifications are
highly variable, multi-dimensional, multi-logical, contradictory, and contested. We need the archacological
record to increase our appreciation of typological and classificatory dynamics and to broaden our ethnograph-
ically limited knowledge of this important arena for human action.
Woodward, M. (see Bruchez, M.) |10|
: Woody, Alanab J. (Nevada-Reno)
| [19] ROCK ART AND THE SOCIAL ORDER: EXAMPLES FROM THE GREAT BASIN
| Rock art is an important part of the archacological record. Aspects of the social order that can add to
our understanding of the interactions of prehistoric peoples and their environment may be contained in
these motifs. Hypotheses have been presented that describe both the structure and the function of this art
| as relating to hunting magic. This poster will present data from diverse sites in the northern Great Basin,
which confirm this hypothesis. Additional data will also be presented, however, that suggest a relationship
to other activities associated with gathering pursuits, fertility rites, puberty rites and other aspects of female
behavior.
Woollett, J. (see Amorosi, T_) |79|
Wright, E. (see Clark, J.) |6)
| Wright, Henry (Michigan) [Discussant 79]
Wright, Katherine I. (University of London)
[33] GROUND STONE ASSEMBLAGE VARIATIONS AND THE ORIGINS OF AGRICULTURE IN THE
NEAR EAST
The role of ground stone technology in the origins of agriculture in the Near East is reviewed. Data were
collected from 22 Jordanian sites dating to 22,000 to 5,500 B.P. The sites include hunter-gatherer campsites,
farming villages, and herding camps. The significance of ground stone assemblages is investigated using
cthnographic and experimental data on plant-food processing, The transition to agriculture may have had
consequences for women. Mesopotamian texts indicate that grain milling is associated with adult women
: in household economies. Analysis of grave goods suggests that this pattern may not have existed before the
) development of agriculture.
| Wright, Lori (Chicago)
[106] ANCIENT DIET AND SOCIAL EVOLUTION IN THE PASION MAYA LOWLANDS: INSIGHT
FROM BONE CHEMISTRY
Stable isotopic and trace element data are presented for 5 sites in the Pasion river region: Altar de
Sacrificios, Seibal, Dos Pilas, Aguateca and Itzan. Ancient diet was largely similar across the region, but
individual sites show distinct chronological and social patterning. Together with stability in skeletal indicators
of health stress, chronological trends in maize and animal protein consumption do not conform with the
| expectations of an ecological model for the collapse of thip segion. Instead, changes fh Whe BEANE O! Ne
| and intra-site diversity in dietary partitioning suggest social factors may have been involved in this
| transition.
| Wright, Rita P. (New York University)
: [12] TECHNOLOGY AND DIFFUSION: PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED BY AN AMERICAN NEAR PARIS
The apparent failure of Euro-Disncy at a site near Paris raises questions about the neutral nature of
technology and diffusion that are relevant in archaeological contexts, This paper reframes current discourses
on technology and diffusion by refocussing on them as integrated phenomena and reframing assumptions
about them. The main thrust of the argument is that by returning to a methodology in which qiffusion ane
technology are viewed as interdependent and by extending their definitions beyond current limits,
| their importance as social activities will be better understood.
: Wurst, LouAnn (Syracuse University) '
| [93] COLONIZING OURSELVES: THE LAST FRONTIER?
: Archacologists are aware that colonialism has impacted the way we study the pasts of conquered peoples.
: However, we rarely recognize that colonialism extends further than the “other” to influence our own
historic past. This paper will examine the effects of colonialism on the practice of historic archaeology in
the United States by confronting the assumptions, expectations, and explanatory models we use for interpre-
ting the behavior of diverse groups and peoples, American historical archacology scidom challenges common
misconceptions such as the “vanished” Native Americans, the “melting-pot" of immigrant groups, and
| traditional or “primitive” behavior ascribed to Afro-Americans.
| Wylie, A. (see Lynott, M.) |38|
TT
, 6 [49] Albert Spaulding and the Continuation of Archaeological

this symposium seeks an understanding of the social, political, demographic, and environmental conditions

under which sedentary hunter-gatherer villages arose.

[49] Symposium: ALBERT SPAULDING AND THE CONTINUATION OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL
SCTENCE

This symposium brings together a group of archaeologists who have been directly or indirectly influenced
by the late Albert Spaulding. The symposium is not intended to be a retrospective of Spaulding’'s work.
Rather it is intended to reflect the ways in which Albert Spaulding’s multifaceted writings and ideas continue
to influence current rescarch practices, both theoretical and methodological. The current research of a
number of archacologists will be used to highlight the ways in which Spaulding’s notion of archacological
science continues to shape our discipline.

[52] Sponsored Symposium: MAKING THE GRADE; EVALUATING ARCHAEOLOGY EDUCATION
PROGRAMS (SAA Public Education Committee)

Twenty years ago there were only a handful of programs in North America which seriously attempted
to educate the public about archacology. Today, programs exist or are being developed in almost every state
and province to educate both students and teachers about archacological resources and their stewardship.
Archacologists and educators are beginning to recognize archacology as a valuable tool for teaching in many
disciplines and learning situations. Evaluation of these programs is critical to their improvement as well as
to the development of new ones. In this symposium, we will describe some existing programs and their
evaluation mechanisms, and share what has been learned about what works and what doesn’t in a variety
of educational settings.

[$3] Workshop: ARCHAEOLOGY FOR EDUCATORS, PART I (SAA Public Education Committee)

Archacology education has become an important part of the archaeological profession. This 10-hour
workshop for all educators including teachers, museum docents, and outdoor program leaders, is a showcase
of existing archacology education programs. Participants discover the science of archacology through hands-
on activities. They are then equipped to teach archacological concepts to both children and adults in a
variety of settings. Exercises in values identification and clarification surrounding the issues of archacological
conservation and an overview of local resources complete workshop instruction. Although the workshop
is designed for educators, archaeologists are invited to attend.

[54] Fryxell Symposium: BONE CHEMISTRY AND HUMAN DIET—RECENT ADVANCES, RECENT
RETREATS

Spanning the disciplines biochemistry, geochemistry, physiology, and anthropology, the study of chemical
signatures in living and fossil tissues has revolutionized the study of past human diets. The field of archacologi-
cal bone chemistry is barely twenty years old, yet it has already passed from a rarely available cxotic
procedure to a standard component of archaeological analysis. In the process, the field of osteochemistry
has matured. Papers in the symposium explore the wide range of stable isotope and trace clement studies
in practice today and illustrate the broad geographical range of applications.

‘ [55] Symposium: THE FOUNDATIONS OF POWER IN PREHISPANIC OAXACA: ICONOGRAPHY,
EPIGRAPHY, AND IDEOLOGY

This symposium brings together a diverse group of scholars to consider the role of ideology in complex
societies of prehispanic Oaxaca, from the Formative to the Postclassic. The papers describe aspects of
prehispanic ideology and examine the role of ideology in the legitimization of power and strategies of
rulership. The goal of the symposium is to encourage a dialogue amongst scholars working in archacology,
art history, ethnohistory, ethnography, and epigraphy. The symposium promises to achieve both a synthesis
of current research as well as a discussion of theoretical implications, data limitations, and furure directions.
[56] Sponsored Symposium: THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE PLEISTOCENE-HOLOCENE

TRANSITION IN ASIA, AUSTRALIA, AND THE AMERICAS (International Quaternary Union-
INQUA)

This symposium explores the diversity of human responses to environmental changes at the end of the
Last Glacial in East Asia, Australia, and the Americas. Between 13,000 and 8,000 years ago, human adaptations
in these regions were dynamic and diverse. In areas as diverse as Tasmania, Thailand, Japan, Siberia, the
Plains, and Patagonia, humans had to adjust to major changes in climate, landforms, plant communities, and
resources, Our papers provide regional syntheses of these adaptive patterns and discuss future research
directions on the dramatic environmental and cultural changes that took place at the Pieistocene-Holocene
transition.

[57] Symposium: RECENT ADVANCES IN THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF BAJA CALIFORNIA

This symposium presents the results of the most recent archaeological fieldwork carried out on the

peninsula of Baja California. Archacologically, Baja California remains one of the least studied regions in
, |67| Archaeological Approaches to the Built Environment 7
North America. This is unfortunate in that its geographic isolation resulted in several unique cultural
developments among the prehistoric groups that inhabited the peninsula. It thus provides a fascinating case
for addressing the effects of cultural isolation. The symposium papers present data (including the latest
radiocarbon dates for the peninsula) on many aspects of Baja prehistory including reports on the special
project of the Instituto Nacional de Anthropologia ¢ Historia in the Sierra de San Francisco, the largest ever
undertaken in Baja California.
[58] Symposium: BIG CHANGE IN BIG SITES ON THE BIG RIVER: REGIONAL VARIABILITY IN
CLASSIC AND PROTOHISTORIC SITES OF THE NORTHERN RIO GRANDE, NEW MEXICO

The Classic (A.D. 1325-1600) and Protohistoric (A.D. 1450-1700) periods of the Northern Rio Grande
archacological sequence in New Mexico are characterized by extensive site complexes and distinctive
ceramic assemblages, Papers in this symposium present results of recent research examining variability in
site use, economic strategies, and demography. Alternative models examining intra-site settiement patterns,
site dating criteria, resource exploitation and regional integration move beyond typological categorization
and ethnographic analogues that have been used to explain the cconomy, demographic change and the
structure of late prehistoric and protohistoric society
[59] Symposium: AGRICULTURE AND THE FORMATION OF SEDENTARY COMMUNITIES

The role of agriculture in the formation of sedentary communities has been postulated for some time.
Sedentism in an agricultural economy requires certain facilitics and behaviors oricnted toward harvesting
scasonally distributed, storable foods. These structural and economic shifts are often accompanied by a
number of significant human behavioral changes including hereditary social inequality, social stratification,
craft specialization, storage, Ceramic production, irrigation, and warfare. It is also seen as a deleterious
transition because of increases in population size, demographic change, increasing evidence for infectious
disease, increased levels of violent conflict, and a decrease in the quality of the diet. This transition from
mobile foragers to sedentary farmers is documented in a number of areas including Asia, southern Europe,
the mid-latitudes North America, the lowlands of Central and South America, and the highlands of Mexico
and the Andes.
[62] Symposium: THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE MODERN STATE

This session examines the archacology of a series of institutions which define the modern capitalist state.
European colonial and post-colonial institutions such as prisons, factories, and plantations structure and
circulate State authority through the surveillance of individuals. Such institutions produced, circulated,
policed, and reproduced social behaviors which maintained state power relations. Each paper will demon-
Strate how apparently dissimilar institutions and mechanisms create and reproduce capitalist state societies.
[64] Symposium: THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF MIGRATION IN EARLY EUROPE

Recently many archacologists have attempted to explain change in terms of internal societal dynamics
rather than through movements of peoples. Papers in this symposium cxamine cases in European archacology
in which migration may have played an important role in cultural change. Examples from early historical
EES SAE COMERS: AEWA EE CLVESOPEREDS OF INET UN aN CHENEY at: he archacniogice study of
migration.
[65] Symposium: MICKEY MOUSE ARCHAEOLOGY: MICE, RATS, AND OTHER RODENTS

Honoring the venue of the 1994 SAA Annual Meeting, this symposium deals with a gnawing problem in
American archacology: rodents. These small mammals are an unger-considered but nearly ubiquitous feature
of the zooarchacological record. The papers in this symposium consider various aspects of rodent research,
from ethnography and cthoohistory to quantitative zooarchacology.
[66] Symposium: PALEOINDIAN AND ARCHAIC ADAPTATION IN TRANSITIONAL

ENVIRONMENTS ’

Palcoindian and Archaic period occupation of the western plains and Rocky Mountain region of Colorado
and Wyoming encompass a variety of subsistence and social adaptations at the juncture of two major
environmental zones. This symposium will investigate and synthesize current studies in this area to better
understand the relationship between peoples in these areas and their social and ecological environment.
Of special interest is resource procurement, mobility across and within physiographic zones, and local
adaptation to high altitude and transitional environments,
[67] Symposium: ARCHAEOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT

Archacologists have excavated and mapped thousands of buildings and built spaces, yet only use a handful
of methods for analyzing the culturally constructed built environment. This is a major analytical oversight
with significant theoretical implications for understanding past socictics. This symposium brings together
archacologists and architects who are developing new approaches to the built environment, including
phenomenological and structuralist approaches, the cthnoscience of spatial relations, and applications of
, 150 Yates, R.
Yates, R. (see Mitchell, P.) | 45)
Yellow Kidney, Buster (Blackfeet Tribe) [Forum Participant 95]
Yener, Asliban (Smithsonian Institution)
[24] METALLURGICAL INNOVATION AND TRANSFORMATION IN HIGHLAND ANATOLIA (4500-
3000 B.C.): A VIEW FROM THE FRONTIER
The metallurgical cransformation of the Chalcolithic is part of the wider phenomenon occurring throughout
the highland resource areas of Anatolia. A basic trinket technology for fabricating metal ornaments changes
in this region to one for the manufacture of functionally and technologically superior tools and weapons.
A whole range of metallurgical techniques, metals, and skills appear in close proximity to mining arcas and
quantities of metal finds are greatly increased. These changes coincide with the socio-political transformation
evident in the Ubaid and subsequent Uruk periods in Mesopotamia.
Yerkes, R. (see Kardulias, P.) |75)
Yesner, David (Alaska)
[56] ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE AND SUBSISTENCE DIVERSITY IN THE LATE PLEISTOCENE’
EARLY HOLOCENE OF ALASKA
The earliest occupation of Alaska occurred during the “Birch Period,” dating from 14,000 to 9,000 B.P.,
when rapid environmental changes, leading to a post-glacial thermal maximum, radically transformed the
landscape. The clearest patterns of occupation are seen in basins north of the Alaska Range, where locss
deposits have sealed occupations in well-defined paleosols dating to 11,800 B.P. To date, well-preserved
faunal remains are known only from the central Tanana Valley, where they suggest a wide subsistence
diversity, including large and smal! game, birds, and fish. Maritime adaptations are exclusively Holocene in
date, and begin ca. 9,000 B,P., as in arcas to the south.
Yoffee, Norman (Michigan) | Discussant 99}
Young, Bailey K. (Assumption College)
[64] MIGRATIONS AND INVASIONS? OR HOSTILE TAKEOVERS AND RESTRUCTURING? THE FALL
OF ROME REVISITED
Did the Roman Empire in the West actually “fall” during the Fifth Century to migrating barbarian invaders?
This notion, derived from contemporary written sources, underlay the archacology of this period in France
until recently, A re-examination of the evidence concerning the three major groups to “invade” Gaul and
establish “successor states" there suggests that “restructuring” offers a better metaphor for a long and
complex process, with episodes comparable to hostile takeovers in the corporate world.
Young, D. Craig, Jr. (Nevada-Reno)
[36] LOCATIONAL MODELS: SETTLEMENT PATTERN CHANGE IN WARNER VALLEY, OREGON
Warner Valicy, Oregon, provides a case study for modelling prehistoric adaptation to the varied resource
mosaics of the northern Great Basin. A locational model based on local geomorphology and resource
: productivity may clarify our understanding of the variation visible in the archacological record. A model
of settlement patterns has been developed using fluctuations in recent lake levels and marsh productivity.
LandSat images and aerial photos are used to show landform response to climatic variation. This poster
Shows model development and results of initial testing against the local record, An understanding of possibile
settlement regimes, and their expression in the archaeological record, may provide a better understanding
of levels of sedentism in the Great Basin.
Zedeno, M. Nieves (Arizona)
[42] A RETURN TO JHE GIFT: PREHISTORIC RECIPROCITY IN THE NORTHERN SOUTHWEST
The study of circulation of goods is crucial for understanding cconomic, social, and political relationships
among neolithic-level societies; unfortunately, archaeological research has been largely limited to the recon-
struction of long-distance trade of exotic or scarce commodities. Al present, increasing access to sophisticated
methods of physico-chemical characterization opens new possibilities for investing the circulation of goods
at a fine scale. This paper uses ceramic data from cast-central Arizona to explore social and ritual aspects
of reciprocity and discusses the archacological correlates of reciprocal exchange among prehistoric commu-
nities of the northern Southwest.
Zeidler, James (llinois-Urbana/Cbhampaign)
[59] POPULATION DYNAMICS AND DOMESTIC LABOR ORGANIZATION IN THE EARLY
SEDENTARY VILLAGE: A VIEW FROM REAL ALTO (ECUADOR)
This paper cxamines emergent social complexity in the Early Formative Period of coastal Ecuador by
focusing on habitation space and palecodemography at the Valdivia site of Real Alto. Between Phases 1 and
4 (ca. 3500-2500 B.C.), changes in village size, configuration, and domestic architecture correlate with
, Zukosky, William 151
changes in population structure inferred from life table analysis. Archaeological evidence from both data
sets indicates a strong trend toward increasing social differentiation, houschold size variability, and status
equality. The implications of these trends are explored with regard to models of household competition,
domestic labor control, and the rise of “big-man” leadership.
Zeller, Anne C. (Waterloo)
[34] PRIMATE CHILDREN AS MODELS FOR ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

Anthropologists study Primates as models to help understand early hominid social behavior and ecological
adaputions. Most field research has been focused on the requirements and contributions of aduit group
members to the virtual exclusion of young, except in their roles as a focus of mate selection or social
buffering, Specifically considering the needs of primate “children” alters projections of ecological parameters
such as food procurement patterns, home range size, and adult tasks, The nature and scope of changes in
accepted models of social organization and energy budgets when the requirements of young are considered
could provide useful parallels when studying populations archacologically.
Zbao, Zhijun (Missouri-Columbia) and Deborab M. Pearsall (Missourt-Columbia)
[25] USING MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES TO SEARCH FOR DIAGNOSTIC PHYTOLITHS

Phytoliths are silica bodies produced in plant cells. In some taxa, phytoliths are highly variable in their
characters. Recognizing the patterns of variability of diagnostic phytolith types is the key for identifying
plant taxa from archacological soil samples. In this paper, we explore multivariate approaches to study
phytolith shape and size for developing specics-level diagnostics. We use Oryza and Selaria as our examples,
and illustrate how species-level diagnostics can be identified using discriminant analysis and other multivariate
analysis techniques.
Zier, Christian J. (Centennial Archaeology, Inc.)
[66] HOLOCENE ADAPTATIONS AS EXHIBITED IN ROCK SHELTERS ALONG THE PLAINS—

FOOTHILLS TRANSITION ZONE, SOUTHERN COLORADO

Seven rock shelters on Fort Carson Military Reservation provide a stratigraphic record of human occupation
during the period 5700-770 B.P. Paleoclimatic data suggest rather subtle environmental variation during
this span, with conditions never profoundly different from those at present. A stable hunter-gatherer economy
oriented principally towafd consumption of small mammals and Chenopodium is evident. Maize appears
in the stratigraphic record around 2750 B.P. but in small quantities, with little obvious effect on the overall
subsistence system. Lithic materials analysis suggests use of, or contact with, plains areas further cast as
well as high mountains to the west.
Zimmerman, Larry (South Dakota) | Discussant 38}
Zimmerman, Larry (South Dakota) and Leonard Bruguier (South Dakota and
Inbanktonwan Sioux Tribe)
[93] USURPING NATIVE AMERICAN VOICE

The use of “voice” is not often a matter of i. choice for scholars. Archaeologists erroncously
assume that they have the authority to speak for human beings under archacological investigation
and that they have some understanding accessible only through archacological reconstruction. Because
archaeology is purported to be the only way that information about the past can be obtained, the archacologist
claims the voice of those studicd and asks others to yield to that authority. For many Native Americans,
archaeological usurpation of Native American voice be challenged because to allow it threatens the
power of the living cultural tradition seit iirthg ater of “ethnocriticism” may allow legitimate .
archacological use of Native American voice.
Zubrow, Ezra (SUNY-Buffalo and National Center for Geograpbic Information Analysts)
[96] ASSOCIATION, SPATIAL VARIATION, SPATIAL TAXONOMY AND GIS IN ARCHAEOLOGY

Underlying a considerable amount of analysis in archacology is the concept of association, which suggests
“like is near like” both spatially and temporally. On this premise various archacological taxonomies are
traditionally defined: the “horizon—phase” taxonomy, the “activity area—site—culture” taxonomy, and the
“hamlet—village—town—city” taxonomy, to name a few. This paper considers the appropriateness of such
theoretical and methodological concepts, and uses spatial semi-variance and spatial autocorrelation to
illustrate their strengths and weaknesses. Examples use GIS for analytic and presentation purposes.
Zukosky, William (Dames & Moore, Inc.)
[37] ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE EASTERN GREAT BASIN: THE KERN RIVER GAS TRANSMISSION

LINE PROJECT

The Kern River Gas Transmission Line project under the direction of Dames and Moore mitigated 140
prehistoric and historic cultural properties in the castern Great Basin, western Utah. Site types consist of
residential bases, short-term logistic or foraging camps, diurnal task sites, and extractive locations, Research

EE __ eee
, | ee SS eee
152 Zurita-Noguera, J.
domains include chronology, paleoenvironments, lithic procurement and technology, subsistence and settle-
ment patterns, and site structure and activity reconstruction. With the use of these research domains we
seek to explain variation in human behavior throughout the castern Great Basin from the perspective of
evolutionary ecology.
Zurita-Noguera, J. (see McClung de Tapia, E.) (8)
Zurita-Noguera, Judith (Institute de Investigaciones Antropolégicas UNAM) and Emily
McClung de Tapia (Universidad Nacional Auténoma de Mexico)
[25] IDENTIFICATION OF CARBONIZED AND MINERALIZED AGAVE FIBER REMAINS FROM
TERREMOTE-TLALTENCO, TEOTIHUACAN AND TLALTELOLCO
There is substantial information concerning the uses of Mexican Agave fibers to manufacture fabrics,
sandals, cordage, rope, etc. Most of the archaeological remains of fibers are poorly preserved and, especially
if carbonized or mineralized, do not respond to traditional laboratory treatments. The study of phytolith
extractions of modern specimens revealed silicified structures that can be considered diagnostic of Agave
fibers. Application of phytolith analysis was carried out with specimens from Terremote-Tlaltenco, Teotihua-
can and Tlaltelolco. It was possible to identify which specimens were Agave fibers and to determine which
corresponded to other plant families on the basis of diagnostic phytoliths.
Zutter, C. (see McGovern, T.) [46]
&
, NOTES
4
'
s :
’
153
, 8 [68] ZiNj Kids and Archaeology: Perspectives

computer imaging and virtual reality. The archacological case studies are global in scope: the Mediterranean,

Nile Valley, Madagascar, Andean South America, Central Mexico, and lowland Mesoamerica. This symposium

represents an important step in advancing archacological research in the built environment,

[68] Sponsored Symposium: ZIN) KIDS AND ARCHAEOLOGY: PERSPECTIVES OF A YOUNGER
GENERATION (ZiNj Magazine and SAA Public Education Committee)

Kids all over the world are interested in prehistory; numerous science fair projects, reports, class projects,
and much personal time are devoted to archacological topics, yet professional archacologists are often
unaware of that interest and, especially, are often unaware of the potential allies we have in the classrooms
of America. In this symposium kids present the results of their experiments, research, thinking, and feelings
about archacology. Each presenter has worked with an adult, professional mentor, to produce a quality
presentation. This symposium demonstrates that outreach to kids is an effective means to bring messages
about protection and preservation of cultural resources to the general public, that kids are great spokesper-
sons for heritage resources, that kids can be effective in educating adults, and that youthful enthusiasm is
contagious.

{69} Symposium: LATE PLEISTOCENE FORAGERS IN THE UKRAINE: RESEARCH AT MEZHIRICH,
1991-1994

Multidisciplinary research involving scholars from Ukraine, Russia, and the United States has provided
valuable new insights into Late Picistocene adaptations on the East European Plain and has also yielded
pertinent data on the macro- and micro-environments in which these adaptations occurred. Using a highly
syncretistic battery of data recovery, data processing, and analytical methods and techniques, issues of Late
Pleistocene site formation and emplacement processes, site use, subsistence, and seasonality are explored
at Mezhirich, located at the junction of the Ros and Rosava rivers in south-central Ukraine.

[74] Symposium: A ROCKY PAST: INTERDISCIPLINARY PALEOINDIAN RESEARCH

From the beginning, Paleoindian research has been an interdisciplinary endeavor. The combined efforts
of archaeology and geology, especially petrology and scdimentology, were crucial to early investigators in
demonstrating the origins and antiquity of Paleoindian cultural deposits. More recently, Paleoindian special-
ists have employed additional techniques and concepts from other scientific disciplines including chemistry,
ecology, mathematics, physics, and zoology. The papers in this symposium exemplify the growth and
necessity of interdisciplinary Paleoindian research.

[75] Symposium: RECENT RESEARCH IN SOUTHERN NEVADA

This symposium emphasizes recent archacological research on the prehistory and history of southern
Nevada, a region which encompasses the periphery of the Southwest, the Mojave Desert, and the Great
Basin. The diversity of the papers reflects the complexity of the research issues in the region. They focus
on prehistoric climate reconstruction, chronology, water resources, infra-structure of hunter-gatherer sites,
geoglyph analysis, historic site interpretations, and recent historic structures in an archaeological context,

‘ Together these papers represent the state of current research on important themes in western United States
archacology.

[77] Symposium: BETWEEN HORIZONS: SOCIAL RECONFIGURATIONS AND POLITICAL

STRATEGIES IN THE EARLY INTERMEDIATE PERIOD OF PERU

Striking changes in social structure, economic, political, and ideological organization, and settlement and
burial patterns occurred in the Central Andes at the close of the Early Horizon with the demise of the
integrative networks fostered by the Chavin cult, and again at the end of the Early Intermediate Period as
Andean societies entered into significant interaction around the new, more politically based integration of
the Wari Empire, We examine the critical events and processes of destructuration and reconfiguration at
the beginning and end of the Early Intermediate Period from the perspective of the north coast and adjacent
highlands with comparative insights provided by discussants for other core regions of the Central Andes.
(79] Symposium: ISLANDS AS LABORATORIES: ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH IN COMPARATIVE

PERSPECTIVE

In this symposium researchers examine the utility of the biogeographic concept of “islands as laboratories.”
islands have served as convenient units for biologists and anthropologists to address questions of evolutionary
change because they vary in size, ecological complexity, human and environmental history, and degree
of relative isolation. Recent island research has stressed two related issues. Paleoenvironmental analyses
demonstrate the fragility of island environments with natural and human-induced changes. Recent work has
also shown that islands are not “closed systems” but vary significantly in inter-island and island-mainland
interactions (human and biotic). We show that island laboratories offer insights for research problems
worldwide.
, [85] The Development of Social Power in Nonstate Societies 9
[80] Symposium: THE HOHOKAM CLASSIC TO POST-CLASSIC TRANSITION: CULTURAL
CONTINUITY OR DISLOCATION?

Across the American Southwest during the late A.D. 1300s, populations decline and many regions are
apparently abandoned. In the Hohokam Region, accumulating evidence indicates the presence of low density
populations after about A.D. 1350. Papers presented here focus on the cause of this population decrease,
as well as differences and similaritics between Classic and Post-Classic period cultural adaptations. To what
extent are Post-Classic populations comparable to the Classic period? The problem of determining the
degree of cultural continuity and/or change is addressed from site-specific perspectives and through analysis
of specific classes of material culture.

[81] Symposium: IT’S A SMALL WORLD AFTER ALL: THE STUDY OF COMMUNITIES AND THEIR
ORGANIZATION

The focus of this symposium is on communities and their organization. All human socicties occupy
communities. Depending on such factors as sociocultural complexity, subsistence, social organization, and
intergroup relations communities range from relatively self-sufficient entities to elements or modules linked
into highly integrated networks of other communities. Further, the internal organization of communities
reflects an additional set of factors and constraints associated with kinship relations, activity organization,
wealth and starus, ideology, and cosmology and ritual. Sorting out these factors, at the local and regional
scales, is a major methodological challenge. Linking the factors to community structure, organization, and
change is the theoretical challenge. In this session, scholars investigate community organization from a
variety of theoretical perspectives, methodological approaches, and regional contexts.

[82] Sponsored Public Symposium: INVESTIGATING THE MYSTERIES OF TIME WITH
ARCHAEOLOGY (SAA Public Education Committec)

This three hour program offers a lecture series and exhibits/posters oriented to the general public in the
Los Angeles vicinity. The lecture scrics includes a session chair, two featured speakers, a representative of
the SAA, and a spokesperson from the Socicty for California Archacology. The latter speaker briefly discusses
opportunities in that state for the interested public to get involved in archacology. The two featured speakers
address in a popular fashion the wide range of scientific techniques that archacologists use to reveal the
ancient and recent past. The exhibits/posters represent a wide range of archacological organizations from
California and nationwide and provide information on current archaeological activities as well as programs
available to the public.

[83] Symposium: PREHISTORIC ENVIRONMENTS AND LAND USE ALONG A 1670 KM TRANSECT
IN THE WESTERN UNITED STATES

A five-year program of archacological surveys, testing, data-recovery cxcavations, and monitoring of
construction along the route of a natural gas pipeline in Idaho, Washington, Oregon, and California has been
completed. Paleoenvironmental research and archacological investigations at more than 400 prehistoric and
historic sites along the 1670-km transect have yielded substantial information on latitudinal and diachronic
variability in land use, settlement, resource procurement, oe and exchange systems over a span
of 10,000 years. The papers in this symposium examine the Pfoject’s major research goals, methods, and
findings, not only as they relate to testing archaeological models and hypotheses but also in terms of designing
future studies of land use along extensive transects.

[84] Symposium: PROJECTILE TECHNOLOGIES: ARCHAEOL@GICAL, EXPERIMENTAL, AND
ETHNOARCHAEOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES

Contributions to this symposium address questions concerning the design, manufacture, and use of
projectile technologies, as well as environmental and cultural influences on weapon selection and projectile
design. Paradigmatic issucs of exploring projectile technologies and hunting techniques are considered.
The temporal coverage of the symposium extends from the Middle Paleolithic through the present; geo-
graphic scope spans the Old World and the New World. Results of archacological, experimental, and
ethnoarchacological research involving spears, atlatls, bows, and arrows are presented.

(85) Symposium: THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIAL POWER IN NONSTATE SOCIETIES: EXAMPLES
FROM THE AMERICAN SOUTHWEST AND THE SOUTH-CENTRAL ANDES

The methodological and theoretical issucs involved in the reconstruction and explanation of the develop-
ment Of social complexity in nonstate societies have generated considerable debate. Using case studies from
the South Central Andes and the North American Southwest, this symposium will address the archacological
measurement and the explanation of a central aspect of complexity, ic., social power, from a number of
theoretical vantage points. These two regions were chosen because they developed significant levels of
social complexity without becoming states, were frontiers of states during long periods of their histories,
and were occupied by groups of similar demographic and territorial scales of integration.

