Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     1
The ANNUAL MEETING of the Society for American Archaeology provides a forum for the dissemination of knowledge and
discussion. The views expressed at the sessions are solely those of the speakers and the Society does not endorse, approve, or
censor them. Descriptions of events and titles are those of the organizers, not the Society.
                                                Participants-Individual Abstracts
Abdolahzadeh, Aylar (University of Pennsylvania), Dennis Sandgathe (Simon Fraser University), Deborah Olszewski
(University of Pennsylvania) and Shannon McPherron (Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology)
[36]
Does the Southwest France Pattern of Neanderthal Fire Use Exist across Europe?
Less frequent use of fire during cold periods and greater use during warmer periods has been observed as a pattern in several
Middle Paleolithic sites in southwestern France. This calls into question the consistency of fire use among Neandertals who lived in
the mid-latitudes of the European continent. In recent years, the majority of research related to this subject is primarily from
evidence for the presence and absence of direct fire residues (charcoal and ash). However, relying on direct evidence of fire is
problematic due to preservation bias. The present research overcomes this problem, to some extent, by analyzing stone artifacts.
This poster presents the results of a study on the percentage of burned flints in several lithic assemblages (only cave and rock-
shelter sites) selected from a wide range of geographic and climatic conditions during the Late Pleistocene within the European
continent in order to (a) understand whether this pattern can be also observed across Europe in the Late Pleistocene, and (b) to
evaluate the variability in the frequency of fire use in the archaeological record.
Abdullayev, Rahman (Gobustan National Historical Artistic Preserve) and Vugar Isayev (Gobustan National Historical
Artistic Preserve)
[111]
Scientific Research at Gobustan National Historical Artistic Preserve and International Collaboration
Discovered at 1939 by archaeologist Ishag Jafarzade scientific investigations in Gobustan National Historical Artistic preserve are
continues. Despite the lack of technology and international experience archaeological investigations held during the USSR period
led light to many questions about Gobustan petroglyphs. Because of the political and socio-economic condition after the collapse of
USSR scientific researches at Gobustan was stopped. In relation to the inscription into the UNESCO World Heritage List during the
last fifteen years, there are several scientific projects held at Gobustan and examples took the international experience gained
randomly. Gobustan National Historical Artistic preserve into the collaboration with an international network of rock art organizations,
like “European Rock Art Trails” of Council of Europe in order to gain high standards of management of rock art sites. But there is an
urgent need of experience or partners especially in the field of conservation of petroglyphs.
Abell-Selby, Emma
[214]
Compliance v. Deviance within the U.S. Army (1890–1950)
Using Giddens’ agency theory, this research explores self-care and institutional care practices in the U.S. Army. This project examines
medical and personal care items discarded by U.S. soldiers from Bldg. 104 of the San Francisco Presidio from 1890 to 1950. These
artifacts were found in a barrack and include items such as bottles (e.g., alcohol, medicine, soda), razors, toothpaste, floss, chewing
gum, health-related advertisements and pamphlets, cigarette packaging, Kellogg’s Corn flakes, etc. Methods include cataloging and
analyzing artifacts, conducting archival research at the Golden Gate National Recreation Area, as well as examining primary and
secondary source documents. This research investigates whether or not soldiers complied with or deviated from the rules and
expectations of the U.S. Army. Fundamentally, the U.S. Army provided soldiers with structure, safety, and purpose. Prior to 1890, health
and preventative medicine were becoming of great interest to the U.S. Army because of the outbreak of cholera in the 1850s. In order to
ensure the health and wellbeing of the troops, the U.S. Army took great lengths to educate military personnel on the dangers of illicit
sexual activity and consumption of alcohol. The items discarded in Bldg. 104 also represent quotidian life within the U.S. Army.
Ables, Dayna (Bureau of Land Management - New Mexico State Office)
[88]
Discussant
Abraham, Shinu (St. Lawrence University), Laure Dussubieux (Field Musuem), Thomas Fenn (University of Oklahoma) and
Alok Kanungo (Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar)
[249]
Reconstructing Glass Manufacturing Patterns in India through Raw Materials Sourcing and Ethnoarchaeological Investigations
Despite the widespread distribution of Indian-made glass beads around the Indian Ocean and beyond, not much is known about
South Asia’s early glass industries from the first centuries BCE through the second millennium CE. This paper will present an
overview of an ongoing project designed to use elemental and isotopic characterizations of soil samples from selected regions
around India to connect raw material sources to ancient glass artifacts. One of this survey project’s goals is to examine localized
production patterns in order to investigate whether glass and bead making may have shifted within India regionally and temporally,
in response to changing overseas demand. Another important byproduct of the survey is the recognition of local and regional
variability in glass making techniques and organization, through the compilation of ethnographic accounts on these fast
disappearing village-based industries.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     2
Abraham, Shinu [249] see Fenn, Thomas
Abramovich, Lucía (San Antonio Museum of Art) and Jennifer Mathews (Trinity University)
[109]
The Nuts and Bolts of Collaboration: The Precolumbian Collection as a Bridge between Curators and Professors
Despite a similar educational trajectory, curators and professors have drastically different experiences and expectations in their
respective careers. Moreover, the modern-day reality of these occupations is vastly different from previous generations, and the
study of collections has had to adjust accordingly. In this paper, we discuss ways of cultivating the relationship between universities
and museums that benefit both institutions and aid curators and professors in meeting their professional goals. More specifically, we
survey the historical relationship between the San Antonio Museum of Art (SAMA), as it pertains to SAMA’s collection of Pre-
Columbian Art, and Trinity University’s Department of Sociology and Anthropology. Historically, the SAMA-Trinity partnership has
allowed curators to participate in teaching and oversee student projects through internship programs. This assistance facilitates
deeper research of museum collections and improves visitor engagement with the museum collection. While archaeology professors
may be dissuaded from working with museum collections because of a lack of archaeological context, they may formulate rich class
experiences when students conduct original research/and or receive applied professional training in a museum setting. Looking
ahead, we consider how this collaboration will evolve in this era of more socially-engaged museums and universities.
[109]
Chair
Abrego, Alejandra [147] see Hertfelder, Paula
Abrego, Alejandra [79] see McGuire, Randall
Acabado, Stephen [239] see Rodning, Christopher
Acebo, Nathan [27] see Tomczyk, Weronika
Aceituno, Javier [198] see Robinson, Mark
Acevedo, Natalia [246] see Weber, Marion
Acuña, Mary Jane (Washington University, St. Louis), Carlos Chiriboga (Yale University), Varinia Matute (University of
Calgary) and Francisco Castañeda (Independent)
[269]
Preclassic Maya Site Engineering and Landscape Evolution: The Role of the Hydraulic and Defensive Earthworks at El Tintal,
Petén, Guatemala
During the Late Preclassic period, massive construction projects were carried out at sites across the south-central Yucatán
Peninsula, in a region known as the Central Karst Uplands. At sites like El Tintal, El Mirador, Nakbe, Yaxnocah and Calakmul,
inhabitants modified the landscape through massive filling and levelling operations prior to constructing large pyramid complexes.
Elevated causeways were also laid out radiating out from the site centers, connecting outlying groups and neighboring sites.
Additionally, at El Tintal, two major earthworks were completed, consisting of extensively excavated features. The first of these is a
canal or moat that encircles the epicenter of the site, which we previously suggested might have had a dual function; while the
second, the North Canal, connected Chacamat lagoon with the Nacimiento drainage north of the site. Over a few centuries, El
Tintal’s inhabitants carried out major engineering works that drastically altered their landscape and would continue to influence
successive occupations at the site for over a millennia. We will present a summary of results and analysis based on LIDAR data and
recent excavations looking at deliberate and unplanned consequences that these monumental constructions produced on the
landscape.
Adam, Manda
[53]
Postclassic Ritual Deposits in Northwest Belize
In northwest Belize there is limited material evidence for the full range of Postclassic Maya occupation and presence. While there is
evidence for occupation in the Early Postclassic, the remaining data for the Late Postclassic time period generally consists of ritual
visitation deposits. These ritual visitation deposits consist of incensarios at the bases of stela and/or temples and have been found
at the sites of Dos Hombres, La Milpa, and Chan Chich, among others. This paper examines and synthesizes these deposits of
Postclassic Maya as ritual activity in northwest Belize.
Adam, Manda
[206]
Chair
Adam, Manda [206] see Ruffe, Danielle
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       3
Adams, Alisha (University of Otago), Sian Halcrow (University of Otago), Andrew Millard (Durham University), Hoang Trinh
Hiep (Vietnamese Institute of Archaeology) and Marc Oxenham (Australian National University)
[199]
The Crossover Conundrum: Exploring the Relationship between Linear Enamel Hypoplasia and Incremental Dentine Isotopes in
Prehistoric Vietnam
Early life stress can have life-long consequences for health of the individual and population. Within archaeology, infant and
childhood physiological stress can be addressed by studying the skeleton, which is a record of diet and stress over the lifetime.
However, there is an interwoven, biocultural relationship between diet and stress, and detangling this relationship is difficult using
one method alone. To clarify the relationship between diet and stress during development, this research compares the timing of
linear enamel hypoplasias (LEH), markers of stress identified through microscopic topographic methods on tooth enamel, and
incremental dentine stable isotope profiles, which allow changing diet and stress episodes to be observed. Dentine and enamel
grow concurrently, thus combining these methods provides clarity to the interaction of changing diet and stress in children. This
paper presents two individual cases from Man Bac in Neolithic Vietnam, investigating the timing of LEH and changes of δ15N and
δ13C. These cases illustrate how each method interprets the timing of dietary and stress indicators, based on metric positioning or
aging systems. We demonstrate the problems when combining methods, and how to address these issues when discussing
developmental stress in the past.
Adams, Aron [229] see Stephens Reed, Lori
Adams, Christopher (Gila National Forest Archaeologist)
[122]
Mimbres Exploitation of Native Copper on the Gila National Forest, New Mexico
The discovery of a native copper artifact on a Classic Mimbres site on the Gila National Forest in southwestern New Mexico in 2009,
initiated an archaeological investigation to determine if more native copper artifacts existed in the Mimbres area. This preliminary
investigation involved surveying a small sample of Mimbres prehistoric sites using the latest metal sensing technology available,
documenting the distribution of native copper nuggets and copper artifacts within the Mimbres area of the Gila National Forest. This
poster presentation will highlight the results of the metal sensing survey but more importantly it will focus on the Mimbres
exploitation of natural/worked copper nuggets, fragmented/crushed/complete copper bells, copper fetishes and other copper
artifacts that have been recently discovered adjacent to Mimbres pithouses and Classic Mimbres pueblo sites dating from AD 950–
AD 1130.
Adams, Jake (USDA Forest Service)
[253]
Typological Miscommunication: Can We Get to the Point? A Case Study from Alaska
Artifact typologies are an essential component of archaeological research that facilitate the organization of data into convenient and
easily discernible categories. Types are produced through morphological similarities of artifacts and observable patterns that may be
used to answer specific research questions. This is particularly the case for projectile points that may manifest in specific styles that
include traits such as flake patterns, flutes, and notches. Even though a useful and necessary tool in theory, typologies often fail in
practice. If these approaches are opaque and ambiguous, they prove to be more of a detriment than an advantageous tool for
discourse concerning artifacts in time and space. In this context, a specific case study of typological miscommunication is examined
from the perspective of late Pleistocene/early Holocene Alaska. A picture survey based on projectile points that have been classified
into “rigid” categories was undertaken to see how reliable and consistent typological designations are for archaeological research.
Alternatives to defining strict cultural traditions, or complexes, are discussed from behavioral and lithic technological organization
approaches.
Adams, Jennifer [252] see Perdikaris, Sophia
Adams, Jonathan [161] see Wright, David
Adams, Karen [235] see Turner, Michelle
Adams, Kenneth [198] see Wriston, Teresa
Adams, Megan (Eckerd College)
[197]
Imprints of Landscape Inequality at Bourbon Plantation, Cat Island, Bahamas
Studies of British colonial plantations in The Bahamas have increasingly explored the landscape for manifestations of social
inequality. Several models of hierarchical landscape organization have been suggested in the last few decades. A recent mapping
survey of Bourbon Plantation, an early nineteenth-century cotton and livestock estate on Cat Island, provides an opportunity to
assess these models. The spatial distribution of masonry architectural remains suggests a built environment with a subtle, but
consistent, relationship between topographic relief and architectural elaboration. A key architectural feature in this context is vertical
height, which correlates strongly with natural elevation. The findings evoke contemporary discourses on viewshed, panopticon, and
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    4
other conceptualizations of social visibility. Apart from shedding light on an important local heritage site and a one-time settlement
for enslaved laborers, the survey raises questions about the roles of human ecology and hegemonic power in the creation of
agrarian landscapes in the colonial West Indies.
Adams, Sophia [135] see Hamilton, Derek
Adeyemo, Elizabeth (University of Notre Dame)
[216]
Investigating Connections: Ecology and Indigenous Resource Utilization among the People of Agbowa Ikosi
The materialization of the perspicuous human niche forms over a substantial period of time. This occurrence births the accumulation
of diverse cultural expressions among different groups occupying varying geographical locations. Based on the theoretical
background of sociocultural ecology to understand human-environment relationships, this research demonstrates the relationship
between the subsistence, architecture and the spatial distribution among the people of Agbowa Ikosi, Lagos state, Nigeria. Using
ethnographic tools, this research reveals that the environment significantly stimulates rather than dictates human choices of
settlement location, architectural construction and the space allocation of the population. Although fishing is the major means of
livelihood in the community, the indigenes have varying architectural structures within the community which are clearly segregated
into temporary and permanent structures mainly induced by fishing seasons. The temporary structures are located close to the
lagoon and built with thatch sourced from across the lagoon. On the other hand, the architectural structures considered more
permanent are built away from the lagoon with clay found in close proximity to the habitation. Although a single community, the
differences in the architectural structures, subsistence patterns and the level of specialization reflects human adaptation to the
environment, utilizing available resources in a typical traditional society.
Adler, Michael (Southern Methodist University)
[148]
Transfers of Power: Caching of Ritual Objects in Precolonial and Postcolonial Picuris Pueblo
This research considers caching and deposition of ritually-charged objects in pre- and post-colonial Pueblo communities in the
Northern Rio Grande region. These depositional acts show continuities in the practices of empowering and constraining the agency
of objects over long time spans. The particular focus of this study is a cache of Catholic religious medallions and other items
deposited in the walls of the eighteenth-century mission church at Picuris Pueblo and considers various interpretive approaches to
the cache by tribal and non-tribal individuals.
Adovasio, J. M. (Senator John Heinz History Center)
[170]
The Gault Site, Mike Collins, and the Prehistory of the America
Collins’s still ongoing excavations at the Gault Site (41BL323), Bell County, Texas, have contributed substantially to the near-final
dissolution of the venerable Clovis-First paradigm both chronologically and behaviorally. Specifically, the excavations at Gault reveal
that humans are present in central Texas some 3,000 years before the Clovis horizon and, further, that these first Texans are
probably not specialized big game hunters. Additionally, the Gault excavations indicate that the Clovis culture, itself, is in need of
redefinition as the Clovis horizon at Gault is not representative of a rapidly transient population of spear-toting, big game hunters.
Collins continuing reluctance to address the profound implications of the Gault research is also addressed.
Adovasio, J. M. [222] see Freund, Kyle
Agenten, Courtney [193] see Malo, Erika
Agnew, Neville [111] see McClintock, Thomas
Agostini, Mark [120] see Van Keuren, Scott
Agurcia Fasquelle, Ricardo [130] see Pineda de Carias, Maria-Cristina
Ahern, Kaitlin (University at Buffalo)
[189]
An Analysis of Lime Plaster Samples from the Holmul Region
During the summer of 2018 and 2019, the author collected 22 lime plaster samples from the ancient Maya sites of Cival, Holmul,
and Witzna. These three sites are located in the Holmul region, which is located in the Petén, Guatemala. along the border with
Guatemala and Belize. The majority of the plaster samples were collected during the Holmul Archaeological Project’s 2018 field
seasons at Holmul and Witzna. These plaster samples were analyzed via thin-section analysis, SEM-EDS, and PXRF with the goal
of determining the elemental and chemical composition. Comparative analysis was conducted to determine the variations between
the plaster samples and provide insight regarding the interactions between these three sites and the practices involved in the
selection of raw materials and plaster production.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      5
Ahlman, Todd (Texas State University), Ashley McKeown (Texas State University), Nicholas Herrmann (Texas State
University) and Fred van Keulen (St. Eustatius Center for Archaeological Research)
[215]
The 2019–2020 NSF REU Exploring Globalization through Archaeology Archaeological, Bioarchaeological, and Geophysical
Investigations on St. Eustatius, Dutch Caribbean
The second year of the National Science Foundation (NSF) Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Exploring
Globalization through Archaeology project included archaeological investigations of the sugar works site (SE095), bioarchaeological
investigations of an eighteenth-century cemetery (SE600), and geophysical survey of the SE095 slave village, SE127/410 Lazaretto
area, and two cemeteries. The various projects allowed the NSF REU students the opportunity to undertake a wide variety of
research projects. The posters in this session exemplify this diversity and the broad range of research undertaken by the NSF REU
researchers. This poster presents an overall picture of the 2019–2020 session to introduce the overall project as well as highlight
the student research.
[215]
Chair
Ahlman, Todd [215] see Black, Reece
Ahlman, Todd [215] see Fields, Mara
Ahlquist, Tia (Arizona State University)
[185]
Oral History of the Teotihuacan Research Laboratory
Archaeologists study the past. What’s often missing is the story of the archaeologists’ interaction with the land and its people, and
the impact their presence has had on the region, the academic discipline, and the future. These stories are not missing; they are
alive in the memories of those involved, but someone has to shed light on those stories and make them known before it is too late.
In the case of the ASU’s Teotihuacan Research Laboratory in San Juan Teotihuacan, Mexico, there is a decade’s worth of histories
yet to be shared. It has been to the home of many groundbreaking research projects over the years and continues to be an
important fixture in Mexican archaeology today. The Teotihuacan Mapping Project, a legendary undertaking by George Cowgill and
René Millon beginning in the 1960s, remains one of the greatest archaeological feats to this day. Since then, the Teotihuacan
Research Laboratory has become the base of countless other research projects, a foundation for international collaboration, and
home to an unmatched collection of artifacts. It is an important part of both ASU and Mexican history, and a treasure to the
archaeological community. This is its story.
Ahlstedt, Steve [78] see McKenna, Kathryn
Ahlstrom, Richard (HRA Inc. Conservation Archaeology)
[229]
Introducing a Database of Tree-Ring Dated Puebloan Pit Structures
Prehistoric and early historical period Puebloan pit structures are characterized by a succession of appendages to their
southeastern quadrants, including lateral entryways, antechambers, ventilators, recesses, and platforms. The documented history of
these features is reviewed through the lens of a database of tree-ring dated structures, including approximately 250 pit houses and
100 kivas, that can be reliably assigned to 25-year intervals between AD 200 and 1625 (mostly to AD 425–1475) and, often, to
substantially narrower intervals as well. The data are assessed for their contribution to the history of these feature types, but also for
their usefulness in documenting rates in the adoption and spread of the architectural features over space and time, the “holy grail” of
archaeological chronology.
Ahrens, Birte [62] see Piezonka, Henny
Aimers, Jim (SUNY Geneseo)
[93]
Discussant
Ainsworth, Caitlin (University of New Mexico)
[129]
Singing for Their Supper: An Exploration of Bird Domestication Processes
Birds have played an important role in people’s lives throughout human history. In bird watching clubs and at turkey dinners, from
feather capes to figurines, and on pots and petroglyph panels, evidence of humanity’s long fascination with birds is all around us.
Birds were, and continue to be, prized as sources of food, feathers, companionship, beauty, and song. Yet despite birds’ ubiquity in
humans’ lives, very few bird species were ever fully domesticated. They mostly occur in the archaeological record as fully wild or,
less commonly, captive animals. The universal importance of birds but their infrequent domestication raises questions about the
incentives for and impediments to bird domestication. This paper explores the factors acting for and against bird domestication using
avifaunal data from Pottery Mound, New Mexico.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   6
Aiuvalasit, Michael (Illinois State Archaeological Survey, University of Illinois)
[171]
Domestic Water Insecurity, Climate Change, and the Long-Term Sustainability of Communities: A Case Study of Ancestral Pueblo
Dryland Famers in the Jemez Mountains, New Mexico
Water used for consumption and domestic purposes is rarely the subject of archaeological study, even though humans must acquire
and consume water every day. Archaeological examples of how societies in arid lands met their domestic water needs are
increasingly relevant to present-day concerns about water insecurity on our hotter and more crowded planet. Through a case study
of domestic water management practices by nine Ancestral Pueblo farming communities in the Jemez Mountains of New Mexico
(AD 1100–1600), I demonstrate the utility of merging interdisciplinary geoarchaeological and geospatial studies with interpretive
frameworks from socio-hydrology for studying domestic water. This study shows how tradeoffs for developing robust collective
action strategies to manage one resource (i.e., agricultural production) can introduce fragilities in other resources (i.e., domestic
water). Feedbacks generated by hydrological and agricultural droughts in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries made some, but not
all Ancestral Pueblo communities in this study area vulnerable to periods of water insecurity, suggesting that communal decision-
making surrounding resource management is critical to the long-term sustainability of communities.
Aiuvalasit, Michael (Illinois State Archaeological Survey, University of Illinois)
[220]
Discussant
Akens, Jamie [85] see Lorenz, Wayne
Akoshima, Kaoru (Tohoku University) and Hyewon Hong (Tohoku University)
[162]
For Identification Standards of Lithic Use-Wear in the East Asian Paleolithic
This paper investigates methodological aspects of functional inferences made on the basis of microwear analysis of lithic artifacts.
Various use-wear traces are static facts in the present world, while behavioral episodes utilizing stone tools were dynamic
processes of the past cultural system. Thus, fundamental principles of the Middle Range Theory in the sense of Binford (1981) apply
to experimental microwear analysis. The uniformitarian assumption applies to the physical facets of controlled experiments, while
factors such as ancient environments, lithic raw materials, and technological diversities interfere in making reliable functional
inferences. More than forty years of experimental work by the Tohoku University Microwear Research Team has identified essential
problems of use-wear study as middle range research. This paper presents standardized identification criteria such as micro-polish
charts and microflaking patterns. Examples from Northeastern Japan, especially from the Mogami River Upper Palaeolithic research
project, are used to develop a dependable inferential framework. Some cases from the Korean Peninsula are also examined for
inter-regional applicability of the Tohoku University methodology, which integrates both high power and low power approaches.
Alaica, Aleksa (University of Toronto)
[106]
Herding and Late Moche Politics: Camelid Offerings as Long-Distance Tribute, a Look through Stable and Radiogenic Isotopic
Evidence from Huaca Colorada, Jequetepeque Valley, Peru
To explore the dynamics of the north coast region, trading networks and camelid husbandry needs to be at the forefront of
conversations about mobility, diffusion, stylistic integrations and local transformations. The Late Moche site (AD 650–850) of Huaca
Colorada has a large assemblage of camelid remains that attest to their use in feasting events, quotidian activities and for long-
distance interactions. Recent stable and radiogenic isotope analyses indicate that the camelid remains from Huaca Colorada are
highly diverse, with evidence of consistent contact with the highlands and other coastal regions. The diverse use of these animals in
food sharing traditions as well as for ceremonial offerings suggests that camelids were considered extended kin. I argue that trade
groups and agro-pastoralists considered their camelid herds as valued socio-political and ideological offerings for large feasting
events occurring in the southern Jequetepeque Valley in the Middle Horizon. Through the offering of camelids these transient
groups were forging strong social and political bonds among north coastal groups but also with communities farther abroad. It was
through camelid herding that the division between ‘them’ and ‘us’ was broken down and allowed for meaningful interactions between
groups to occur.
Alaica, Aleksa [61] see Belisle, Veronique
Alaica, Aleksa [61] see Biwer, Matthew
Alaica, Aleksa [86] see Jennings, Justin
Alamseged, Zeresenay [55] see Coon, Sarah
Alaniz, Alfred [16] see Perez, Gary
Alarcón Tinajero, Edgar (University of Georgia) and Samuel Hillman (University of Edinburgh)
[119]
Biodistance at the Core of Empire: Biological and Cultural Admixture in Early Colonial Mexico City
Indigenous North American communities were marred by violence, displacement, epidemics, and demographic loss in the sixteenth
century wake of European contact. Historical documents attest to the relocation of entire communities and coalescence of new
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     7
ones, including San Gregorio Atlapulco in the southern Valley of Mexico. Across North America, sixteenth and seventeenth century
transformations came about through population movements, cultural admixture, and genetic admixture between Native Americans,
Europeans, and Africans. Non-metric dental variation from skeletal remains excavated at the San Gregorio Atlapulco cemetery
elucidates biological change of the initial Colonial period in one region. Interpretations of sex-based differences in biological
variation from the adults at this cemetery site are presented. Preliminary interpretations explain the dearth of typically-European
dental traits and preponderance of typically-indigenous ones. A narrative of sociobiological continuities despite ideological
transformations at San Gregorio Atlapulco is substantiated by sparse evidence of gene flow between Europeans and Native
Americans, a high proportion of cranial modification among individuals, and a site-wide burial arrangement consistent with a
Christian context. This research, and similar bioarchaeological approaches, scrutinizes our understanding of the varied experiences
of indigenous people in a new colonial order.
Alberg, David [231] see Casserley, Tane
Albert, Katherine (University of Massachusetts, Boston) and Heather Trigg (University of Massachusetts, Boston)
[112]
Understanding the Construction of Seventeenth-Century Spanish Colonial Architecture and Its Role in the Process of Colonizing the
American Southwest
Previous work on Spanish colonial architecture in seventeenth-century New Mexico focuses primarily on the construction of religious
and civic architecture; it is rare to find literature about domestic architecture from this time period and region. As such, a large
aspect of Spanish colonization of the American Southwest is not well understood. This paper aims to address this gap in knowledge
of Spanish colonial architecture by investigating the construction and role of the architecture of LA 20,000, a seventeenth-century
ranch (estancia) in New Mexico, in the processes of Spanish colonization of indigenous Pueblo and Plains peoples of the American
Southwest. Using architectural data recovered from the excavations at LA 20,000 in conversation with similar case studies of
Spanish colonial architecture, we offer interpretations of what the structures of the estancia may have looked like, and what
materials and labor efforts were used to construct them. From this, we see a lack of physical separation between the colonizer and
colonized, which has ramifications for the social interactions between them.
Albert, Rebecca (University of California, Santa Barbara) and Susan Kooiman (Southern Illinois University, Edwardsville)
[235]
Exploring Potential Contamination of Domesticate Microbotanical Remains in Carbonized Food Residues
Microbotanical remains, such as starches and phytoliths, provide useful insight into the origins of agriculture and early regional
adoption of various cultigens. Maize microbotanicals in carbonized food residues adhered to ceramic cooking vessels have been
dated as early as 300 BC throughout the Upper Great Lakes region, which is earlier than macrobotanical evidence for maize in the
area. The Cloudman site (20CH6), on Upper Michigan’s Drummond Island, provides an excellent opportunity for temporal studies of
diet and early agricultural practices because of its occupational history, spanning the Middle and Late Woodland periods. The goal
of this study is to determine if microbotanicals present in soil from historic and modern farming practices could have resulted in false
positive findings of maize and squash microbotanicals present in the carbonized residues recovered from ceramic rim sherds from
the Cloudman site. Soil samples were chemically floated to separate starches and phytoliths from sediment and will be
microscopically analyzed. If no microbotanical remains for maize or squash are present in the soil samples, this can increase
confidence in the findings of maize phytoliths and starches present in charred residues dated to AD 100 at the Cloudman site.
Albrecht, Kendal [180] see Rademaker, Kurt
Alconini, Sonia (University of Virginia)
[61]
Inka Kallawayas: Cuisine, Identity, and Status Negotiations in the Eastern Imperial Fringes
The Kallawayas were valued traveling shamans and herbal healers of the Tawantinsuyu that dwelled in the eastern valleys of the
Titicaca basin. Located along an ancient trading route that penetrated deep into the tropical Yungas was the Inka center of Kaata
Pata, conceived as the mountain’s heart. Excavations in this center have revealed its sociopolitical importance, as lavish feasting
events were recurrently celebrated. Such commensal celebrations, targeted to elite segments in the region, comprised conspicuous
consumption of camelid meat and chicha corn beer served in elaborate serving vessels in the Inka Taraco Polychrome and
Urcosuyo Polychrome styles. Using faunal data, archaeobotany, ethnohistory and stylistic ceramic analyses, this presentation will
explore Inka cuisine and identity construction, and the ways in which indigenous elite segments attained status and power in the
eastern imperial fringes.
Alconini, Sonia (University of Virginia)
[224]
Discussant
Alcover, Omar (Brown University) and Ricardo Rodas (Universidad de San Carlos, Guatemala)
[128]
Protoclassic Maya Warfare: The Social and Political Role of Violence between 100 BC and AD 400
In the Maya area, archaeological research on warfare has most often focused on the centuries leading up to the dissolution of
Classic period divine kingship, or otherwise on Postclassic conflicts in the Yucatán and Guatemalan highlands. Recent research,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        8
though, reveals that periodic, traumatic incidents of warfare were an early component of Maya social and political life. By the
Protoclassic period (100 BC–AD 400), war seemed to have intensified as many early, nonfortified settlements were either
abandoned in favor of more defensive spaces, or perimeter walls were constructed around them. In this paper, we synthesize the
evidence for armed conflict during the Protoclassic period, addressing the form and function of defensive systems, regional
variability in practices of war, as well as the sociopolitical consequences of warfare at this time. Specifically, we will draw on findings
at the site of Macabilero, Guatemala, which may exemplify fortified sites of the Protoclassic period more generally. Overall, we
argue that in the Maya Lowlands, early fortifications may have served as points of resistance to political reorganization and the
burgeoning institution of kingship; a means to rally around limited resources; or a way to control emerging trade networks and the
movement of people.
Alcover, Omar [265] see Rodas, Ricardo
Alcover, Omar [202] see Schroder, Whittaker
Alday, Camila
[74]
The Preceramic Plant-Fiber Technology of South America
The Preceramic hunter-gatherers (cal 10,000–3700 BP) who inhabited the Pacific littoral of South America highly relied on plant
resources from wetlands, fog oases, and riparian zones. We now know that Preceramic fibers markers from the Peru-Chile desert
were aware of the nature of wetland plants as suitable fibers for the fabrication of clothes, cordages, fishing gear, and mats. Here, I
examine how the plant-people bond was forged through the procurement of wetland plants used for this technology, as well as the
impact of the uninterrupted technological encounter of people and plants had on the organization of the daily life during the
Preceramic period. Archaeobotanical analysis of artifacts made of Cyperaceae, Typhaceae, and Gramineae reveals how people
seized the plant anatomy to turn them into textile fibers. I also discuss the economic impact of the fabrication of fishing nets and
fishing lines on the Preceramic foraging lifestyle and the role that yarns, and mats as composite technologies played in coastal
populations. Finally, I propose a narrative of the entanglement of people and plants before the advent of the agriculture in Ancient
South America, in which the fabrication of plant-based artifacts set the foundation for the development of Andean textile technology.
Aldenderfer, Mark [252] see Iizuka, Fumie
Aldenderfer, Mark [233] see Noe, Sarah
Alex, Thomas
[164]
Jose’s Cantina: A Seasonal Observation Site in Big Bend National Park, Texas
Casual observations at Jose’s Cantina, a prehistoric rock shelter in the Chisos Mountains, revealed a set of pictographic imagery
assumed to be associated with tracking the winter solstice seasonal change. Petroglyph imagery suggests association with annual
renewal and rebirth ritualism. The variability of a set of motifs may be better understood through use of ethnographic analogy. The
artifact assemblage collected from the site surface includes a Late Archaic dart point, maize, basketry, and fiber materials typical of
the Late Archaic in the Big Bend Region of west Texas. The presentation discusses ongoing study and provides a glimpse at a most
singular Late Archaic rock imagery site and its petrographic association with other sites in the Big Bend region of west Texas.
Alexander, Rani (New Mexico State University)
[138]
Landscapes of Inequality in Ebtun, Yucatán, 1800–1890
In this paper, I examine the postcolonial social transformations of Yucatec-speaking communities located southwest of Valladolid,
Yucatán, occasioned by the Caste War (1847–1901), a violent rebellion and revitalization movement intricately related to processes
of decolonization following Independence. How did native leaders negotiate the imposition of liberal and anticlerical political-
economic policies after Independence? Did the Caste War affect wealth disparities among these rural communities? How did they
emerge from the Caste War and rebuild the socioeconomic fabric in the twentieth century? Using the wills and testaments from the
Titles of Ebtun and nineteenth-century censuses from the Archivo General del Estado de Yucatán, I calculate GINI coefficients to
analyze variation in household material wealth, social mobility, and inequality in the nineteenth century. My results indicate that the
strategies and practices through which community leaders accumulated and transferred wealth to descendant generations
reproduced sociogeographic identities into the twentieth century.
Alfonso-Durruty, Marta (SASW, Kansas State University), Nicole Misarti (WERC, University of Alaska, Fairbanks) and
Andres Troncoso (Universidad de Chile)
[243]
Stable Isotope Evidence of Dietary Trends among Prehistoric Populations from the Semiarid Region, Chile
The semiarid region of Northern Chile (29–32°S) is a transitional ecological area, located between the extreme hyperarid conditions
of the Atacama Desert and the Mediterranean ones of Central Chile, with a long history of human occupation (Archaic Period—Late
Period). This study evaluates the stable isotope signatures, δ13Cap, δ13Ccol, and δ15N, of individuals from the coast and inland for
the entire temporal sequence. Among coastal groups, marine resources are central throughout the prehistory of the region but δ15N
decreases over time. In contrast, δ13C increases over time. In the inland, δ15N levels remain stable, while δ13C increases. Among
coastal groups there is a higher degree of diversity in δ15N and δ13Ccol during the Middle Period, and in δ13Cap during the Late
Period. Among inland groups variability in δ13C is highest during the Early Ceramic period, whereas δ15N is most variable during the
Late Intermediate period. Overall, the results indicate a late introduction of C4 plants both in the inland and along the coast, and a
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     9
dietary variation that although limited, likely emerged from differences in preferences, access, mobility, and the changing meaning of
foods.
Alfonso-Durruty, Marta (SASW, Kansas State University)
[61]
Chair
Alfonso-Durruty, Marta [119] see Morello Repetto, Flavia
Ali, Abdallah K. [216] see Fitton, Tom
Allard, Francis (Indiana University of Pennsylvania) and Lauren Glover (University of Wisconsin, Madison)
[28]
Stone Beads along the Maritime Silk Route: A View from Hepu’s Han Dynasty Burials
Situated at the northern end of the South China Sea, the coastal site of Hepu in Guangxi Province played an important role in the
development of the “Maritime Silk Route” following its incorporation into the Han Empire in 111 BCE. Hepu’s Han dynasty burials
have yielded large quantities of objects of nonlocal manufacture, pointing to China’s emerging involvement in trade networks which
extended to Southeast and South Asia. This presentation focuses on the stone beads found at Hepu, whose source materials
(garnet, agate, carnelian, chalcedony, beryl, and turquoise) are thought to have originated in South Asia and other distant regions.
Hepu’s stone beads are compared to beads excavated at other sites in Southeast Asia and southern China, providing insights into
the nature of trading networks which reached southern China. As a way to investigate the beads’ possible sociopolitical
associations, the presentation also looks at their distribution among Hepu’s burials.
Allaun, Sarah [180] see Mahan, Chase
Allen, Bryan [230] see Coughenour, Chance
Allen, Christian (Midwest Archeological Center)
[239]
Coalescing Communities of Practice: Assessing Intrasite Ceramic Spatial and Element Compositional Variability Using pXRF and
GIS at Mialoquo (40MR3) a Mid-Eighteenth-Century Cherokee Community in East Tennessee
This is a preliminary study of the Mialoquo site (40MR3) an eighteenth century Cherokee town located in Monroe County in East
Tennessee. Multiple analyses were used to assess the social organization of the town; including ceramic typological, spatial and
element compositional analyses. The results of the analyses indicate that the Mialoquo community was founded by at least two
communities of practice. Portable X-ray Fluorescence (pXRF) analysis of 146 ceramic sherds identifies both local and non-local
products at the Mialoquo site. Additionally, while both shell- and grit-tempered vessels were produced from clays local to the site,
those sherds produced with shell-temper had a much broader range of clay sources. The implications of these results suggests that
some of these shell-tempered sherds were produced from non-local clay sources, likely as ceramic vessels transported to the site
from neighboring towns. The pXRF and spatial analyses results demonstrate that the communities of practice at Mialoquo were
highly blended sharing their domestic spaces, disposal middens, and clay procurement locations.
Allen, Julie [27] see LeFebvre, Michelle
Allen, Mitchell (University of California, Berkeley) and William Trousdale (Smithsonian)
[205]
The Bronze Age in Afghan Sistan
Knowledge of the Bronze Age in eastern Iran and Afghanistan is substantial, including the well-studied sites of Shahr-i Sohkta, Nad-i
Ali, and Mundigak. But a key component, the settlement pattern along the Helmand River—the major conduit that links those sites
as well as being an important pathway between West, South, and Central Asia— is almost unknown. The Helmand Sistan Project,
co-sponsored by the Afghan Institute of Archaeology and the American Smithsonian Institution, was the first long-term attempt to
systematic survey and excavate in the lower Helmand Valley. In the field in the 1970s, its findings are only now being analyzed and
published. This presentation will describe the Bronze Age sites identified by the Project along the Helmand and how they reshape
our existing knowledge of this region. The interaction between cultural, hydrological, and climatological forces will be highlighted, as
well as the difficulty in identifying and understanding Bronze Age settlement in this area. The result will be a more complete
understanding of this region and its role linking the major cultural areas on all sides.
Allen, Susan [255] see Forste, Kathleen
Allen, Zach [8] see Brown, James
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       10
Almeida, Ana
[108]
The Lure of the Sea: Objects and Behaviors
It is generally accepted that Iron Age folk left the sodden lands in the valleys of large rivers and choose to settle on high ground, in
locations with natural defenses, but very often near water sources. Agro-pastoral interests likely were part of the decision, but so
were proximity to the mouth of major rivers and to the sea. These factors allow for relating Iron Age hilltop settlements to other
profitable activities, such fishing, gathering of seafood, control of fluvial and sea routes as well as the production and trade of salt.
The geographic location of the S. Lourenço Castro on the coast of Esposende and near the mouth of the Cávado River enabled
these activities. This paper discusses the archaeological objects and behaviors associated with those practices.
Almer, Calista (Smithsonian), Michael Mlyniec (Smithsonian) and Igor Chechushkov (Smithsonian)
[176]
Site Patterning of Two Boulder Field Sites from the Lower North Shore of Quebec: Implications for Dating, Social Organization, and
Future Research
Boulder field sites frequently appear along the shorelines of Labrador, Newfoundland, and the Quebec Lower North Shore. These
sites, located on raised beaches, in past research have been believed to represent habitation structures and features related to
storage and fish processing, ranging from the Maritime Archaic Period-Paleo-Inuit/Dorset cultures (3000 BC-AD 1000). Despite
many of these sites having been identified, little research has been conducted due to the lack of artifacts found at these loci.
Traditionally, they were dated using climate and geographical data as a proxy for cultural material. The purpose of this pilot study
was to indicate meaningful trends to allow for better differentiation between these sites, thus resulting in a better understanding of
the distribution and cultural patterns within the region exhibited by the early cultures inhabiting it. This poster seeks to explain the
mapping of these two sites and the differences recorded in their organization and implications for increased social complexity seen
at one and not the other, thus allowing for a plan of future research to be undertaken within the region.
Alonso, Alejandra, Soledad Ortiz (Instituto de Investigaciones Filológicas), Oscar de Lucio (Laboratorio Nacional de
Ciencias para la Investigación y la Conservación del Patrimonio Cultural), José Luis Ruvalcaba (Laboratorio Nacional de
Ciencias para la Investigación y la Conservación del Patrimonio Cultural) and Luis Barba (Laboratorio de Prospección
Arqueológica)
[20]
The Art of Processing Limestone into Lime in the Maya Lowlands: The Characterization and Technology of Plaster Decorations from
the Preclassic to Late Classic Periods
This work is a comparative study for explaining the processing of limestone for the production of lime. The Maya used lime plasters
for protecting and decorating civil architecture. Our study includes wall and floor samples dating from Preclassic to Terminal Classic
Periods. This study elucidates how lime processing transformed into a standardized industry. The examples presented in this work
identify the quality of stone selected for the production of lime, as well as the technology employed for producing lime more
efficiently through time. Our intention is to determine the burning temperatures responsible for producing lime with different
properties, and how this part of the technology directly affects the preservation of plastered floors and walls in the architecture. We
concentrate in establishing the connection between calcination temperatures and the morphology and technology of kilns. We
determine how these elements, modified through time, help reduce energy waste. We propose a particular method to measure and
compare pyrotechnic indicators to determine subtle variables in our samples coming from different sites of Yucatán. The expected
result of this work is to identify cultural and regional patterns in the extraction of limestone for the production of lime.
Alonzi, Elise (University College Dublin), Barra Ó Donnabháin (University College Cork) and Kelly Knudson (Arizona State
University)
[134]
Vows and Violence: Diet and Mobility at Tintern Abbey, Ireland
Diet, mobility, and trauma are key factors in the performance of social identities and the maintenance of social boundaries between
groups. In medieval Ireland, burial at monasteries also provided an opportunity for both lay and ecclesiastical communities to
represent the religious identities of deceased individuals. In this study, mobility, trauma, and diet are investigated at Tintern Abbey,
Co. Wexford, Ireland (thirteenth–sixteenth centuries AD) in relation to estimated membership in the lay or ecclesiastical community.
The prevalence of trauma that likely indicates interpersonal violence is notably high at Tintern Abbey. Osteological analyses, in
addition to carbon, strontium, and oxygen isotope values, will be considered for 24 individuals at up to three periods in life. Despite
Tintern Abbey’s connection to other Cistercian abbeys in Wales and across Europe, the ecclesiastical individuals did not experience
significantly more mobility than the lay community members. The most notable factors that differentiate the lay and ecclesiastical
groups are diet and trauma, whereas individuals in both groups undertook mobility. This study finds that trauma and diet are the
important performative divisions between lay and religious groups at Tintern Abbey. In contrast, mobility was likely was most
influential in forming an individual’s identity within the group.
[134]
Chair
Alsgaard, Asia (University of New Mexico), Carolyn Freiwald (University of Mississippi), Stephanie Orsini (Coastal
Environments Inc./Moore Archeological Co), Douglas Kennett (University of California, Santa Barbara) and Keith Prufer
(University of New Mexico)
[270]
From Armadillo Scutes to Peccary Skulls: Changing Foraging Efficiency during the Transition to Agriculture in Southern Belize
Globally, the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture was a co-evolutionary process between humans, plants, and
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     11
animals with many potential drivers. Using zooarchaeological analysis and predictions derived from evolutionary ecology, we test for
the underlying drivers of the transition to agriculture in southern Belize. We use prey and patch choice models to test for changes in
foraging efficiency in the animal portion of the diet during the critical juncture between 5000–1000 BP when forager-farmers were
transitioning to more intensive forms of maize-based food production. Our zooarchaeological dataset comes from Mayahak Cab
Pek, a rockshelter located in the interior of the Maya Mountains in southern Belize containing a 10,000-year transect of faunal
deposits across the Holocene. The taxa of the faunal remains mirror all the endogenous species found in the region today.
Additionally, the deposits contain a human, paleoethnobotanical, and, and lithics, excavated from stratified excavations anchored to
over 100 precise AMS radiocarbon dates. These provide the context for a high-resolution view into animal exploitation prior to and
following the agricultural transition.
Altschul, Jeffrey (SRI Foundation/Coalition for Archaeological Synthesis)
[58]
The Once and Future Promise of CRM
I chose CRM over academics to be relevant. I wanted to be part of the public debate about the balance between historic
preservation and economic development. In the ensuing 40-plus years, I find much to be proud of. CRM archaeologists identified
lots of sites, saved or excavated those that were important, empowered local and indigenous communities to be part of the process,
and learned much about what happened in history. CRM evolved from a fledgling enterprise to a mature industry. What once was a
temporary way station is now a career path for more than 10,000 archaeologists in the United States. I’m also frustrated with what
we didn’t do. We learned a lot about a little, spending our days analyzing and interpreting the remains within project boundaries
mostly drawn by others. Rarely, did we try to put things together on temporal and spatial scales that did much more than fill in dots
in regional culture histories. Now, in the twilight of my career, I feel compelled to take on one last initiative: to leverage the vast
amount of data we collected to address pressing social issues from a long-term perspective that only archaeology can provide.
Altschul, Jeffrey (SRI Foundation/Coalition for Archaeological Synthesis)
[115]
Moderator
Altschul, Jeffrey (SRI Foundation/Coalition for Archaeological Synthesis)
[207]
Discussant
Alvarado, Jazmin (CEA UNAM) and Daniel Pineda (CEA UNAM)
[121]
Uso de plantas a través de restos macrobotanicos en dos sitios en el norte del estado de Durango
Uso de plantas a través de restos macro botánicos en dos sitios del norte de Durango. Buscamos presentar los resultados
preliminares que hemos obtenido a partir del análisis de restos macro botánicos (principalmente semillas) en dos sitios en el norte
del estado de Durango: Los Berros y Trincheras ambos siendo asentamientos de poblaciones sedentarias. El fin de este análisis es
obtener conocimiento de las formas de subsistencia que se dieron en estas zonas ya fuera por recolección o la posibilidad de
cultivo de las semillas, así también buscando entender la relación de sus habitantes (entonces y actuales) con su entorno.
Alvarez, Elliot
[104]
Improvements and Possibilities in Digital Artifact Processing and Accessibility
With the move to preserve archaeological specimens in digital formats, the concern over the accuracy of current capturing methods,
and the dissemination of those results has become increasingly important. Laser scanning and photogrammetry have successfully
digitized artifacts on a consistent basis, but are methods that have not been adopted by the community at large, which seeks 1:1
fidelity in reproductions. With the incorporation of 3D modeling programs, such as ZBrush and Autodesk Maya, and techniques
including 3D sculpting and painting, we have seen a spike in the level of quality and accuracy of digital assets. This paper will
discuss our workflow and compare the resulting 3D models to previous output. Example pieces include objects from the Cravens
World: Human Aesthetic collection at the University of Buffalo. These samples were captured using the FARO 8-Axis and Artec
Space Spider, later processed using Geomagic Wrap, and refined using ZBrush. This paper will also discuss possibilities for the
accessibility of these high fidelity models, in terms of sharing and reproduction for academic purposes. Based on the results of our
workflow, we advocate for the wider usage of these applications, and ultimately the broader circulation of archaeological assets in
and outside of this field.
Amaral, Márcio [161] see Rocha, Bruna
Amati, Anne [184] see Lofaro, Ellen
Ambler, Bridget
[92]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      12
Ambrosino, Gordon (Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA))
[60]
The Rock Art of La Serranía de la Macarena: Previously Undocumented Inscriptions at the Headwaters of the Orinoco River (Meta,
Colombia)
La Serranía de la Macarena (La Serranía) is a prominent geological formation that is located along the Guayabero River, a tributary
at the headwaters of the Orinoco River in south-central Colombia. La Serranía and its surrounds hold a large complex of previously
undocumented rock art that has remained remarkably well-preserved and that represents a vital, but overlooked, component of the
social history of the greater Orinoco River watershed. A survey of La Serranía and its surrounds in 2016 revealed large quantities of
both pictographs and petroglyphs that display distinct relationships between production technique, iconography and geographic
settings. GIS mapping was employed to understand the distribution of its rock art and to model its relationships with associated
cultural and natural features. Close-range photogrammetric models of select rock art panels were then produced and used as the
base for generating high-resolution digital vector renderings. Initial stylistic and contextual analysis indicate similarities between La
Serranía’s petroglyphs with those of the middle Orinoco River, while its pictographs bear much in common with those of
Chiribiquete, to the south. Moreover, these works were likely produced over a period of several millennia, some of which may
correspond to the Paleoindian period.
Ambrosio, Arianna
[178]
Crafting in the Maya Hinterlands: Excavations at Tres Hermanas Group T19–1, El Perú-Waka’, Guatemala
Studies of Maya urban economies often neglect craft production activities by hinterland populations, and instead focus on artisans
residing within city centers. However, hinterland crafting, was a crucial facet of the overall economies of lowland centers. Over
multiple field seasons, archaeologists working the Classic Maya urban center of El Perú-Waka’, Guatemala have investigated the
Tres Hermanas District, southeast of the city center, where they have recovered substantial evidence on hinterland crafting activities
and production. This poster presents new data from the 2019 excavations at one of the Tres Hermanas groups, Group T19–1. A
small, unassuming settlement of low mounds, excavation recovered evidence that the T19–1 inhabitants engaged in a variety of
different craft activities, which enables a more nuanced understanding of the social, economic, and political dynamics between
urban and rural populations, as well as the organization of trade between social classes within a Classic Maya city
Amend, Tessa
[52]
A Low-Impact Archaeological Site Protection Plan for the Orchard Combat Training Center
The Orchard Combat Training Center (OCTC) is a multi-component military training facility located in the central portion of the
western Snake River Plain in southern Idaho. In the summers of 2014 and 2018, two National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
eligible sites were heavily impacted by tank units during training activities. In an immediate response, the Idaho Army National
Guard (IDARNG) and Bureau of Land Management (BLM) scoped traditional protective measures such as fences, seibert stakes,
signage and concrete barriers 50 m outside all of the NRHP eligible site boundaries. Now, rather than installing physical barriers and
signage, the IDARNG proposes to improve training units’ spatial awareness, increase accountability and help reform attitudes
toward cultural resources. There are other less intrusive options that could not only be more effective but less expensive with fewer
adverse effects on the surrounding environment. If these strategies are successful in protecting archaeological sites on the OCTC,
this plan could serve as a model in the development of site protection plans at other training installations.
Ames, Christine [193] see Trocolli, Ruth
Ames, Christopher [11] see Collins, Benjamin
Ames, Christopher [140] see Maher, Lisa
Ames, Nicholas (University of Notre Dame)
[134]
“Mountains of water the waves assume”: Nineteenth-Century Oceanic Crossings in Emigration, a Phenomenological Approach
Between 1815 and 1920 over 60 million people emigrated from Europe to the Americas and Australasia. While these migrations
cannot be distilled down to a single process or experience defining the complexity of these movements, a common denominator
shared by all migrants (albeit infinitely varied in significant ways) was the oceanic crossing. While the volume of those crossings
during the nineteenth century led to an industry of passage, which shortened durations and standardize routes, for many there
remained aspects of trauma underpinning the journey. While physical injury, exposure to disease, salient weather, and exploitative
conditions were real consequences for many migrants, often trauma manifested in the experience of departure itself—the stress of
change in physical and social environments, the constructed nature of this new space, loss of agency as passengers on-board, and
the sense of a future unknown. This paper considers the experiences inherent in these aspects of the migration process, and the
impact it had on the individuals and communities involved. By drawing from historical accounts, materiality of vessels, and a
phenomenological experiment in trans-Atlantic crossing by the author, this paper highlights the constitutive coingredience of place
and identity in defining experiences of migration by sea.
Anaya Hernández, Armando [178] see Parrott, Nathan
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     13
Ancona Aragón, Iliana [128] see Plank, Shannon
Anderson, Amy [15] see McCool, Weston
Anderson, Amy [80] see O’Donnell, Lexi
Anderson, Atholl [100] see Weyrich, Laura
Anderson, C. Broughton (Berea College)
[259]
Slave|Free: Working through, in, and with the Archives in Madison County, Kentucky
Tracing the paper lifeway of George White, a freed slave and property owner, and his descendants, my work considers the
materiality of the archives as central to working with enslaved and free populations in Madison County, Kentucky. Located in a rural
and struggling community, the county archives are rather poor, with little attempt at preservation, organization, or care. With that
said, Madison County is the home to Berea College, which has a history of interracial education and a rich archive concerning the
lives of black men and women who attended. George White’s paper lifeway sits somewhere in|between these archival spaces. Two
points are central to understanding and locating George White and his family. The first is that the archival spaces are indicative of
the continued struggle of understanding slave|free populations in this county. The second rests in further exploration of written
material as physically and metaphysically demonstrating power. In other words, the documents and the archives fully demonstrate
moments of the White family position of slave|free in the present and the past.
Anderson, Cheryl (Boise State University)
[131]
Contextualizing Conflict: Social Theory in the Bioarchaeology of Central Anatolia
Throughout her career, Debra Martin has utilized an innovative, multidisciplinary, and theoretical approach to bioarchaeology. One
of her most significant contributions to archaeology has been her pioneering work on violence, utilizing social theory and current
methodologies in order to interpret the skeletal evidence. Her scholarship has improved our understanding of the process of
violence and how it is affected by social, political, economic, and historical factors. She has emphasized the importance of context
for understanding why violence is or is not used a strategy in different circumstances and this nuanced viewpoint on investigating
violence will be critical for future studies on this topic. Martin’s research has had a significant impact on the next generation of
bioarchaeological scholars and this paper aims to demonstrate the influence of her work utilizing a case study from the Middle
Bronze Age (ca. 2000–1750 BCE) in central Anatolia. This project examines the skeletal remains of a minimum of 64 individuals that
are likely the victims of a battle and incorporates a broader, social theoretical approach to the study of violence and inequality in the
past that is a reflection of Debra Martin’s vision and mentorship.
Anderson, David (University of Tennessee)
[59]
Mitigating the Impact of Climate Change on the Archaeological Record: Cultural Resource Investigations along the Savannah River
as Models of How to Proceed
Archaeological mitigation planning and fieldwork on an unprecedented scale will be necessary to save what will be lost to climate
change in the coming years. The approaches taken during the Russell Reservoir project, and other long-term heritage resource
management programs in the Savannah River basin, serve as models of what will be needed moving forward. Participating
agencies and researchers have made a conscious effort to examine the widest possible range of cultural resources, including
studies of prehistoric and historical archaeology, domestic and industrial architecture, history, oral history, and paleoenvironments.
Numerous technical and popular reports have been produced, and the collections are permanently curated and remain accessible to
this day. Paleoenvironmental research in and near the Savannah River have vastly improved our understanding of human
settlement in the basin, and show how this kind of research is a critical part of mitigation planning. Examining old growth forest will
be essential, for example, for dendroclimatological research, and the collection of sediment, pollen, charcoal, and other remains in
ponds, terraces, and Carolina Bays will be critical for documenting geomorphological, geoarchaeological, and paleobiological
conditions. We have no choice: once these sources of information are lost, they are gone forever.
Anderson, David [183] see Wells, Joshua
Anderson, Derek [180] see Miller, D. Shane
Anderson, J. Heath [150] see Kate, Emily
Anderson, Jen [186] see Nielsen, Christina
Anderson, Jennifer, Natalie Bauman and Madison Roberts
[37]
Shovel Testing as a Hypothesis Testing Tool
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     14
Shovel testing is one method used by archeologists to test hypotheses regarding where buried sites are located in a given
landscape. Shovel tests are generally 30 cm diameter holes that are excavated to no greater than 100 cm below the ground surface.
They are typically either placed judgmentally across known areas of high geoarcheological probability or in a grid-like pattern to
identify buried cultural materials. In the summer of 2019, anthropology students from the University of Texas at Arlington used
shovel testing to test a hypothesis that the previously excavated Way Ranch site (41HY519) expanded beyond the known site
boundary. Our poster explains how the location of each shovel test was selected, how the results of each shovel test directed future
block excavations, and how shovel test data compared with data from the block excavations.
Anderson, Ridge [147] see Jepsen, Jacob
Anderson, Ryan [135] see Jazwa, Christopher
Andrade Pérez, Axel (Arqueólogo)
[145]
Análisis de escultura en piedra de la fachada Este de la Casa del Sur, Conjunto Monumental de Atzompa, Oaxaca
Se realiza un análisis de los materiales de escultura en piedra localizados en la liberación de la fachada Este de la Casa del Sur.
Los restos de escultura se encontraron dispuestos sobre un piso de estuco correspondiente a la primera etapa constructiva, y otros
como parte del relleno. Los fragmentos representan elementos del sistema calendárico zapoteca, entre los que destacan algunas
representaciones de lagarto, primer símbolo del calendario ritual. Se muestran los resultados de un estudio comparativo con otras
representaciones de escultura en los Valles Centrales de Oaxaca.
Andrade Pérez, Axel [145] see García, Dante
André, Lino [34] see Gonçalves, Célia
Andrefsky, William (Washington State University)
[253]
Discussant
Andrews, Bradford (Pacific Lutheran University), Kenneth Hirth (Pennsylvania State University) and Michael Glascock
(University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR))
[133]
State Control or Free Trade: Comparing Obsidian Access at Epiclassic Xochicalco?
This paper presents an analysis of the obsidian sources represented in a collection of artifacts from the elite civic-ceremonial center
of Epiclassic (AD 650–900) Xochicalco in Central Mexico. One important question is whether the Xochicalco elites were directly
involved in the city’s stone tool economy; this question can be investigated by comparing the obsidian sources in the “elite
assemblage” to those found elsewhere in the city. Seventy-five obsidian artifacts from this assemblage were analyzed with INAA.
The results indicate that the percentages of sources in the elite assemblage are similar to those found in most Epiclassic residential
contexts at Xochicalco, although they do differ in some interesting ways. Overall, we conclude that our study does not support direct
elite or state control over the acquisition of obsidian consumed at Xochicalco. This finding differs from what has been concluded for
many other prominent urban centers in Prehispanic Mesoamerica and thereby contributes to understanding how Mesoamerican
flaked stone economies varied over space and time.
Andrieu, Chloé (CNRS Université Paris I La Sorbonne)
[93]
Discussant
Andrieu, Chloé (CNRS Université Paris I La Sorbonne)
[151]
Layers of Times: Archaeology and the Other Pasts
In this presentation, I will share our experiences working at Raxruha, Guatemala. During our fieldwork seasons, we have faced that
the archaeological work involves a broad range of different actors, all at different degrees. Interestingly, all actors have diverse and
complex relationships to the precolumbian past we study. Maya Q’eqchi communities, rural Ladinos, rich landowners, students, and
Guatemalan or French archaeologists are all related differently to the material culture we excavate. Therefore, one of the major
questions we have come through is: How do we communicate results and hypothesis of a field project without overwriting other
narratives of the same past? We suggest that methodological approaches, such as “symmetrical archaeology,” which is usually
used to think the epistemology of the discipline, could also be an interesting methodological key in order to consider such issues.
[151]
Discussant
Andrus, C. Fred [237] see Voorhies, Barbara
Andrus, C. Fred [59] see West, Catherine F.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       15
Angelucci, Diego [162] see Cabanes, Dan
Anico, Eddie (Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma)
[113]
Discussant
Anja, Behrens [107] see Ebert, Julia
Anthony, Alexander (Syracuse University)
[192]
Less Than Human: The Institutional Origins of the Medical Waste Recovered at the Milwaukee County Poor Farm Cemetery
Poor Laws enacted in the early nineteenth century condemned the most destitute to confinement in almshouses, poor farms, and
workhouses. These laws paralleled contemporary Anatomy Acts that turned the unclaimed bodies of individuals who died at those
institutions over to medical facilities for dissection, often simultaneously removing anatomization as a punishment for murder. In
essence, pauperism became punishable by anatomization. Thus, dissection served the dual purpose of reinforcing social identity
amongst the lower class and privileging the social identity of upper-class medical students. This study is an analysis of the material
medical waste recovered from the graves of individuals interred at the Milwaukee County Poor Farm Cemetery. My goal is to
determine from which medical institution in Milwaukee County the medical waste, and thus the body, originated, in concert with
ongoing, collaborative bioarcheological analysis. This study utilizes a presence and absence analysis of types of medical waste
found at burial locations alongside bioarcheological evidence for types of postmortem medical intervention in order to determine the
institutional origin of the waste recovered.
Anzellini, Armando (University of Tennessee, Knoxville)
[167]
The Family Plot: Burial Patterns, Grave Location, and Kinship at Bethel Cemetery
Mortuary practices, with their spiritual and cultural significance, are often thought to provide a glimpse of social relationships in the
community that followed those practices. Thus, patterns of grave location and funerary materials are used by archaeologists to
interpret kinship and social networks which may have existed within the community under study. Archaeological interpretations of
kinship and social networks, however, rely on assumptions about spatial patterning of graves, similarity in grave goods, and
correlations between grave and kin proximity. Bethel Cemetery provides a unique case study in which these assumptions can be
tested using a dataset of known burials and create new models that may be used to identify individuals that remain unidentified. By
combining genealogical data, results from osteological analyses, geospatial information, and the archaeological analyses of grave
goods and coffin styles we can approach the questions of kinship and mortuary practices from a variety of perspectives thereby
improving our interpretations of relationships and burial practices at Bethel Cemetery. Thus, with known kinship patterns and
histories we can explore models that may better represent the choices made by the living in the interment of their kin, particularly in
Euro-American communities, which may extend to other communities around the world.
Aoyama, Kazuo
[93]
Discussant
Aoyama, Kazuo
[265]
Preclassic and Classic Maya Chipped Stone Weapons
How did the Maya use weapons during the Preclassic and Classic periods? Based on the lithic data from Copan, Honduras, as well
as Aguateca and Ceibal, Guatemala, the spear/lance points were major chipped stone weapons among the Preclassic Maya. The
adaption of the atlatl darts from highland Central Mexico in the Early Classic seems to represent the first significant change in Maya
warfare but did not replace handheld spears as a predominant weapon in the Maya lowlands. Throughout most of Maya Classic
history, lance points and to a smaller extent dart points were more important than the bow and arrow in Maya warfare. Both notched
and unnotched were present in the Copan Valley during the Early and Late Classic periods as well as at Aguateca and Ceibal
during the Late Classic period. The results of high-power microwear analysis indicate that obsidian prismatic blade points were
mainly used as arrow heads. The bow and arrow were present in Maya lowlands earlier than has been previously suggested. The
increase in the production and use of atlatl darts as well as bows and arrows by the Terminal Classic period may signal a change in
the practice of warfare.
Aprile, Jamie (George Mason University)
[51]
Looters Can’t Steal Everything: Salvage Archaeology at the San Giuliano Necropolis
The Etruscan cemetery around the San Giuliano Plateau has been looted extensively, but salvage excavations of several emptied
tombs have yielded results that increase our understanding of the funerary landscape. In the 2018 and 2019 field seasons, two
vertically adjacent tombs on a hillside were excavated down to bedrock, both of which revealed complex stratigraphy representing
ancient activities related to tomb construction, landscape modification, and funerary ritual as well as post-abandonment damage. In
this paper, the results of these two seasons of field work will be presented with special attention paid to the complex long-term
formation processes that contributed to the current state of the site, now part of a regional nature park. Discoveries include a
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    16
possible hillside pathway, evidence of stone quarrying, an intact exterior cremation grave, and direct evidence of looting practices.
Although Etruscan cemeteries are often characterized in the literature by typological uniformity, these excavations suggest that
variability may have been common in smaller, less elaborately decorated chamber tombs.
Aquino, Daniel (National Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology of Guatemala) and Juan Melendez (Washington
University, St. Louis)
[166]
Of Snakes and Masks: A Contextual and Iconographic Study of Ancient Maya Greenstone Mosaic Masks
We argue that ancient Maya portable mosaic masks, found in high-elite burials across the Maya Lowlands, could have, at some
point during the Late Classic period (AD 550–800) and perhaps even earlier, been the ideal insignias of the Kaanul “snake” regime,
which in ancient Maya writing is represented by the head of a snake. Following close-up observations of images of snakes, in
particular theirs faces and heads, we noted that their scales present similar features to the tesserae that form the greenstone
mosaic masks; for example the Parrot Snake (Leptophis mexicanus), which also has a green pigmentation that emulates the
greenstone tesserae. Similarly, we believe that the buried pavements that constitute massive mosaic masks at the Olmec site of La
Venta could have also been lifelike representations of a snake’s face and head where each individual carved block was used to re-
create the scales of this reptile. Therefore, we propose that the main idea behind the prehispanic mosaic technique could have been
inspired from the natural world, notably from the scales and scuta of snakes, crocodiles, and turtles.
Arakawa, Fumi (New Mexico State University), Jorden Scott (New Mexico State University), Lindsey Cron (New Mexico
State University), Dustin Wagner (New Mexico State University) and Kristin Corl (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[136]
Georgetown Phase Great Kiva in the Diamond Creek Locality of the Northern Mimbres Region
Architectural features of great kivas in the Mogollon cultural area typically consist of a circular or oval shape subterranean structure
that is more than 10 m in diameter, and many have been identified in the region. One of the hallmarks of these kivas is their size,
and many archaeologists have argued that they were used for ritual activities and political meetings by local and/or regional
residents. The South Diamond Creek Pueblo site in Gila National Forest, New Mexico has been the subject of investigation by the
New Mexico State University archaeological fieldschool from 2017 to 2019, which targeted the Georgetown phase (AD 550–650) of
occupation. The aim of the excavations was to determine the size of the structure, to recover diagnostic features, and to reconstruct
cultural and natural processes. This paper presents the results of partial excavations of the great kiva at South Diamond Creek
Pueblo, and we compare our results with other Gerogetown phase great kivas in the surrounding areas.
Arakawa, Fumi [122] see Cron, Lindsey
Aramayo, Alejandra [4] see Capriles, José
Araujo, Astolfo [232] see Correa, Letícia
Araujo, Astolfo [73] see Okumura, Mercedes
Arazi-Coambs, Sandra (Cibola National Forest and National Grasslands)
[239]
Adaptability of the Commons: Historical Ecology of Land Tenure Patterns in the Sandia Mountains, NM
This paper uses a historical-ecological framework to address land tenure patterns in the Sandia Mountains, located east of the
modern city of Albuquerque, NM. In a modern context, the mountains are largely communal spaces where use is regulated under a
higher legislative order, in this case a federal land management agency. While the mountains have always been under communal
ownership in some regard, the parameters of management, control, and use have shifted along with dramatic upheavals in the
socio-political structure of the area. This paper will use ethno-historical data combined with recent survey data to examine how
geographically-based cultural identity intersects with land tenure and how these parameters have been contested and negotiated
into the twenty-first century.
Arazi-Coambs, Sandra [148] see Pedro Black, Marielle
Archambeault, Marie
[113]
Discussant
Ard, Vincent, Friedrich Lüth (DAI, Berlin, Germany), Vivien Mathé (University La Rochelle, UMR 7266, France) and Antoine
Laurent (CNRS-University Toulouse, UMR 5608, France)
[107]
Back to the Field: Megalithic Quarries as a Marker of Neolithic Landscape (Tusson, France)
Known since the nineteenth century, the barrows of Tusson (Charente) is one of “giant” megalithic monuments of Western-Central
France built during the fifth millennium BC. This cemetery still counts today three long barrows and two smaller round ones.
Probably protected by their dimensions, these monuments have never been excavated. As part of an on-going ANR (French
National Research Agency) research project MONUMEN (Monumentality, landscapes and social competition during the Neolithic in
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   17
Atlantic Europe), we decided to reinvest the study of these monuments with a multi-method approach using noninvasive tools, such
as geophysical survey and lidar, but also through targeted excavations on some of the detected features. These magnetic
anomalies of varying morphologies—sub-circular, oblong, or linear—surround some of the tumuli and do not correspond to anything
known. Between 2017 and 2019, several were excavated, certifying that these are quarries for the construction of cairns. The
almost systematic abandonment of deer antlers, used or not as tools, at the bottom of the quarries, attests to a probably symbolic
practice. Their dating is an exceptional opportunity to date the construction of non-excavated monuments and participate in the
debate on the emergence of megalithism on the Atlantic coast of Europe.
Ardelean, Ciprian (University of Zacatecas, Mexico & University of Exeter, UK)
[170]
Reflections about Humans of the LGM in Americas: Ontology, Epistemology, and Academic Religiousness
The early peopling of Americas during the Pleistocene is more than a scientific inquiry, a matter of public curiosity or a political-
academic scenario: it is mostly an ideological issue, functioning on the basis of paradigms so strong that it almost mimics religion.
Many years ago, I approached this topic (coming from other archaeological fields) because I felt attracted by one of the last
strongholds of true enigmas and legitimate research questions in world archaeology, a milieu still propitious for adventurous quests,
challenging mysteries and real involvement of passions. Mike Collins had a lot to do with my earliest steps and my formation within
North-American prehistory. This brief paper—more than a tribute to Mike—is a necessary reflection about how we actually make
science today in American prehistory, how we shape our investigations and collaborations, and how we influence students who join
us in our search. The presence of humans during of before the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) is the new territory of dispute between
ourselves: a battlefield between ontologies and epistemologies, and between para-religious ego-driven paradigms.
Ardelean, Ciprian [73] see Williams, Thomas
Ardren, Traci (University of Miami)
[93]
Discussant
Ardren, Traci (University of Miami), Michelle LeFebvre (Florida Museum of Natural History), Victor Thompson (University of
Georgia), Scott Fitzpatrick (University of Oregon) and M. Jesse Schneider (University of Miami)
[271]
Island Aquatic Environments in the Prehistoric Florida Keys
A range of evidence exists for the occupation of the Florida Keys prior to European contact, yet little is known of the relationship
these indigenous people had with better known coastal and inland cultures of south Florida, such as the Calusa. Scholars working
on the mainland have suggested that Keys inhabitants could not have supported themselves year-round with the resources
available on the island chain, and that the archaeological record of the Keys represents only seasonal occupation. We review
multiple lines of evidence for ecosystem resource use including subsistence exploitation, fresh water availability, and tool production
to evaluate the potential viability of year-round versus seasonal occupation by indigenous Keys occupants. The Keys were not
isolated from the rest of southern Florida, and the shallow waters of Florida Bay provided an integrative mechanism for contact and
exchange. We conclude with suggestions for what unique resources from the aquatic environment of the Keys might have been
exchanged with mainland peoples.
Ardren, Traci [59] see Jorissen, Philippa
Ardren, Traci [164] see McClean, Xavier
Ardren, Traci [102] see Stanton, Travis
Ardren, Traci [5] see Waite, Danielle
Areche, Rodrigo (Qhapaq Ñan Project)
[21]
Controlling Chili Peppers under the Inka Government: The Case of Huacones–Vilcahuasi in the Cañete Valley
The archaeological research at Huacones–Vilcahuasi, one of the largest architectural complexes and the center of political-
administrative power of the local group called Guarco in Cañete valley, is providing new aspects about economic and political
organization during the Late Intermediate and Late Horizon. A particular finding from our excavations was one deposit of chili
peppers located within elite residence. This paper seeks to examine how local elites from Huacones–Vilcahuasi controlled the
distribution and exchange of chili peppers and what was its role in the economic organization in this region under the Inka
government.
Arias, Oscar [257] see Yamamoto, Atsushi
Arias, Veronica (West Texas A&M University) and Tarek Rashed (Civilizology LLC)
[248]
Geovisualizing Climatic Conditions at Texas’s Largest History Museum
Environmental monitoring is an important aspect of preventive conservation for museums and other cultural institutions. Changes in
climate conditions, particularly temperature and relative humidity, over time can have profound effects on the long-term preservation
of records and collections. Standard methods for the continuous recording of environmental conditions include the use of data
loggers with external sensors for measuring temperature and relative humidity levels. Specialized software then enable the analysis
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   18
of these metrics with established guidelines for each type of collection. While these analyses are useful when monitoring changes
locally, they fail to show general trends across the breadth of the institution. This paper explores methods to spatially model
environmental conditions throughout a museum over time. It details some of the major challenges and limitations in developing a
time-enabled geovisualization of climatic conditions at the largest history museum in Texas, which has a building footprint of more
than 285,000 square feet. The ability to model geospatially the interior spaces of a large museum over time can result in better
management decisions with regards to the suitability of existing exhibition and storage spaces, enhancing the visitor experience,
and providing insights on sustainable preservation strategies.
Arieta Baizabal, Virginia (Universidad Veracruzana) and Yuribia Velázquez Galindo (Universidad Veracruzana)
[269]
El sitio olmeca de Antonio Plaza: la vida entre ríos, humedales y dos capitales.
Las recientes investigaciones arqueológicas en la isla de Capoacan, ubicada en la región olmeca, al sur de la costa del Golfo de
México, han derivado información importante en torno a la vida de sus antiguos pobladores. Los programas de mapeo digital y
recorrido sistemático, llevados a cabo en los años 2017, 2018 y 2019, proporcionan un panorama más claro del patrón de
asentamiento de los sitios ubicados entre los ríos Uxpanapa, Coachapa y Coatzacoalcos. Asimismo, el análisis de los materiales
arqueológicos recuperados en las dos fases antes mencionadas, revela datos que colocan temporalmente al sitio de Antonio Plaza
durante el periodo Preclásico inferior y medio. En esta ponencia se presentarán las primeras interpretaciones sobre la dinámica
poblacional de Antonio Plaza, un sitio ubicado dentro de los humedales, rodeado de ríos, y ubicado entre las dos capitales olmecas
de San Lorenzo, Veracruz y La Venta, Tabasco.
Arieta Baizabal, Virginia [227] see Lira-Lopez, Yamile
Arjona, Jamie
[266]
Noise Pollution: Racism, Noise Control, and the Subversive Textures of African American Blues Soundscapes
Antebellum slave ordinances throughout the South forbade African Americans from holding leisurely music and dance performances
on plantations after work hours. In the Jim Crow Era, these oppressive slave codes were replaced with a suite of new laws and
ordinances targeting African American leisure. Racist stereotypes derided Black musical performances as embodiments of “noise
pollution”, enabling the creation of local “nuisance” laws aimed at regulating dance halls, jook joints, and other music venues. This
paper examines the ways in racialized perceptions of sound and acoustics shaped the evolution of African American blues traditions
in Florida during the early twentieth century. Using historical and archaeological evidence from an early twentieth century Florida
jook joint, I examine how the rugged acoustics of rural blues joints subverted racist musical conventions and thwarted efforts to
police Black leisure establishments. I argue that Blues artists embraced and reimagined “polluted” soundscapes, creatively
disrupting racialized attitudes toward musical aesthetics and acoustic architecture. Musicians transformed the sounds of railroad
whistles, clanging hammers, and industrial background noise into emotionally resonant rhythms.
Arksey, Marieka (Office of the Wyoming State Archaeologist)
[172]
Donations, Appraisals, and Tax Write-Offs: Trying to Keep Collections off of the Antiquities Market
Every year, museums, repositories, archives, and campuses receive requests by private citizens to accept donations of artifacts and
archives. Putting aside some of the difficulties that can arise in confirming the provenience and the legality of non-research
collections, some donors request that certain conditions be met for them to consider donating their collection to a facility. Among
these requests is that the collection be appraised so that the donation can be used as a tax write-off. While there are some older
regulations in place that suggest how to appraise sites and collections (“the commercial or archaeological value of the
archaeological resources involved and the cost of restoration and repair,” ARPA) or how to handle IRS forms, the specifics of how to
do this in a manner in keeping with relatively rapidly-changing archaeological codes of ethics are often vague, sometimes
intentionally so, and they vary institution by institution. This talk describes how the University of Wyoming Archaeological Repository
and the Office of the Wyoming State Archaeologist are attempting to navigate this issue and some of the interesting quandaries we
have encountered along the way.
[172]
Chair
Arksey, Marieka [193] see Van Etten, Heidi
Arkush, Elizabeth (University of Pittsburgh)
[32]
Discussant
Arkush, Elizabeth (University of Pittsburgh)
[265]
Discussant
Armijo Torres, Ricardo [126] see Gallegos Gomora, Miriam Judith
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       19
Armstrong, Douglas [239] see Wallman, Diane
Arnauld, M. Charlotte (CNRS), Eva Lemonnier (Université de Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne) and Julien Hiquet (Université de
Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne)
[102]
Classic Maya Population Densities as Seen from Río Bec, Campeche, Mexico
Ideally, every ancient Maya city should be characterized by its population density and its urban agricultural productivity, both closely
linked parameters. Even though specific intra-settlement agricultural strategies may have helped to increase productivity, self-
sufficiency in basic foodstuffs could not be achieved in packed urban landscapes that lacked enough space for infields. Mobility to
outfields maintained in rural intersite areas also helped increase self-sufficiency, yet control by urban populations on those areas
depended on social and political factors. In this complex gradient of more or less self-sufficiency, Río Bec can be characterized as a
low-density urban landscape with high agricultural productivity in intensified infields in terraced sectors. After evaluating these
parameters, we raise two questions. First, in case self-sufficiency was not reached internally between AD 700 and 800 when the
population was the highest, what were the conditions of access to rural outfields in intersite areas which were apparently also
heavily populated? Second, as the housing system changed at that time with many vaulted multi-room structures built in Río Bec
increasing lodging capacities, how should we adapt our occupation index to this new system? Comparative insights are derived from
datasets obtained from La Joyanca (northwestern Petén) and Naachtun (central Petén).
Arnauld, M. Charlotte [178] see Thornton, Erin
Arnold, Philip [150] see Puente, Nicholas
Arnott, Sigrid [127] see Maki, David
Arp, Ryan and Steve Swanson (Arizona State University)
[229]
An Ancestral Piro Trail to Zuni Salt Lake
During recent fieldwork for the Bureau of Land Management, we identified an Ancestral Piro trail between the Rio Abajo region and
Zuni Salt Lake. The Zuni Salt Lake is an important salt source and religious place for indigenous cultures in the Four Corners area.
While several trails dating from prehistoric times to the present are known to link Hopi, Navajo, Zuni, Acoma and Laguna peoples to
the lake, no connections with Puebloan peoples in the Rio Abajo region have been identified. We discuss archaeological, historical,
and geographical evidence for a trail paralleling U.S. Highway 60 between San Acacia, New Mexico and the Zuni Salt Lake. In the
five-mile segment that we investigated, we documented shrines located on prominent topographic features overlooking the trail
route. This pattern is replicated in other, uninvestigated portions of the trail route. Diagnostic artifacts associated with these shrines,
as well as a date from a basket containing salt, suggest regular use of the trail by the AD 800s and continuing to the late AD 1200s.
After that time, it is likely that Ancestral Piro peoples obtained their salt from the Salinas province to the east, with perhaps
occasional use of the trail to Zuni Salt Lake.
Arroyo, Barbara (Museo Popol Vuh, Universidad Francisco Marroquín, Guatemala)
[128]
The Protoclassic in the Maya Highlands: The Role of Kaminaljuyu and the New Transformations
Kaminaljuyu was a very large and important Preclassic center. Its advances in hydraulic management, production and exchange of
obsidian artifacts, and intensive agriculture, among other accomplishments, allowed the establishment of a long distance exchange
network in the Preclassic Central Maya Highlands. Our research has documented a major crisis throughout the site toward the end
of the Preclassic, which ultimately culminated in the first large collapse of the site. However, the resilience of its inhabitants during
this period of decline allowed for the resurgence of Kaminaljuyu during the Early Classic. This moment led Kaminaljuyu to forge
important long-distance relationships with different distant settlements in the Maya Lowlands and Central Mexico. This paper will
present information from recent research at Kaminaljuyu focusing on this important moment in history, exploring the various
sociopolitical transformations achieved by its inhabitants at the beginning of the Classic period.
Arroyo, Barbara (Museo Popol Vuh, Universidad Francisco Marroquín, Guatemala)
[209]
Discussant
Arthur, John (University of South Florida St. Petersburg)
[86]
Beer and Feasts in the Highlands of Southern Ethiopia: Ethnoarchaeological and Archaeological Perspectives
Feasting and drinking beer by the Gamo Boreda, who live in the highlands of southern Ethiopia, represents status and seniority and
has a long tradition of connecting the living with the ancestors. This paper focuses on the archaeological site of Ochollo Mulato (AD
1270–1950) incorporating oral traditions in association with ceramic ethnoarchaeological and archaeological research documenting
the importance of beer and feasting by the Gamo Boreda. Elders recount from their oral tradition that Ochollo Mulato is the oldest
and most senior of the nine original settlements encompassing the Gamo highlands. Oral tradition and archaeological and
ethnoarchaeological ceramic analyses suggest that large-scale ritual feasting with beer and other foods were part of the activities
occurring at Ochollo Mulato over the last eight centuries.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      20
Arzate, Mayra
[150]
Ancient Maya Sustainability: A Review of Past Data
To understand the ancient Maya as a complex society and investigate their views toward sustainability, we must utilize the
archaeological record. The goal of this study is to bridge the gap between how the Maya integrated agricultural systems within urban
centers and to see how sustainability was the key to the construction of their “green cities.” Through characterizing the
anthropogenic impact of their various agricultural production systems, it should be possible to drive useful implications for green
cities today. Toward that purpose, the information collected will help further understand how this ancient civilization adapted and
worked with their natural environment. By using the concept of modern urban planning along with past archaeological data, society
will be better positioned to learn from the Maya and their eco-cities to help reflect on the current implementation of urban
consciousness and environmental awareness for sustainable development in cities of the present day. The integration of
archaeological data will be important to this study, as well as review of scholarly literature on a variety of methods relating to
agriculture, urbanism, diet, and social organization among the ancient Maya.
Asher, Brendon [77] see Smith, Heather
Astrup, Peter Moe [252] see Woo, Katherine
Athanassopoulos, Effie [192] see Weber, June
Atici, Levent [27] see MacIntosh, Sarah
Attorre, Tiago (Flinders University) and Sarah Klassen (University of British Columbia)
[28]
Koh Ker Archaeological Project: Remote Sensing of the Inner Courtyard at Prasat Thom
Angkor was the capital of the Khmer Empire for over 600 years except for one brief period during the tenth century when political
control shifted 80 km NE to Koh Ker. Despite Koh Ker’s political importance, very little is known about the longevity of the site and its
occupation history. This paper presents results from a ground-penetrating radar investigation in the main temple precinct.
Understanding the construction sequence of this area is crucial to understanding the long-term occupation patterns and how this
was impacted by the movement of the capital to the site in the tenth century. Our results suggest that the area of the main temple is
a complex palimpsest. We identify numerous subsurface buildings that may have predated the construction of the central pyramid
and others that may postdate it. This new insight provides lines of further research and indicate that the center was an important
political and religious site long before it became capital in the tenth century.
Audin, Laurence [197] see Combey, Andy
Augustine, Jonah (University of Chicago)
[105]
Common Sense and the Distribution of the Sensible in Ancient Tiwanaku, AD 500–1100
This paper will examine the aesthetic and affective construction of political subjectivities within the Tiwanaku state (AD 500–1100).
Based on evidence for feasting within the ceremonial core of Tiwanaku and a detailed analysis of the polychrome serving wares that
were consumed at these events, I will argue that large-scale rituals were sites at which “common sense” and affective bonds were
constructed among members of the political community. Common sense in this context is an adaptation of the Kantian version of the
same term, which denotes the subjective capacity for aesthetic judgment. However, unlike Kant, I argue that common sense is
culturally constructed. In this vein, I will also be engaging with Rancière’s theory of the “distribution of the sensible,” which analyzes
the relationship between aesthetics and politics. Ultimately, I will be evaluating the degree to which my data from Tiwanaku can be
used to contribute to and expand these theoretical frameworks, which attempt to examine political relations through the lens of
sense, affect, and pleasure.
Augustinus, Paul [124] see Ladefoged, Thegn
Auld-Thomas, Luke
[128]
Regional Settlement Patterns and Social Change: A Wide-Angle View
Archaeological descriptions of the Protoclassic period in the Maya lowlands—including the abstract for this symposium—do not fail
to note that this was a time of widespread population displacement and decline. Yet this claim is more factoid than fact, due to
limited research on settlement patterns during the period in question. It remains unclear, for example, whether populations relocated
or declined outright, and there has been limited attention to regional variability in these processes, let alone how processes in one
area may have been linked to those operating in another. Fortunately, enough settlement data exists to attempt such a systematic
analysis. This paper collates settlement data from the Late Preclassic and Early Classic periods across a wide swath of the lowlands
and asks what kind of changes are evident in those data, how spatially variable those changes are, and ultimately what mechanisms
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    21
might explain them. Such a before-and-after view allows us to begin the process of reconstructing the broad-scale social processes
at work across the Protoclassic lowlands.
[128]
Chair
Auld-Thomas, Luke [102] see Canuto, Marcello
Aurore, Val [11] see Giulia, Ricci
Ausel, Erica (Marian University, College of Osteopathic Medicine)
[134]
Multilevel Migration and Interpersonal Violence at the Angel Site: Bioarchaeological Investigations of Trauma at a Large
Mississippian Period Community in Southwestern Indiana
The connection between migration and violence is complex and occurs in many social spheres within a single community. Data
accessible through archaeological excavations, partnered with bioarchaeological analyses, can provide insights that are otherwise
invisible regarding these experiences. To this end, my research explores the patterns of interpersonal trauma and migration
observed at the Angel site, a large Mississippian period (AD 1050–1450) community located on the Ohio River, focusing on two key
associations. First, the correlation between females with well-healed blunt-force trauma, unusual burial position, and isotopic
signatures more similar to Fort Ancient communities suggest an association between non-local origins and violent treatment for
some community members. Second, only males from the site exhibit scalping, with one individual, also buried prone, receiving 14
perimortem fractures to their body. These patterns are likely related to social disruptions during the late Mississippian period
caused, in part, by the migration of peoples into the area due to sociopolitical instability and climate change. These data are the first
from one of the largest Mississippian period communities in mid-continent and corroborate prior bioarchaeological research on
migration and trauma for this time period in the Eastern Woodlands of North America.
Austin, Rita [242] see Pott, Laura
Austin, Robert [130] see Marken, Damien
Austvoll, Knut Ivar (University of Oslo)
[263]
Modeling Organizational Variation in Bronze Age Societies along the Coast of Northwestern Scandinavia
This paper addresses organizational variation along the coast of north-western Scandinavia and looks into the theoretical potential
of “Collective action theory” to address socio-political variation—both regionally and diachronically. The outcome of the framework
shows connectivity between societies but also varied organizational strategies that result in an unbalanced power structure. By
capitalising on the maritime trade network up and down the coast, the region of Jæren/Karmøy effectively created a nodal point for
wealth accumulation that help situate themselves as a maritime power. However, interdependence and connectivity with other more
peripheral region such as Inner Sogn was a requisite for the maintenance of such a power strategy.
Awe, Jaime
[93]
Discussant
Awe, Jaime, Claire Ebert (Northern Arizona University), Lauren Sullivan (University of Massachusetts, Boston) and Jillian
Jordan (University of New Mexico)
[168]
INAA Analyses of Cunil and Kanluk Ceramics from Cahal Pech and Their Implications for Determining the Origins of the Earliest
Maya Settlements in the Belize River Valley
In his summary chapter in the volume The Origins of Maya Civilization, Gordon Willey (1978:401) asked “Exactly who were these
first settlers of the [Maya] lowlands, and where did they come from?” Several years before, Robert Sharer and James Gifford had
pondered the same question and, based on their stylistic analysis of Preclassic pottery from Barton Ramie, concluded that the early
inhabitants of the Belize Valley were likely immigrants from the southern highlands. Other scholars subsequently suggested places
of origin in the Mixe-Zoquean regions to the west, or somewhere in the southeastern Maya lowlands. In this paper we report the
results of recent instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) of Preclassic Cunil and Kanluk ceramics from Cahal Pech, by Ron
Bishop, Dorie Reents, and Claire Ebert, and we discuss their implications for determining the origins of the earliest Maya
settlements in western Belize.
Awe, Jaime [130] see Fitzmaurice, Rosamund
Awe, Jaime [230] see Hoggarth, Julie
Awe, Jaime [178] see Saldaña, Gabriela
Awe, Jaime [23] see Stemp, W. James
Awe, Jaime [232] see Sullivan, Kelsey
Awe, Jaime [158] see Watkins, Tia
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     22
Axelrod, Ella [188] see Jamison, Gregg
Axume, Denise [176] see Carballo, Priscila
Ayala, Sergio (Gault School of Archaeological Research)
[73]
An Experimentally Supported Review of the Oldest Bifaces at the Gault site (41BL323), ca. >16,000 Years Ago cal BP
Lithic analysis of the Gault Assemblage bifaces (older than Clovis specimens) within the excavation Area 15 provided a working set
of reference parameters to conduct experimental productions. This presentation outlines the strategies and tool-implement
techniques embedded in the Gault Assemblage biface morphologies (technological behaviors) and flake scar signatures to discern
both social group and individual level production behaviors on stone. The principles behind the Gault Assemblage bifacial tool
manufacturing will be presented, highlighting the cultural elements/traits that differ from Clovis production behaviors. The
relationships between material procurement, tool production, and tool type and function will be discussed.
Ayalla, Gianna [24] see Moody, Bryony
Ayers-Rigsby, Sara (Florida Public Archaeology Network)
[193]
Chair
Ayers-Rigsby, Sara (Florida Public Archaeology Network)
[220]
Discussant
Ayers-Rigsby, Sara (Florida Public Archaeology Network), Victoria Dominguez and Valentina Martinez (Florida Atlantic
University)
[257]
Preserving Heritage in Coastal Ecuador
Climate change is negatively impacting cultural heritage and archaeological sites worldwide. The site of Balsamaragua, which
signifies 2,500 years of human occupation on the coast, is rapidly deteriorating, having lost 10m of shoreline since 2009. Increased
awareness and documentation at the site can help us glean valuable information about the past before it is lost forever. This paper
will explore the fascinating history of this archaeological site and what is lost to climate change. This paper will also discuss work by
the Florida Public Archaeology Network to engage the public in documenting loss of coastal sites in Florida and how this model
might be able to help document site loss in coastal Ecuador.
Ayers-Rigsby, Sara [146] see Miller, Sarah
Ayling, Melissa (Vancouver Island University)
[86]
Pouring the Past: A Discussion of Authenticity in Re-created Ancient Ales
Beer, by all archaeological evidence, has been a passion of humanity since before written language. This fermented beverage was
the chosen drink of many ancient cultures and societies, for health and nutrition, for the effects of alcohol and for social and religious
occasions. Today, the craft beer movement is exploding across the globe; as drinkers explore new styles and flavors, some
breweries are turning to the tried and true brews of our ancestors to meet demand. There has been a multitude of academic and
commercial attempts to re-create a variety of ancient beers with varying degrees of ‘authenticity’ employed. These beers range from
ancient inspired brews made for modern palates to more authentic recreations using ancient grains, locally sourced ingredients and
even using ancient brewing methods and technology. The concept of authenticity and its varying degrees in beer recreation will be
explored, as well as the benefits and difficulties surrounding modern attempts to re-create ancient beer. Authenticity in ancient beer
recreation will be highlighted through my project with Dr. Marie Hopwood (VIU) and Dave Paul (Loveshack Libations) to make
ancient inspired ales that bridge the gap between contemporary and ancient drinkers.
Azar, Madelaine
[166]
Cruising through the Cosmos: Making Sense of “Rim Rider” Effigy Bowl Iconography in the Central Mississippi River Valley
Ceramic rim effigy bowls are found throughout the Central Mississippi River Valley (CMV) from southeastern Missouri to
northwestern Mississippi. Characterized by modeled head and tail adornos, these bowls depict a variety of supernatural beings
inhabiting the tripartite Mississippian cosmos. However, a comprehensive iconographic analysis of CMV rim effigy bowls has not
previously been conducted. Through a systematic review of the CMV corpus, this study provides a potential iconographic model that
links aspects of rim effigy bowl style and theme to cosmic referents and ritual practice. The proposed model posits that rim effigy
bowls acted as miniature models of the Mississippian cosmos. Additionally, variation in vessel theme and style has strong spatial
patterning throughout the CMV, which suggests that religious collectives, such as sodialities, may have produced and used their
own rim effigy bowls.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     23
Aziz, Umer [63] see Russ, Jon
Babot, Pilar [174] see Comeca Ramirez, Gianina
Bacha-Garza, Roseann [6] see Gonzalez, Juan
Baci, Erina (University of Michigan), Michael Galaty (University of Michigan), Sylvia Deskaj (University of Michigan) and
Haxhi Mehmetaj (Kosova Institute of Archaeology)
[263]
Diachronic Landscape, Environment, and Settlement Patterns in Western Kosova: Results of RAPID-K, 2018–2019
Regional Archaeology in the Peja and Istog Districts of Kosova (RAPID-K) is the first intensive, systematic survey conducted in
Kosova. Following two seasons of fieldwork, we are now in a position to begin to explain why people lived where they did at various
keys points in the region’s history, from the Neolithic to the Bronze Age, through periods of contact with the Mediterranean world, to
the present. Regarding the Neolithic-Bronze Age transition, our survey shows a general shift from open settlements to higher
altitude locations often referred to as hill forts. However, our project has also produced an exception to the rule in the discovery of
Pepaj, a large, flat Bronze Age settlement discovered in 2018. Such “flat” Bronze Age sites are extremely rare in the Balkans,
therefore Pepaj presents a unique opportunity to investigate Bronze Age settlement beyond the prototypical hill forts. In “Dardanian”
times (the developed Iron Age, ca. 700 BC-400 BC), occupation in western Kosova shifted toward the hot springs at Banjë e Pejës.
Finally, the Roman occupation caused existing sites to grow, perhaps influenced by newly emerging roads, like the Lissus-Naissus
road, which began at modern-day Lezhe in Albania.
[263]
Chair
Bader, Gregor (Senckenberg Centre for Human Evolution and Palaeoenvironment, Tübingen), Lyn Wadley (Evolutionary
Studies Institute), Christian Sommer (Role of Culture in Early Expansions of Humans) and Nicholas Conard (Senckenberg
Centre for Human Evolution and Palaeoenvironment)
[11]
A Regional Perspective on the Final MSA in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa
The final MSA of southern Africa (~40–28ka), represents one of the most understudied technocomplexes in this part of the world.
Researchers often focused on earlier time periods or those shortly after, encompassing the transition between Middle and Later
Stone Age. Thus, the final MSA remains poorly understood. In KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) only few chrono-cultural markers called hollow
based points are known. Since 2016 Umbeli Belli in KZN has revealed new insights on the final MSA and demonstrated that this
period features a clear archaeological signal comprising an elaborate method of tool production with a strong emphasis on shaping
technology and a well-standardized core reduction method. Here we extend our research on the final MSA on a regional scale. We
present a comparative analysis with the final MSA layers Co–Es at Sibudu, dating to ~38 ka BP. Our results indicate that broad
terms such as final MSA must be used thoughtfully, to take account of diachronic variability within relatively short time frames at the
same site. Despite this variability, the final MSA in KZN provides a clear cultural signal which is distinct from other periods and
regions in southern Africa.
Badillo, Alex (Indiana State University)
[268]
Integrating UAV Mapping and SfM Photogrammetry into a Regional Pedestrian Survey of the Ocoña and Chorunga River Valleys in
Southern Peru
Technologies of the twenty-first century have revolutionized archaeological practice as 3D documentation equipment has proven to
be accessible and affordable. Digital 3D spatial data collection of archaeological remains (i.e., sites, features, and artifacts) is
becoming more integrated into traditional archaeological methods every year. The incorporation of twenty-first-century 3D
technologies into traditional methods may require archaeologists to rethink and revise current methodological approaches. In this
paper, the author discusses a novel approach to regional survey that integrates UAV and other 3D digital technologies into
traditional methods. Additionally, the author presents some of the major considerations when integrating 3D data collection methods
into archaeological survey. In 2019, members of the Corral Redondo Archaeological Project spent four weeks doing excavations at
the site of Corral Redondo while conducting regional survey in the surrounding Ocoña and Chorunga river valleys. Using the 3D
documentation technique known as Structure from motion (SfM) photogrammetry, project archaeologists were able to enhance
traditional methods of data collection during survey. Photogrammetric methods enabled the survey team to record entire sites,
architectural features, and carved stones quickly and effectively. The resultant 3D photorealistic reconstructions are measurable,
store much observational/descriptive detail, and can be “revisited” with ease.
Badillo, Alex [189] see Levine, Marc
Badillo, Alex [167] see Myers, Joshua
Badillo, Alex Elvis [268] see Simborth, Erika
Badillo, Melissa and Elizabeth Shikrallah (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[150]
Time to Clean House: Analyzing Household Activity in Postclassic Residential Groups at Santa Rita, Corozal, Belize
Previous archaeological research conducted by the Corozal Postclassic Project focused primarily on the Postclassic period at the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     24
site of Santa Rita, Corozal in northern Belize. Through that research, Santa Rita was found to be an important Postclassic Maya city
which likely served as the capital of the ancient Maya province of Chetumal. Given the major reorganization that occurred in the
Maya Lowlands at the end of the Classic Period, it is useful to more thoroughly understand any changes in the organization of
Postclassic Period sites. This research contributes to a better understanding of the Postclassic period by exploring the intricacies of
household activity during this time. Research expounds on the implied functions of households and plazuela groups based on the
variation between artifact distributions from selected groups throughout Santa Rita, Corozal. Using chronology previously
established for the site as the baseline, spatial analysis highlights variation in domestic building functions within and among plazuela
groups. Analysis of associated artifact classes infers building function and intensity of use during the Postclassic period.
Bagdi, Stacey [192] see Silverstein, Jay
Bagwell, Elizabeth (Piñon Heritage Solutions)
[121]
Prehistoric Architectural Construction Utilizing Boulders in Durango, Mexico: A Case Study from Santa Maria del Oro
The methods of architectural construction used by the prehistoric inhabitants of Durango, Mexico is poorly understood. This poster
compares and contrasts the prehistoric architecture present at an archaeological site along the Rio Sextin near Santa Maria del Oro
with the well-known site of La Ferreria as well as architecture from Sonora and Chihuahua.
Bailey, Geoff [252] see Woo, Katherine
Bailey, Shara [11] see Fisher, Erich
Bainton, Nick [188] see Lowe, Kelsey
Bair, Daniel [163] see Terry, Richard
Baires, Sarah
[70]
Moderator
[70]
Discussant
Baitzel, Sarah (Washington University, St. Louis), Arturo Rivera Infante and Martin Polo y La Borda
[242]
So Close, Yet So High: Explorations of a Late Intermediate Period High-Altitude Pastoralist Settlement in the Heart of the Vilcanota,
Cusco, Peru
Throughout the past, camelids have sustained human populations in some of the most marginal high-altitude landscape of the
central Andes. During the late prehispanic period, camelid herds were pillars of economic wealth and mobility in complex societies,
yet these pastoralist communities are rarely the focus of archaeological investigation. The site of Yayamari (4,900 masl) in the heart
of the Vilcanota, Cusco, was a high-altitude pastoralist settlement whose residents, though spatially proximate to the Inca capital,
inhabited an extremely marginal environment. Located at the base of a volcanic plug that towers over the Sibinacocha Lake and
valley, the Yayamari site is situated amidst megalithic rockfall that frames residential and hydraulic infrastructure. Pilot excavations
in 2019 revealed two episodes of occupation during the Late Intermediate Period (AD 1200–1400) and the Colonial Period (AD
1532–1650). Faunal remains indicate a pastoralist subsistence reliant on local camelid herds, whereas lithic artifacts suggest that
Yayamari’s residents participated in supra-regional exchange networks. In addition, reconstructions of the region’s paleo-landscape
contribute to our understanding of the site. The results of our study highlight the marginal yet interconnected nature of high-altitude
pastoralists at the core of the Inca Empire during the transconquest period.
Baitzel, Sarah [242] see Corcoran-Tadd, Noa
Baitzel, Sarah [61] see Diaz, Lucia
Bajdek, Brennan (Logan Simpson) and Sam Willis (Oregon Parks Department)
[194]
Under the Mazama Ash: Results of Data Recovery Excavations at the Crescent Lake Site (35KL749)
Since 2016, the Crescent Lake Resort in Klamath County, Oregon has been undergoing updates to its infrastructure. The resort is
situated on top of a large, stratified, multicomponent prehistoric site, with occupations both pre-dating and postdating the eruption of
Mount Mazama over 7,000 years ago. In order to mitigate impacts from utility system upgrades, Logan Simpson conducted data
recovery excavations at the site in response to a Section 106 project on the Deschutes National Forest. This work resulted in the
recovery of over 10,000 prehistoric artifacts, and the excavation of two buried prehistoric features, including a pre-Mazama single
reduction locus and a post-Mazama thermal feature. This paper explores the results of artifact and feature analyses, including
typologies, radiocarbon dates, obsidian studies, and blood residue analysis. All of these factors have been compared between the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     25
pre- and post-Mazama components in order to evaluate changes in site occupation over time.
Baker, Caitlin, Sydney Stenstrom (Eastern New Mexico University) and Heather Smith (Eastern New Mexico University)
[148]
Stone-Lined Archaeological Features in East-Central New Mexico: Addressing Function, Chronology, and Culture
Throughout the North American Southwest rock-lined features present on the ground surface are a common occurrence, but they
are not always associated with archaeological materials that attest to their function, chronology, and cultural affiliation. They served
many purposes for different prehistoric peoples, such as fire pits, storage caches, hunting blinds, and ceremonial areas. During the
field season of 2019, the Eastern New Mexico University field school identified several stone-lined features in north-central New
Mexico. However, the variety of potential functions and lack of contextual associations with other artifacts make it difficult to address
research questions regarding function, chronology, and culture. The goal of this project is to determine if these questions can be
informed by morphological and spatial analyses. Results are compared to similar features in the region and ethnographic data
collected from local Native American communities.
Baker, Lori
[51]
Osteological Analysis of Two Contemporary Tombs from the San Giuliano Necropolis
This paper will describe and compare the skeletal remains recovered from two small Etruscan chamber tombs from the San
Giuliano archeological complex in the Marturanum Park in the Lazio region of Italy. Both tombs, G13-001 and G12-060, are dated to
the sixth century BCE using the rich ceramic assemblage that was recovered during field excavations from 2016 to 2018. The tombs
have been extensively looted; however, the skeletal remains, although quite damaged and fragmented, were not removed. Results
from skeletal analyses including the MNI of the tombs will be discussed. In addition, human cremains were discovered in both tombs
scattered throughout. The analyses and comparison of these cremains will be discussed in the context of amount, type,
temperature, and cremation process. An intact cremation grave was also discovered just outside of the entrance to tomb G12-060
with a nearly complete red impasto vessel in the pit covered by a bucchero bowl. The contents of the vessel were removed in the
laboratory and contained human cremains. These will be discussed in comparison to the scattered cremains from inside the tombs.
Baker, Lori [51] see Jones, Lauren
Baker, Sheldon [165] see Graham, Carole
Baker, Sheldon [149] see McAllister, Christine
Bakke, Gwen (Southern Methodist University)
[119]
The Aftermath of Colonization: Wichita Subsistence Change in the Southern Plains
European colonization of North America had profound impacts on Native American populations. These include the introduction of
European diseases and warfare, the consolidation and abandonment of traditional lands, and the eventual forced relocation to
reservations. Previously, much archaeological focus has been on the demographic, social, and political responses to European
Contact. However, European colonization also greatly impacted traditional subsistence practices of Native Americans and has
garnered far less attention. Changes in subsistence are important because they can be used as a measure to understand how
Native Americans responded to European influences, the impact on their traditional lifeways, and potentially the relationship
between Europeans and Native populations. This research presents preliminary results from a faunal study of the Upper Tucker site
on the southern Plains, a site occupied by the Wichita and their ancestors in northeast Texas along the Red River during the period
of European contact. This research examines the subsistence strategies at the site with a particular focus on how bison were
utilized. The results of this study can contribute to archeologists understanding of potential changes, or continuity, in subsistence
patterns in response to European occupation and interaction on the southern Plains.
Bakke, Gwen [22] see Lupo, Karen
Balanzario Granados, Sandra
[223]
Datos arqueológicos del asentamiento de Dzibanché, Quintana Roo
Desde 1987 hasta la fecha actual, el Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia ha realizado exploraciones arqueológicas en el
asentamiento prehispánico de Dzibanché. Exploraciones que han documentado un asentamiento integrado por cuatro grupos de
arquitectura monumental: Grupo Principal de Dzibanché, Kinichná Tutil y Complejo Lamay, todos ellos conectados por una extensa
red de sacbeob. Conjuntos monumentales integrados por espacios cívicos ceremoniales y áreas habitacionales. La secuencia de
ocupación considera una temporalidad que inicia en el Preclásico Medio y continua hasta el Posclásico Tardío (300 aC-1400 dC).
[223]
Chair
Balanzario Granados, Sandra [223] see Estrada-Belli, Francisco
Balanzario Granados, Sandra [223] see Viskanta Khokhriakova, Sandra
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     26
Balcarcel, AnaBeatriz (Mirador Basin/FARES Foundation)
[163]
Temas eternos, datos nuevos de arquitetura ritrual: La cancha para juego de pelota de Tintal, Cuenca Mirador, Petén, Guatemala
Las canchas para juego de pelota han estado presentes en Mesoamérica desde el período Precíásico. Su complejidad se manifiesta
desde las diferentes variantes en su forma, temporalidades y dimensiones. Durante la temporada 2014 se tuvo la oportunidad de
excavar una de las canchas preclásicas más grandes de las tierras bajas mayas y, en esta ponencia, se expondrán datos relevantes
sobre la arquitectura, su asociación con otros edificios importantes en la traza urbana, así como sus principales hallazgos.
Balcarcel, AnaBeatriz [163] see Hansen, Richard
Balco, William (University of North Georgia)
[254]
Meaningful Engagement on a Shoestring Budget in North Georgia
Engaging students, landowners, the public, and policymakers in the scientific process of archaeology is an essential component of
our discipline and creates opportunities to impress upon these groups the value of historic preservation. Doing so demonstrates that
archaeological and historic resources are limited and fragile, affording professionals the opportunity to emphasize the at-risk nature
of many of these resources while also raising awareness of the diversity of local cultural heritage. Many institutions, particularly in
today’s socio-political and economic climate, may struggle with ways to fulfill the need for public engagement on limited funds. This
paper presents various low-budget and collaborative efforts to engage others in the process of archaeology, from research design to
excavation, artifact processing and analysis, report writing, and the final dissemination of results. Four engagement-minded
archaeological projects from north Georgia’s piedmont are discussed, serving as case studies of low-budget, high impact
engagement strategies.
Balco, William [169] see Kolb, Michael
Baldwin, Dennis [206] see Garrison, Thomas
Balée, William [161] see Rocha, Bruna
Balicki, Joseph (Commonwealth Heritage Group) and Susan Malin-Boyce (USACE, St. Paul District)
[132]
The Rediscovery and Restoration of Arlington Cemetery’s Ord-Weitzel and Sheridan Gates
In 1879, the War Department building next to the White House was demolished. In 1814, masons who rebuilt the White House
carved the building’s columns. General Montgomery C. Meigs repurposed six of the columns from the north portico of the building
as gateways through the original cemetery boundary wall at Arlington Cemetery. Meigs viewed the gates as lasting symbols of the
nation’s military. Meigs stated, “These historic columns, among which have moved the chief soldiers of the Army and the chiefs of
the War Department during the last sixty years, and they have furnished very handsome gates to the principal cemetery [of the
United States].” A cemetery expansion in 1971 included removal of the gates, but most elements were stored outdoors in an unused
part of the cemetery. Beginning in 2012, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Mandatory Center of Expertise for the Curation and
Management of Archaeological Collections (MCX CMAC), Saint Louis District (Corps) under the direction of Sonny Trimble, has led
the efforts to rediscover and restore the gates. Once restored, these original gates will be incorporated into the modern cemetery
expansion bridging memorial landscapes and furthering Meigs’s enduring vision.
Ball, Christopher (University of Toronto)
[231]
Collaboration in Collections-Based Archaeology
This paper discusses the growing importance of collections in archaeological research and addresses both the opportunities and
challenges afforded by the integration of datasets obtained from a variety of sources such as museum collections, cultural resource
management (CRM) firms, and academic excavations. In light of the rate at which cultural resource management firms have been
able to excavate vast quantities of new data, it has become critically important that researchers from a variety of professional
contexts begin making greater efforts to keep up with increasing rates of archaeological dataset production and ensure that the vast
wealth of CRM excavated datasets and museum collections are not neglected in pursuit of additional excavation. Doing so,
however, is often easier said than done. As such, with specific reference to my own work in southern Ontario, this paper will discuss
the various idiosyncrasies and challenges of working with collections obtained from a variety of different sources, advocate for a
greater degree of standardization in archaeological sampling strategies, and explore the ways in which the establishment of more
robust relationships among researchers at academic institutions, museums, and CRM firms alike may feasibly make collections-
based research a much more accessible endeavor.
Ball, Joseph (San Diego State)
[126]
Potting and Polychromy at Late and Terminal Classic Buenavista del Cayo, Belize: What NAA and Archaeology Say of What Was
and Was Not
Since 1993 there have been repeated references in the literature to possible “pottery making” at the Classic period Belize Valley
center of Buenavista del Cayo. In reality, there is scant evidence to support actual pottery manufacture at the site, but, there is
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    27
ample support for the decorative painting, individualized detailing (with “Maya blue”), and final refiring of Guajiro Variety Cabrito
Cream-polychromes within the center’s palace. These two propositions (no fabrication, but painting and finishing) are supported
both by ceramic and artifactual evidence, and the NAA findings of Ron Bishop’s long term investigation of the production and
circulation of Classic period Maya polychromes. This paper reviews the pertinent archaeological ceramics and NAA data supporting
the absence of actual pottery fabrication at Buenavista, and the probable small-scale painting and second firing of red and orange-
red on cream-slipped earthenwares within the center’s palace in the early ninth century AD.
Ball, Kaitlyn (University of Massachusetts, Boston)
[80]
Archaeology of Health and Medicinal Practices in Plymouth Colony, Massachusetts
The exchange of medical knowledge and practices provides insight into the challenges of everyday life in the New England colonial
era, specifically in scenarios where this exchange could have meant life or death. This project analyzes how the exchange of
medical practices and knowledge between the colonists of Plymouth and the Native community can be examined in the
archaeological record. Recent research shows how botanical remains may provide missing data on medicinal exchange and answer
broader anthropological questions about culture contact. Artifactual and botanical remains are key because they complement
documentary records and provide an opportunity to see these practices in archaeological assemblages. Through the use of
historical and ethnographic documentation, a model is constructed to test on existing artifact collections. The study of medicinal
exchange is significant for building a richer, more inclusive understanding of the relationship, influence, and social interaction
between colonists and Native people.
Ballenger, Jesse (University of Arizona), Dakota Larrick (University of Oklahoma) and Alexander Craib (University of
Wyoming)
[103]
Type Name Dalton, a Knudsonian Perspective
The type Dalton is uniquely suited for a Ruthann Knudson perspective of range of variability, because it crosses the lines of style
and function and gender that archaeologists have inferred from the form and context. This analysis concentrates on the variability of
time, form, and use-related dimensions of things called Dalton throughout the U.S. Southeast and Midwest, a problem that she may
appreciate. The type is common, but the effervescence, use, and mixed end of the type is not understood. The analysis is based on
an Oklahoma-centric perspective, where the Ozark Mountains meet the prairie, but we discuss the wider technology and time-range
of what people identify as the type.
Balsanelli, Alice [127] see Palka, Joel
Baltus, Melissa (University of Toledo)
[70]
Discussant
Baltus, Melissa (University of Toledo)
[272]
Mediating Powers, Negotiating Inequalities: Ecological Politics at Cahokia
The Native American city of Cahokia originates in the creation of a cosmologically powerful landscape formed by the gathering of
human and other-than-human participants (including earth, water, and fire) (see Pauketat 2013). At this center humans and their
non-human partners mediated relationships between Worlds (Upper, Middle, and Lower), often involving the gathering and
manipulation of ‘vibrant’ (or potent) materials (after Bennett 2010) in everyday as well as domestic contexts. Here I consider how
local variations of involvement in those negotiations or differential access to the means of engaging with other-than-human agents
likely created social inequalities and internal divisions. Changing relationships between humans and other-than-human agents within
the Cahokian landscape, including periods during which relations of cooperation and complementarity became points of conflict,
seemingly created fractures along new and existing cleavage points (e.g., gender, kin group, sodality, neighborhood or local
community). This paper explores unraveling networks of humans and other-than-human persons in the context of a major
depopulation during the late twelfth century and reconfiguration of the political landscape of Cahokia during the thirteenth century. I
consider evidence for environmental change as transformative of local relationships between humans and other-than humans within
an animate landscape rather than causative of ‘collapse’.
Bandy, Matthew (SWCA Environmental Consultants) and David Reinhart (SWCA Environmental Consultants)
[175]
Automated Identification of Archaeological Features in a Regional Lidar Dataset from Southeastern New Mexico
In 2014, the Carlsbad Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management acquired 372 square miles of high resolution lidar data in an
experimental attempt to map archaeological features over a wide area of southeastern New Mexico. The features of interest were
burned rock middens with a distinctive topographic signature. If successful, this effort would have had significant applications for the
study and management of cultural resources in the region. A GIS-based “digital survey” approach to feature identification was
attempted using human operators and false color visualizations. This was successful but was too labor-intensive to apply to a broad
area. In the end only 51 square miles were studied, about 14% of the lidar data acquired. This presentation reports on efforts to
develop automated computational methods that would permit feature extraction at regional scales with little labor input.
[175]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     28
Banks, Kimball (Metcalf Archaeological Consultants Inc.)
[154]
Moderator
Banks, William (CNRS [PACEA laboratory]) and Philippe Lanos (CNRS)
[24]
An Application of Hierarchical Bayesian Modeling to Upper Paleolithic Archaeological Cultures in France between 32 and 21 cal ka
BP
Investigations of chronology play a key role in the majority of archaeological research endeavors and are particularly pertinent to
examinations of culture-environment relationships, especially during periods marked by pronounced climatic variability. Rigorous
evaluations of data and robust methods are necessary to reconstruct reliable chronologies, and this is especially true for periods
associated with a relatively few radiometric measurements. Such is the case for the Upper Paleolithic archaeological record of
present-day France from 32,000 to 21,000 cal BP. We use critically examined radiocarbon measurements from contextually secure
archaeological contexts and employ a recently-developed method of Hierarchical Bayesian Modeling to reconstruct the chronology
of archaeological cultures from the Middle Gravettian to the Badegoulian. This approach for constructing regional chronologies
represents a significant improvement over methods employed to-date and takes into account all available radiometric data rather
than only those from stratified contexts. These robust chronological intervals for each typo-technologically defined culture phase are
compared to the Greenland ice core climatic record and a terrestrial paleoenvironmental record from Bergsee Lake (Southern
Germany)—itself expressed in calendar years calculated with the same calibration curve employed in our age model—thereby
permitting each archaeological culture to be correlated accurately with documented paleoclimatic variability.
Bankuti, Natalie
[164]
Emblems of Authority: A Comparison of Preclassic and Classic Maya Inscribed Jade Artifacts
In antiquity, the use of prestige objects and adornment made of jade was a key aspect of Maya elite life which carried over from the
Preclassic to the Classic period. The establishment of jade indicating high social status has shown to have begun in Mesoamerica
with the Olmec, however the scope of this paper will focus only on the 1,800-year span of time represented by the artifacts being
studied; roughly spanning from 1000 BCE to 800 CE of the Gregorian calendar. Among these prestigious jade artifacts, some are
inscribed with hieroglyphic writing which can, despite many of the glyphs remaining undeciphered, be of use to understanding
aspects of royal life in the Maya world. While exact provenience and dating cannot always be calculated for every inscribed jade
artifact, estimates provide enough context by which to compare them. These inscribed jade objects of adornment will be the focus of
this paper and their forms, archaeological context, and glyphic messages will function as lenses by which I compare the usage of
prestige material culture across the Maya elite from the Preclassic and Classic periods of the ancient Maya civilization.
Banning, Edward [55] see Hitchings, Philip
Bao, Qingchuan [199] see Zhao, Chao
Baquedano, Elizabeth (UCL Institute of Archaeology)
[225]
Decapitation and the Vulnerable Nature of Joints among the Aztecs
Prisoners of war were ritually killed by heart extraction and they were often decapitated. Archaeologists at Templo Mayor found
skulls with the first cervical vertebrae attached, indicating death by decapitation. Lethal weapons such as flint sacrificial knives were
also found near decapitated individuals. Skulls were also placed in front of the Coyolxauhqui monolith discovered in 1978. Severed
limbs and heads point to the vulnerability of joints, a concept also confirmed in several myths and graphically represented in the
Coyolxauhqui sculptures, and in a variety of other deities and material objects.
Barba, Luis (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico), Jorge Blancas (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico),
Agustin Ortiz (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico), Ricardo Cruz and Sarah Clayton (University of Wisconsin-
Madison)
[133]
Geophysical Studies in the Archaeological Site of Chicoloapan, State of Mexico
In this paper, we present integrated archaeological and prospection data from the settlement of Chicoloapan, State of Mexico.
generated by aerial photo, topographic survey, electric, magnetic, and georadar techniques. These data result from three years of
research by the Proyecto Arqueológico Chicoloapan Viejo, a collaboration between UNAM and the University of Wisconsin-Madison
that investigates the local impact of Teotihuacan’s decline and the growth of an Epiclassic town. The site includes several visible
mounds that appear on the surface to be isolated, but we know now that they were part of large architectural complexes that include
the mounds, sunken patios, plazas, and surrounding residences. Sunken patios are well preserved since they remained beneath the
plow zone. Architectural remains located close to the surface have been altered by modern mechanized agriculture, but we have
been able to detect the buried remnants of walls and plastered floors of large, multi-room structures. Some of these structures
incorporated volcanic stones, making it possible to detect them mainly through magnetic studies. After covering 50,000 m2 by
geophysical methods, we have a clearer understanding of the architecture present at Chicoloapan and can better characterize the
relationship between visible mounds and other kinds of civic and residential structures.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   29
Barba, Luis [20] see Alonso, Alejandra
Barbel, Héloïse [50] see Woollett, James
Barber, Sarah [189] see Joyce, Arthur
Barciela, Virginia [25] see Coltofean-Arizancu, Laura
Bardolph, Dana (Northern Illinois University)
[1]
What Is at Stake in Archaeological Knowledge Production
Recent years have witnessed a sea change in anthropological discourse concerning how gender bias and a lack of diversity has
affected the work that archaeologists produce, interest that dovetails with current concerns about equity and safety issues. More
broadly, scholars in feminist, queer, and Indigenous studies also have questioned the particular frameworks of objectivity upon
which science stakes its privileged access to knowledge. In this paper, I reflect on my own recent research and that of other
scholars on the production and dissemination of archaeological knowledge through the gendered dimensions of publication, grant
writing, and conference presentations. Who gets to write the predominant narratives of archaeology? Whose voices are elevated
and whose are diminished? This prerogative decides the gatekeepers of our field—those who get to determine the prevailing
narratives of our human past. A reflection on these issues and the inclusion of women and underrepresented groups in the narrative
of archaeology (and science more broadly) are crucial if we want new questions asked and different perspectives on how best to
answer existing ones.
Bardolph, Dana (Northern Illinois University), Gregory Wilson (University of California, Santa Barbara) and Duane Esarey
(Dickson Mounds Museum)
[211]
Religion, Culture Contact, and Mississippian Origins: A View from the Illinois Valley
Remote sensing and two years of excavation at the Fandel site, near Upper Peoria Lake in west central Illinois, are shedding new
light on the complicated history of population movement and culture contact that fueled the origins of Mississippian society in the
American Bottom and the Illinois River Valley. This ongoing research has revealed construction and use of early Mississippian
platform mounds, elaborate ceremonial buildings, and rituals central to Cahokia’s mid-eleventh century urban intensification and its
simultaneous integration with outlying contributory groups at strategic points across the upper Mississippi River basin. These
findings have the potential not only to better elucidate the dynamics of culture contact during the Early Mississippian period across
the greater Midwest, but also to reframe understandings of the social and spatial contexts in which various groups interacted and
generated the transregional connections, beliefs, and practices that have come to define Mississippian culture.
Bardolph, Dana [72] see VanDerwarker, Amber
Barker, Graeme (McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge)
[171]
Discussant
Barket, Theresa (California State University, Bakersfield), Felicia De Peña (University of California, Berkeley) and Ahmad
Thaher (Independent researcher)
[199]
New Insights from a Reanalysis of the Flaked-Stone Assemblage from the Neolithic Site of Wadi Shu’eib, Jordan
In the ongoing research on the Neolithic of the Southern Levant, flaked-stone assemblages continue to play a key role in
interpretations of social organization and interaction. Despite the prominence of research on lithic assemblages during the Neolithic,
few comprehensive studies come from the large settlements with long, continuous occupation spans (2,000 years of continuous
occupation) that are likely to be more informative about long-term patterns of social and economic change. For instance, the
research conducted at the long-occupied site of ‘Ain Ghazal, Jordan demonstrated that changes in the flaked-stone assemblage
correspond with changes in subsistence, settlement size, and settlement configuration through time. If such patterns exist at other
similar sites with long occupation spans, it remains understudied. Therefore, this research aims to address these shortfalls in our
knowledge through additional analysis on the flaked-stone assemblage from the site of Wadi Shu’eib, a large Neolithic settlement in
Jordan occupied from the Middle Pre-Pottery Neolithic B to the Pottery Neolithic. Specifically, this paper presents the results of a
technological analysis of a sample of debitage, cores, and tools from each period of occupation and interprets what they may tell us
about socioeconomic change through time at the site of Wadi Shu’eib.
Barkwill Love, Lori (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[135]
Modeling the Early History of Maize in the North American Southwest
Although originally domesticated in Mexico, the initial adoption and spread of maize (Zea mays) are fundamental to understanding
the transition from foraging to farming in the North American Southwest. This study uses multiple statistical analyzes on over 500
radiocarbon dates acquired on maize macrobotanicals from 60+ Archaic sites to model the introduction, dispersal, and intensity of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        30
early maize use in the North American Southwest. To examine the timing of the introduction and dispersal of early maize, Bayesian
chronological models are constructed based on site elevation levels and by ecoregions. Kernel density estimation (KDE) models
and cumulative probability distribution (CPD) models are used to examine the distribution of maize to infer the intensity of maize use
during the Archaic period. In addition, the results of the KDE models are compared to paleoenvironmental reconstruction datasets to
examine the relationship between maize usage and climate change. This study highlights the use of multiple perspective
chronologies to address large-scale issues, such as the adoption and spread of agriculture.
[135]
Chair
Barkwill Love, Lori [122] see Whisenhunt, Mary
Barland-Liles, David (Law Enforcement)
[49]
The Power, Process, and Practicality of Tribal Monitoring of Federal Criminal Investigations
The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure provide a mechanism for investigators, prosecutors and Tribal representatives to build a
relationship of trust that facilitates equitable efforts associated with truth finding and resolution of criminal matters. In 2016 the U.S.
Attorney’s Office successfully prosecuted a former manager of Effigy Mounds National Monument who committed and covered up a
heinous crime designed to circumvent the provisions of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act. A special
agent, 20 sovereign nations, and the U.S. Attorney’s Office used these procedures to become united and powerful protectors of
justice and civil rights. This procedural application had never been attempted before.
Barlow, Robert (University of Wyoming)
[198]
Hunter-Gatherer Behavioral Response to the Younger Dryas in North Alabama
This collections-based study uses approximately 1,300 projectile points from north Alabama to investigate behavioral responses to
the Younger Dryas climatic event (12,900 to 11,700 BP). A modified version of the marginal value theorem is applied to determine
how changing resource structures affected hafted biface technology. I argue that variation in design and curation of hafted bifaces
during and after the Younger Dryas was not conditioned by access or availability of lithic raw material. Instead, observed variation is
a behavioral response to changes in return rates from hunting and foraging. Further, the changes in hunting return rates are affected
by changes in north Alabama forest structure, which were conditioned by climatic changes brought on by the Younger Dryas. To this
end, I argue that the sustained impact of the Younger Dryas, and subsequent Holocene warming, had an effect on the subsistence
economies of hunter-gatherers living in northern Alabama during this time, which is exhibited by changes in hafted biface
technology.
Barnard, Hans [240] see Edington, Stacy
Barnard, Hans [252] see Iizuka, Fumie
Barnard, Hans [268] see Simborth, Erika
Barnett, Kay [149] see Hovezak, Tim
Barnett Tankersley, Kenneth [63] see Herzner, Louis
Bar-Oz, Guy [159] see Vaiglova, Petra
Barrera, Jimmy (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers)
[256]
Case Example of Permit Compliance to Public Outreach, New Braunfels, Texas
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ (Corps), Regulatory Program evaluates activities that require Department of the Army
authorization under various legislative authorities including Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. This presentation will summarize the
Corps’ regulatory involvement with a project located in New Braunfels, Texas. A project overview and summary will be included on
the historic and prehistoric resources. This will be followed by architectural and archeological mitigation which involved public
outreach. The public outreach efforts included: live weekly webcasts on various topics, project website, social media posts, blog
entries, daily site tours including Saturday, special evening programs, working with local volunteers, and a constant team effort to
promote the project. While the Corps’ role in this project is regulatory and review, the implementation and ideas for this project are
owed to the Permittee and their quality team. Finally, this project received a public outreach award and the outreach model has
been utilized in other regional projects.
Barrett, Sophia (Skidmore College), Samantha Mackertich (Skidmore College) and Kathryn Baustian (Skidmore College)
[35]
Reassessing Demography of the Bronze Age Tomb at Tell Abraq (UAE): Using Multiple Bone Elements from a Commingled Context
A circular stone tomb at the site of Tell Abraq (UAE) on the southern coast of the Arabian Gulf was used as a mortuary feature for
approximately 200 years (2200–2000 BC) during the Bronze Age. Both adults and children were buried in the six-meter wide tomb,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        31
causing significant admixture or commingling of the remains. This research reassessed the demography of the children and infants
in the tomb by analyzing bones of the arm (humerus and radius) for comparison to previous data from the leg (right femur). Results
showed similar age distributions with high rates of mortality for newborns and infants under two years of age. Data from the left
humerus and right radius were able to account for seven additional subadults in the tomb, bringing the total minimum number of
individuals (MNI) to 134 subadults. The demography presents opportunities for further investigation of morbidity and mortality factors
among a commingled skeletal assemblage.
Barrientos Q., Tomás [223] see Stuart, David
Barron, Aleese (Australian National University) and Tim Denham (Australian National University)
[235]
The Use of MicroCT Imaging for Archaeobotanical Investigations
MicroCT imaging has the potential to extract new archaeological information from existing archaeobotanical collections as well as
create new archaeobotanical assemblages within ancient ceramics and other artifact types. The technique can aid in answering
archaeobotanical questions in regions with poor archaeobotanical preservation and where ancient plant exploitation remains poorly
understood. This paper will outline current and potential uses of microCT imaging in the investigation of archaeobotanical questions,
including the analysis of organic remains preserved within pottery sherds and the identification of archaeological parenchyma.
Issues to be discussed include analytical coverage, image resolution, sample preparation, data management, access to facilities,
data hosting, as well as methodological limitations.
Barry, Patrick [9] see McDaid, Chris
Barth, Nicolas [102] see Stanton, Travis
Barton, Loukas [236] see Brady, Ryan
Barton, Michael [226] see Bergin, Sean
Barzilai, Rebecca (Illinois State Archaeological Survey)
[264]
The Traditional and the Novel in Material Practice: Nuancing Our Understanding of Ritual Activities at the Emerald Acropolis through
Compositional Studies of Ceramics
The Emerald Acropolis sits at the edge of the historic Illinois prairie on an aboriginally sculpted ridge visibly high in the landscape at
the eastern extent of Greater Cahokia. The site is located 24 km east of the central precinct of the Ancient Indian city which itself is
situated on the east side of the Mississippi River near modern St. Louis. Defined as a lunar shrine complex where intermittent
occupation and activities by local and non-local visitors produce novel ideas, cultural expressions, and material remains, the
activities at Emerald have implications for the origins of Greater Cahokia and the larger region circa AD eleventh to thirteenth
centuries. This study looks at the ceramic material practices associated with the ritual activities of the people of Greater Cahokia,
the visitors to this religious center, and the ways in which these material practices shifted and changed through these interactions;
curating or retiring the traditional and producing the novel in style and material practice. I will look at the vibrancy of material affects
and how these affects and relationships impact/are impacted by human relationships to landscapes and storied geologies to trace
the cultural innovations through the lens of the material sciences.
Basanti, Dil (Northwestern University)
[272]
Materializing Aksumite: Power Plays in the Location of the Northern Stelae Field (AD 100–400)
This paper looks at how the location of the central stelae field in Aksum (in use from ~ AD 100–400) took advantage of natural
features to amplify indigenous ideologies. The Northern Stelae Field is the burial location of the most powerful Aksumites, and
tradition dictates that at least some were kings. The stela field is uniquely located to take advantage of four environment features:
the central reservoir, a nepheline syenite stone quarry 6km away, and two mountains that flank the cemetery. Working together, the
mountains create a light corridor that washes over the stela and emphasizes the unique properties of the granite stone in the early
morning when most people would have accessed the reservoir. While this location is perhaps one of the worst in Aksum for the
preservation of bones, it is perhaps one of the best placed to communicate powerful ideologies through the monumentality of stone.
Mortuary practices indicate the stelae perpetuated ideologies of “Aksumiteness” and “localness” (over “foreigness”). Taken together,
the combination of these different data demonstrate how the authors of the stelae used the landscape to maintain their positions of
power as they became threatened by Aksum’s intense globalization.
Bassett, Christine [237] see Voorhies, Barbara
Bastante Abuhadba, José [197] see Combey, Andy
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        32
Bateman, Mark [194] see Lawrence, Ken
Bates, Brian (Longwood University)
[228]
Improving STEM Competencies via Archaeology Research in the Staunton River Valley: An Introduction
Funded through a National Science Foundation–Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (NSF-IUSE) grant, the overarching goal
of the project is to improve STEM competency among both STEM and non-STEM undergraduate students. The National Science
Foundation has long recognized archaeology as a STEM discipline, although many students do not make this connection. This
project is innovative in that it will engage students through field research in a subject they don’t traditionally perceive as STEM,
archaeology. In this way, the project will circumvent students’ fear-based avoidance of STEM, thereby bridging the gap between
non-STEM and STEM thinking and ultimately improving STEM competency. This paper will provide an overview of the research
project as well as the initial steps undertaken.
Bates, Jennifer (University of Pennsylvania), Adam Green (University of Cambridge), Ravindra Singh (Banaras Hindu
University) and Cameron Petrie (University of Cambridge)
[272]
Many Communities, Many Foods: The Economic and Political Implications of Diversified Cropping Strategies before, during and
after Urbanism in Northwest India ca. 3200–1500 BC
Climate crises are raising questions about how we feed everyone in our highly urbanized modern society. Anthropological research
has demonstrated that economic, political and environmental landscapes are intricately interwoven and intersect with the diverse
choices of people across all scales of society. Nowhere is this clearer than in northwest India, where diverse cropping strategies
have played a major role in the region’s political ecology. Archaeology provides the tools to explore the longue durée of the
economic and political impact of diverse agricultural strategies. In this paper, we will explore the economic and political implications
of the exploitation of different agricultural systems. Over more than four millennia of social development and transformation, the use
of different crops and cropping regimes facilitated different kinds of interaction at various scales, potentially at times alleviating the
pressures brought about by increasing urbanization. For example, in the hinterland of Rakhigarhi, one of the region’s first cities,
farmers developed a variety of strategies to survive social and environmental diversity and change. These diverse multi-cropping
strategies persisted, and were facilitated by social choices that may have favored interaction among rural small-scale settlements
before, during and after phases of urbanism.
Battillo, Jenna (PaleoResearch Institute), Thomas Stafford Jr. (Stafford Research), R. A. Varney (PaleoResearch Institute)
and Linda Scott Cummings (PaleoResearch Institute)
[66]
 Radiocarbon, Deposition, XRF, and Pollen Records from Hall’s Cave, Texas
Hall’s Cave in south-central Texas contains well-dated sedimentary deposits from the Last Glacial Maximum (ca.17 ka RC) to
present. The Younger Dryas event easily observed here as a sediment change at 151 cm BD, divides the pre- and post-impact
event records. The short interval (ca. 11,000 to 10,000 RC) examined for pollen and XRF signatures address the immediate pre-
and post-impact event vegetation and depositional records. A microscopic charcoal spike (2,000% compared with pollen) recorded
immediately above the impact event is accompanied by an abrupt vegetation change, suggesting response to fire. Large quantities
of microscopic charcoal continue in the sediments for approximately 10 cm as the pollen record registers vegetative recovery
marked by a typical early Holocene signature of elevated dandelion-type plants and large amounts of sagebrush. Subsequently,
sagebrush declines and high-spine asters increase. Arboreal pollen frequencies remain lower than earlier. The XRF signatures for
strontium/calcium ratios and quantities of zinc, iridium, and others are examined as part of the depositional history, which is
delineated by 160 radiocarbon dates, 60% on bone collagen. We use complementary pollen, XRF, and radiocarbon analyses to
address the deposition and vegetation records surrounding the purported impact event.
Batún Alpuche, Adolfo [57] see Dedrick, Maia
Bauer, Andrew (Stanford University)
[124]
Cultivating Problems and Constituting Publics: Fertile Fields and the Social History of the Medieval Deccan, Southern India
This paper addresses a long-standing historiographical trope about the social history and essential “fertility” of the Raichur Doab, a
region of the central Deccan of southern India that was ostensibly contested by numerous imperial polities throughout the Medieval
and Early Modern Periods for its rich agricultural resources. By triangulating the shifting locations of land use through analyses of
intensive pedestrian survey results, multi-spectral remote sensing data, and medieval textual records, the paper demonstrates that
agricultural production faced numerous social and material challenges in the region and suggests new lines of inquiry into how the
doab and the diverse publics that were created through its contestation are imagined and theorized.
Bauer, Kimberly
[133]
Epiclassic Domestic Assemblage Variation at Chicoloapan in the Southeastern Basin of Mexico
Chicoloapan in the southeastern Basin of Mexico experienced a large amount of growth during the Epiclassic period, growing from a
few hundred people to a large town of thousands, through a process of migration from unknown areas. In this paper, I discuss
domestic assemblages from Early Epiclassic contexts and their variation across the site of Chicoloapan. Current knowledge of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    33
Epiclassic household material culture is limited in the Basin of Mexico because extensive, stratigraphically controlled excavations of
domestic contexts from this period have been rare. Previous studies of Epiclassic ceramics have focused on data from surface
collected pottery or historic collections without contextual information. Ceramics from Chicoloapan are well preserved and from
specific stratigraphic contexts, providing the opportunity to examine domestic assemblages in detail, which advances our
comprehension of foodways, ritual activity, and variability among households.
Bauman, Natalie [37] see Anderson, Jennifer
Baumann, Laura [137] see Poister, Nicholas
Baumann, Tim [78] see McKenna, Kathryn
Baustian, Kathryn (Skidmore College)
[131]
What’s Your Question? Theoretical Bioarchaeology in the American Southwest and Ancient Arabia
Bioarchaeology today is interdisciplinary, scientific, and theoretical. For over 30 years, Debra Martin has contributed substantially to
archaeology by promoting these shifts in the discipline. Her scholarly accomplishments are extensive but I suggest that perhaps her
most important contribution to the field of bioarchaeology has been her ability to train the next generation of scholars to ask
meaningful questions about people in the past. Martin’s philosophy is that large questions promote exploration of answers from a
variety of data, methods, and perspectives. Using case studies from the Mogollon region of the American Southwest and Bronze
Age Arabia, this paper exemplifies Martin’s influence toward biocultural inquiry. Skeletal data from Grasshopper Pueblo and
Mimbres sites are presented as examples of how violence and trauma may have varied interpretations. Data from the site of Tell
Abraq (UAE) demonstrate the utility of asking broad questions to interpret morbidity and mortality from complicated skeletal
assemblages. Research like this is more nuanced by theory and consideration of many perspectives and this is a direct reflection of
Martin’s publications, teaching, and mentorship. It is sure to continue in the decades to come as her students are now training the
next generation in biocultural, data-driven, theoretical bioarchaeology.
Baustian, Kathryn [35] see Barrett, Sophia
Baxter, Carey (USACE ERDC-CERL), Heather Johnson (USACE ERDC-CERL) and Christopher McDaid (U.S. Air Force)
[256]
Confederate Earthworks on Fort Eustis, VA: 3D Digitalization as Alternative Mitigation and Public Outreach
The Yorktown-Warwick line was a series of defensive earth works constructed in 1861–1862 by the Confederate Army of the
Peninsula to defend the Virginia Peninsula from attack from the United States Army. These earthworks played a key part in the 1862
Peninsular Campaign. Portions of these earthworks survive on the training lands of the Fort Eustis portion of Joint Base Langley-
Eustis, VA. One of these sites, Fort Crafford, was listed on the NRHP in 1973. Proposed power line construction will impact the view
shed of Fort Crafford. To mitigate these adverse effects, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, Engineering Research and
Development Center, Construction Engineering Research Laboratory is combining lidar, Terrestrial 3D scanning and computer
modeling to generate virtual versions of the earthworks as they currently are and as built. These models, when hosted online, will
allow virtual public access to a site usually off limits to the general public.
Baxter, Erin (University of Colorado, Boulder / Denver Museum of Nature & Science), Michele Koons (Denver Museum of
Nature & Science), Steve Nash (Denver Museum of Nature & Science), Deborah Huntley (Denver Museum of Nature &
Science / Tetratech) and Octavius Seowtewa (Zuni Tribe)
[156]
Another Kiva in the Mix: The Toriette Lakes-Reserve Area Great Kiva in Context of Landscape, Chronology, History, and Function
The Toriette Lakes Great Kiva (near Reserve, NM, in the Mogollon highlands) was excavated in 2018/2019 under the auspices of
the Denver Museum of Nature & Science and in collaboration with the Gila National Forest and cultural advisors from the Pueblo of
Zuni. Half of the structure was excavated and systematic surveys (including remote sensing) were conducted around the site. This
paper explores our findings and interprets this kiva within the context of broader Mogollon and ancestral Pueblo architecture and
chronology. Because the kiva is located at about 7,500 feet within a dispersed community, we also examine high-altitude
subsistence adaptions, community organization, and historical precedents for regional research in the vicinity.
Bayarsaikhan, Jamsranjav [62] see Égüez, Natalia
Bayarsaikhan, Jamsranjav [62] see Taylor, William
Bayman, James
[255]
Integrating Top-Down and Bottom-Up Perspectives on the Ancient Southwest
Emerging efforts in anthropological archaeology to integrate “top-down” and “bottom-up” perspectives were foreshadowed by Alan
Sullivan’s provocative research agenda. His investigations of ceramic technology, subsistence economy, and land-use challenge
long-standing assumptions that hinder the development of defensible insights on the ancient Southwest. This presentation offers a
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  34
suite of vignettes to illustrate the integrity of his novel and unyielding approach to archaeology.
Bazán Pérez, Augusto (Fundacion Augusto N. Wiese)
[197]
Reevaluando la Historia Ocupacional de Pampa de Llamas-Moxeke, Valle de Casma
El sitio de Pampa de Llamas-Moxeke, tradicionalmente asignado al Periodo Formativo Temprano (1800–1000 aC), ubicado en el
valle de Casma, viene siendo investigado nuevamente luego de las últimas excavaciones desarrolladas en la década de 1980.
Nuevos datos generados a partir de las nuevas investigaciones en sectores antes no explorados, además de evidencias provistas
por otras investigaciones dentro del valle y aledaños, sugieren fuertemente que el complejo tiene más ocupaciones que las
originalmente propuestas. De esa forma, se plantea una historia ocupacional más antigua que lo previamente determinado, con
implicancias en el tránsito precerámico-cerámico en los Andes Centrales.
Beach, Sonya (Open Range Archaeology), R. Doyle Bowman (Open Range Archaeology), Thomas Thompson (Open Range
Archaeology), Thomas Gruber (Open Range Archaeology) and Janna Gruber (Open Range Archaeology)
[193]
CRM and Public Outreach: Relationship Goals
Archaeologists should be ambassadors of the discipline, giving responsible access to shared history with other disciplines and
members of the public. As Cultural Resource Management (CRM) archaeologists, our autonomy, varied knowledge, and specialized
equipment allow us opportunities to perform a public good, whether in the form of speaking to schools, conducting remote sensing
surveys in cemeteries, writing NRHP nominations, performing photogrammetric research for heritage sites, creating illustrative
hand-outs, maintaining a social media presence, or continuing research on a site for a landowner. CRM archaeologists can
contribute to public outreach in a number of meaningful ways utilizing diverse methods, tools, and scales of outreach. While the
primary focus of CRM companies must be success in the industry as a business, public outreach also allows CRM archaeologists to
reconnect with their passion for the discipline and develop skills that can translate to the commercial sector.
[193]
Discussant
[193]
Chair
Beach, Timothy (University of Texas, Austin), Samantha Krause (Texas State University) and Sheryl Luzzadder-Beach
[59]
Going Back to the Trowel: Wetlands, Resilience, and Climate Change in Maya History
One of the important contributions that archaeology can make to environmental change is to show local and regional examples of
human impacts and responses to environmental changes. Excavations can show the stratigraphic manifestations of such changes
and direct evidence of how humans adapted. This paper outlines these effects and adaptations we interpret from decades of
multiple proxy wetland excavation. We focus on three changes associated with climate change: human impacts on climate, drought,
and water table rise. The wetland complexes in northwestern Belize became wetlands as sea level rose over the late Holocene and
humans built canals to reclaim their maize and polycultural agroecosystems. These wetland-farming systems also overlap with
growing evidence for two periods of drought in the Late Preclassic and Terminal Classic. The explosion of lidar now greatly
increases our ability to test these connections by providing big data about water management features but we still must go back to
the trowel—local manifestations—to explain their chronological connections to drought and beginnings of the Early Anthropocene.
Beach, Timothy (University of Texas, Austin)
[90]
Discussant
Beach, Timothy (University of Texas, Austin)
[219]
Discussant
Beach, Timothy [8] see Casal, Fernando
Beach, Timothy [206] see Donn, Leila Beach, Timothy [230] see Doyle, Colin
Beach, Timothy [206] see Eshleman, Sara
Beach, Timothy [14] see Krause, Samantha
Beach, Timothy [230] see Smith, Byron
Beamer, Dawn (University of Connecticut), Lisa Park Boush (University of Connecticut), Mary Jane Berman (Miami
University), Perry Gnivecki (Miami University) and Amy Myrbo (University of Connecticut)
[59]
Climate and Culture in the Caribbean and Western Atlantic Regions: An Update
The islands of the Lesser and Greater Antilles were permanently settled as early as 8000 ybp but the earliest known human
presence in the Bahama Archipelago is dated ~1300 ybp, some 6,700 years later. Current literature suggests that climate variations
in the Caribbean/West Atlantic region may be a key to understanding the timing of migration, colonization, and some aspects of
culture change in the Bahamas. Periodic climatic fluctuation in the Caribbean/Western Atlantic follows similar trends when observed
at a millennial resolution; however, at multi-decadal and centennial scales, the timing and location of precipitation and temperature
regimes vary. Climate proxies such as Fe, Sr:Ca, Ca and δ18O from the Caribbean/Western Atlantic show if and how climate may
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    35
have co-varied between the islands of the region. We have synthesized a body of high-resolution paleoclimate records to provide a
framework that can be used to view Lucayan resource procurement, trade and exchange, settlement patterns, and sociopolitical
relationships around the time of the Medieval Climate Optimum. Here we present new results from Eleuthera Island and San
Salvador Island, Bahamas, including an updated age model, as well as carbon and nitrogen isotope datasets from lake and
terrestrial sediments.
Beardsley, Michael [190] see Lothrop, Jonathan
Beaudoin, Alwynne (Royal Alberta Museum)
[103]
Points, Ponds, and Palaeoecology: Almost 60 Years of Study at the Fletcher Site (DjOw-1) in Southern Alberta
Ruthann Knudson had a career-long interest in Paleoindian archaeology, especially point typology. As such, points from the
Fletcher Site (DjOw-1), on the northern Great Plains in southern Alberta, attracted her interest, as seen in a fine drawing she shared
with me in 2009. This well-known site was discovered in early 1963 by Armin Dyck, a local avocational archaeologist. Richard Forbis
undertook test excavations in 1963, identifying a bone bed with Paleoindian points. Further excavations, studies, and site visits have
occurred at intervals between 1964 and 2012, with substantial excavations in 1987 and 1988. The Cody-complex level at about 2 m
depth has yielded bison bone, as well as seeds (sensu lato), mollusc shells, bird’s egg-shell, and faunal remains from fine-fraction
analysis of the matrix. Since 1987, my research has focused on these macroremains, identifying more than 33,000 seeds and
79,000 mollusc specimens, mostly from wetland and aquatic taxa. Calibrated radiocarbon dates from seeds suggest an age of about
10,600 cal yr BP. Data synthesis indicates a perennial, perhaps slightly brackish, water body, in an early Holocene landscape
distinctly different from today’s. As it was for Ruthann, the site continues to be a focus of interest in Paleoindian archaeology.
Becerra-Valdivia, Lorena [68] see Koenig, Charles
Beck, Charlotte [253] see Jones, George
Beck, Jess [35] see Hayes, Vivienne
Beck, Margaret [35] see Priola, Victoria
Becker, Hilary (Binghamton University), Julia Sullivan (Binghamton University) and Crae Wilkins (University of Iceland,
Háskóli Íslands)
[234]
Pricing the Painted Walls: Reconstructing the Cost of Roman Pigments in Use
While Pliny the Elder recorded the prices for some pigments, these prices may not easily translate into an understanding of the real
costs of painting without considering the scientific properties of these materials. As some aspects of the ancient industry of Roman
wall painters are lost to us, it is helpful to test scientifically the wisdom received from ancient authors. A Roman account of pigment
prices records that cinnabar (mercury sulfide) could cost 35 times more per pound than red ochre. When looking at the choices
made by patrons and painters, the use of cinnabar seems to be a prestigious and expensive color. A recent study, using
experimental archaeology, reveals that the real material cost of cinnabar was more expensive than an ancient price listing alone
might reveal. In particular, what provoked this study was the knowledge that not all pigments are equal in their volume. Experimental
frescoes were painted using equal volumes of cinnabar and red ochre to explore what the cost and coverage (per pound) of each
color truly was. By learning more about the scale of materials and relative costs, such an inquiry serves to flesh out the chaîne
opératoire of Roman painting.
Becker, Janee
[213]
The Wigwam: Archaeological Investigations and Historical Interpretation of Native American Wild West Show Performer Campsites
in Clearfield County, Pennsylvania
The DuBois Wigwam Project investigates the historic context and significance of twentieth-century Native American performer
campsites in western Pennsylvania through the documentation and excavation of the area surrounding the former home of Major
Israel McCreight, known as the Wigwam. The Wigwam was built in 1906 and served as a camp for Buffalo Bill’s Wild West Show,
and a haven for visiting Native Americans. Aside from Buffalo Bill Cody, Major Israel McCreight often hosted chiefs Flying Hawk and
Iron Tail and was considered a life-long friend of Native Americans. Investigations for this project attempt to locate features related
to historic Native American performer campsites using background research, metal detector survey, magnetic gradiometer survey,
and test unit excavation. Data collected through these investigations address the adaption and resiliency of Native American’s
during the period of 1906 through 1913. This research explores the pressures of this time-period on Native American lifeways and
how they influenced Native American performer identity.
Beckham, Christopher [83] see Carlson, Meredith
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    36
Beggen, Ian (University of Michigan)
[67]
Predictive Modeling and the Identification of Terminal Pleistocene / Early Holocene Sites in the Andean Highlands
Despite increasing research attention, debate continues regarding the timing, duration, and nature of Terminal Pleistocene (TP) /
Early Holocene (EH) occupations in the Andean highlands (>2500 m). Disagreement stems in part from seemingly contradictory
evidence from a relatively small number of early highland sites. Increasing our sample size is key to answering longstanding
questions regarding human adaptations to high altitudes, but common survey methodologies are poorly suited to identifying the full
range of prehistoric activities in the Andes during the TP / EH. This pilot study compares and evaluates a variety of survey methods,
centering on predictive modeling (e.g., geographical/distance analysis, multivariate statistical methods) and its potential for
improving our ability to identify and test TP / EH sites from across the tremendously diverse Andean landscape. Specifically, I test
the efficacy of different methods of predictive modeling through a review of the models’ previous applications in the literature and by
evaluating the ability of different models to identify sites on a simulated archaeological landscape. This elucidation of the most
efficient and effective means of identifying sites will help to resolve current debates regarding early use of the Andean highlands and
ultimately improve our understanding of human adaptive capabilities.
Begley, Chris [77] see Wann, Kevin
Behm, Jeffrey [82] see Crass, Barbara
Behrens, Anja [107] see Lueth, Friedrich
Belardi, Juan (Univ Nac de la Patagonia Austral), Silvana Espinosa (CONICET - Universidad Nacional de la Patagonia
Austral), Luis Horta (CONICET - Universidad Nacional de Tucumán) and Flavia Carballo Marina (Universidad Nacional de la
Patagonia Austral)
[67]
The Quarry in the Forest. The Case of the Upper Guanaco River (Southern Patagonia, Argentina)
Hunter-gatherer forest landscape use is an ongoing discussion in Southern Patagonia. The recent finding of a silicified rock quarry
on the upper Guanaco River (close to the Andean range) adds important data to the debate focused on forest intensity use and it is
useful to model forest-steppe interaction. The quarry, located in the western flank of a hill, in middle of the Nothofagus forest, has
several levels of silicified rock (0.3–0.6 thickness) with flintknapping evidence. In this vein, workshops and rock hammers were
found with an association that was strictly spatial. From a regional biogeographic frame, the quarry could only be used during late
spring and summer. We propose an intense but spatially restricted use and this evidence helps to rank the marginality of forest
lands for hunter-gatherer populations in a supraregional scale.
Belcher, Megan (University of Tennessee), Daniel Williams (Ohio State University) and Natalie Mueller (Washington
University, St. Louis)
[78]
Testing the Soil Preferences of Erect Knotweed (Polygonum erectum) in a Common Garden Experiment
Before the cultivation of maize, a unique crop system of plants was cultivated and domesticated by farmers in precolumbian eastern
North America called the Eastern Agricultural Complex (EAC). Though known archaeologically, important questions about how
these crops were grown, consumed, and shared among past peoples remain largely unanswered. For example, ideal soil conditions
for different EAC crop cultivation is unknown. Preferences for certain soil types by these crops could have played a role in where
and how past peoples interacted and moved on the landscape. This poster explores cultivation practices favored by one crop
species, erect knotweed (Polygonum erectum), through growth experiments. Results indicate that populations of P. erectum grown
in rich, well-drained soils grew faster and larger than those in clay-rich soils. This information contributes to our understanding of
EAC crop cultivation and that illustrates that factors, like crop soil preference, could have influenced ancient farming practices and
settlement patterns.
Belcher, William [188] see Jamison, Gregg
Beliaev, Dmitri (Knorozov Mesoamerican Center, Russian State University for the Humanities) and Simon Martin
(University of Pennsylvania Museum)
[223]
“Serpent Emperor”: The Reign of K’ahk’ Ti’ Ch’ich’ and the Origins of Dzibanché Hegemony
Recent studies of the inscriptions related to the Kaanul dynasty has revealed a new ruler named K’ahk’ Ti’ Ch’ich’. He is mentioned
in various Maya sites (El Peru, Uaxactun, Naranjo) as a high king and overlord with a wide dominion. His accession in 550 CE is
recorded on the wooden Lintel 3 from Dzibanché, and is referred to as “seating as kaloomte.” As far as we know, K’ahk’ Ti’ Ch’ich’ is
the earliest Kaanul ruler to used this supreme Classic Maya title. A reexamination of the text of Altar 21 from Caracol rveals the
name of K’ahk’ Ti’ Ch’ich’and suggest the possibility that it was he who defeated Tikal in the famed star war event of 562. He
appears to be associated with a later date, in 570 or 571, which indicates that his reign was not so short as previously believed. In
the paper we summarize the data that demostrate that K’ahk’ Ti’ Ch’ich’consolidated the political success of his predecessor Tuun
K’ab Hix and made Dzibanché the capital of the largest hegemony in the Maya World.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   37
Beliaev, Dmitri [130] see Vepretskii, Sergei
Beliaev, Dmitri [223] see Viskanta Khokhriakova, Sandra
Belisle, Veronique (Millsaps College), Aleksa Alaica (University of Toronto) and Matthew Brown (University of Michigan)
[61]
Private and Public Consumption: Considering Diet and Social Inequality at the Middle Horizon Site of Ak’awillay, Cusco, Peru
Cuisine can reflect everyday practice and the availability of specific ingredients. However, cuisine can also represent choices made
about what is served and consumed in public and what is kept private. In addition, the way that diet persists or changes through
time can be an indication of internal transformations as well as external pressures. At the multi-component site of Ak’awillay in the
Cusco region of Peru, faunal remains and ceramic vessels indicate diachronic shifts in diet in the Early Intermediate period (200–
600 CE) before the expansion of Wari influence. In the Middle Horizon, public spaces have large amounts of camelid meat and
serving vessels for feasts, while in houses more exotic species are present that may have been part of smaller-scale special meals.
We argue that the way in which local elites were sharing food in public spaces during large consumption events was a mechanism
for maintaining community cohesion among families, labour groups, and trade partners. This public impression was paired with
private dietary choices that involved the importation of exotic species to feed the power struggle connected to the ability to afford
and show access to restricted products.
Bellia, Angela
[25]
Aural Experiences in the Performative Spaces of the Past
The aural experience is a fundamental process in the development of human beings, which is shaped by architecture and the
environment. Sensory experience has rarely been considered in the study of public spaces in antiquity. As Barry Blesser and Linda-
Ruth Salter pointed out, aural architecture is that aspect of real and virtual spaces that produces a sensorial and behavioral
response in inhabitants. For example, a performative space in antiquity related to a sanctuary can produce feelings of
connectedness. This paper aims to investigate new insights of antiquity’s sounds and sights in a performative space. Furthermore,
this paper will explore the visual and acoustic experiences in the performative spaces “as sensory artifacts”, developing a new
theoretical basis and linking digital heritage and acoustical techniques. Through the acoustic analysis of particular case study in
Italy, this paper will intend to explore a new approach to the development of the relationship between space, sound, and
environment and a novel method to decipher geophony, biophony, and anthropophony, as a sort of “sonic fabric” of the performative
spaces and their immediate surroundings, taking into account the relationships between the different and interactive sonic
components of a landscape, thanks to digital technology.
Bello, Charles (Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA-DHS))
[97]
Introduction to Session and Some Case Studies
Introduction to the session of “Collaboration and Community Involvement in Archaeology,” including case studies.
[97]
Chair
Bello, Charles (Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA-DHS))
[154]
Discussant
Belmar, Carolina (Depto. Antropologia, Universidad de Chile)
[74]
Plants and Steppe Hunter-Gatherers in Central Patagonia: A Case Study from the Aisén Region (45°S, Chile)
Researching plant use among hunter-gathering groups has made visible the use of a predictable and ubiquitous resource that are
locally and seasonally available, and have multiple potential uses. Recent studies at the Baño Nuevo 1 site (Aisén, Chile) have
revealed that, even though these groups based their diet on the consumption of terrestrial fauna, the archaeobotanical record has
indicated the consumption of plant resources as a supplementary food. Residue studies show the use of stone tools in the
recollection, processing, and use of plant resources. For this presentation we compare the archaeobotanical record (fruits and
seeds and residues/microfossils in stone tools) of three steppe hunter-gatherer sites that contain a long occupational sequence:
Baño Nuevo 1 (10.750–3.100 cal years BP), cueva La Vieja (12.000–130 cal year BP), in the Ñirehuao basin, and El Chueco 1
(11.500–180 cal years BP), in the Cisnes basin. We can now evaluate, in a large spatial and temporal scale, the appropriation,
processing and use of plants among steppe hunter-gatherers, considering the multiple potential uses that these resource have
within these societies. FONDECYT PROJECT 11180388.
Belmar, Carolina [61] see Reyes, Omar
Belmar, Carolina [177] see San Román, Manuel
Beltrán, Boris [138] see Hurst, Heather
Bement, Leland (Oklahoma Archeological Survey, OU), Joshua Davis (OU) and Kristy Primeau (University of Albany)
[25]
Defining a Prehistoric Hunting Soundscape Using Archaeoacoustic Techniques, Black Mesa, Oklahoma, USA
Game calls applied to animal hunting often mimic the calls and sounds made by the intended prey. Other calls produce sounds that
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       38
draw on the intrinsic curiosity of the hunted animal. In this paper we investigate the use of rock gongs (cupule stones) to create a
tone to attract artiodactyls within an acoustic gathering area associated with a prehistoric hunting complex consisting of hunting
blinds and drive lanes. Research goals include defining the range within which a tone can be heard across a given landscape by the
intended prey, and layering that soundscape over the distribution of mapped hunting features possibly used to hunt pronghorn
antelope in the Black Mesa region, Oklahoma panhandle. Ethnographic analogy for the use of rock gongs to attract prey, along with
attribution of cupule stone shrines to hunting activities strengthen the interpretation of this research.
Bement, Leland (Oklahoma Archeological Survey, OU)
[68]
Discussant
Benavente Escóbar, Carlos [197] see Combey, Andy
Bendtsen, Aká [50] see Turley, Cameron
Benedetti, Michael [36] see Ellis, Grace
Benedict, Laura and Virginia Lucas (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[76]
Dinner in the Desert: A Faunal Exploitation Investigation at California Wash, a Preliminary Analysis
The subsistence practices of people utilizing the California Wash in southern Nevada, northeast of Las Vegas, are not yet well
understood. Analysis of the faunal material collected during excavations at two rockshelter sites located in the Dry Lake Range
within the California Wash enhances our understanding of the subsistence practices of the people who used the area. This poster
presents an updated analysis of those faunal materials collected at rockshelters 26CK1112 and 26CK1113 along with an associated
roasting pit. Radiocarbon dates suggest occupations during the Late Archaic and Pueblo I periods. Early analysis indicates a dietary
dependence on reptiles such as desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii) and chuckwalla (Sauromalus ater). A reliance on reptiles in this
area contrasts sharply with the dependence on artiodactyls such as bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis) and mule deer (Odocoileus
hemionus) that were utilized by surrounding communities.
Benfer, Bob (University of Missouri-Columbia)
[194]
Early and Middle Archaic Fishing Villages on the West Coast of America
The small Early Archaic coastal site of Quipa was followed by the larger Middle Archaic villages of Paloma in the same Chilca Valley
of Peru. Studies of plants, animals, and human remains contribute to our understanding of these and other sites discussed in this
symposium. These data will provide comparisons for a discussion of the origin of dense populations, including changes in climate,
diet, health, subsistence activities, settlement patterns, and cosmology in early fishing villages.
Benítez de Lugo , Luis [35] see Priola, Victoria
Benjamin, Jeff (Columbia University)
[266]
In Praise of the Listening Act
If we accept Tim Hodkinson’s definition of music as “sound that listens to itself” (2010), we are invited to privilege receptivity rather
than projection as music’s fundamental quality. It seems that listening has become the unmarked sign, the forgotten partner of
speech and sound, and it is toward the reemergence of the ear within discourse that archaeoacoustics has so much to offer all
academic disciplines. As an extension of Pierre Schaefer’s formulation of musique concrète, I have suggested that the proper object
of archaeoacoustics is not the forms and structures that produce and sustain sound and music, but rather the sounds themselves,
conceived as sonic artifacts, or sonifacts. In recent years, sound artist and teacher Michael Asbill at the State University of New
York in New Paltz has invited his sound-art students to enter post-industrial mining landscapes to reanimate sounds of the past as
musical and archaeological form; in short, to make sonifacts. In listening to these sonifacts we are, quite literally, “hearing the past.”
Through the work of Asbill and his students, I would like to offer some thoughts on music and sound as archaeological form that is
sculpted by the act of listening.
Benjamin, Jonathan [18] see Hale, Nathan
Benjamin, Jonathan [238] see McCarthy, John
Benjamin, Jonathan [252] see Woo, Katherine
Bennett, Ryan
[205]
The Patterns of the Drums: An Evaluation of Variation in Heger Type I Drum Motifs during the Period of the Dong Son Culture
One of the larger debates in studies of Bronze Age Vietnam is the symbolic meaning of Dong Son drums. However, in the academic
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     39
haste to find this overarching meaning there are several questions that have been left unanswered regarding iconographic variation.
In this paper, it is my goal to address the iconographic variability of these drums and explore the roles of cultural influences and time
on this variability. To conduct this research I shall be using materiality. This research uses a sample of 111 drums from locations
across Vietnam to explore the variations in dimensions, motifs, locations, and age. In addition to the archaeological evidence, I
explore the histories of cultural groups associated with these drums and their neighbors.
Benney Basque, Yvonne and Heather Rockwell (Wyoming State Historic Preservation Office)
[190]
Once a SCRAPer, Always a SCRAPer: Public Outreach and the Extraordinary Success of the New Hampshire State Conservation
and Rescue Archaeology Program
The New Hampshire State Conservation and Rescue Archaeology Program (SCRAP) has inspired novice and professional, young
and old, casual and focused scholars, to study the research, methods, and ethics of archaeological practice since 1984. The
program has had tremendous success with many of its participants moving on to professional and scholarly roles throughout North
America and, indeed, the world. This paper explores the foundations of the SCRAP and its later administration by former State
Archaeologist Dr. Dick Boisvert. Specifically, the paper will explore the program public outreach successes, illustrated through the
author’s own examples.
Benson, Wyatt [148] see Patton, Natalie
Bentley, Heath (CPS Energy) and James Garber (Texas State University)
[239]
Material Presence of the British West Indian Regiments on St. George’s Caye, Belize.
Once a colonial British frontier settlement, St. George’s Caye was occupied by settlers and an enslaved population who experienced
continuous population and economic growth punctuated by events of Spanish aggression and forced removal prior to the
establishment of a formal British Colony. Following the Battle of St. George’s Caye in 1798, soldiers of the British West Indian
Regiments were stationed on the small island into the middle nineteenth century. Their presence across the Caye, documented in
historical record is further demonstrated by deposits containing uniform buttons, metal firearm components, gun flints, lead shot and
a shako plate, among others. The highest density of artifacts on the island has been found within its historic cemetery. Ongoing
research on the artifacts mentioned above and an abundance of materials related to food and drink, recreation and other activities
further orients the assemblage into association with these soldiers and sheds light onto the use of cemetery space during this period
of occupation.
Bentley, Nicholas (Texas A&M University)
[8]
Storms, Sands, and Sinks: Hurricane Deposits in an Inundated Archaeological Site in Northwest Florida
How people respond to natural disasters is an ongoing theme in anthropological research. However, little research has been
conducted focusing on how past peoples in North America responded to these natural disasters. One of the most common natural
disasters thought to have impacted prehistoric societies, particularly in the Southeast of North America, are tropical cyclones. To
understand how tropical cyclones impacted people in the past, we must first be able to see evidence of tropical cyclone activity in
the archaeological record. The Page-Ladson archaeological site (8JE591) in Northwest Florida is located within a submerged
sinkhole which has acted as a sediment trap, continuously preserving sediments since at least 17,000 cal BP. The youngest
stratigraphic unit at Page-Ladson is a Holocene aged peat deposit with thin sand lenses throughout. This poster presents research
which analyzes these sand deposits through radiocarbon dating, grain size analyses, and stable isotope analysis of the δ15N and
δ13C isotopes to determine if these sediments were deposited through tropical cyclone activity. This paleotempestological study
serves as much needed groundwork to help improve our understanding of how prehistoric societies were impacted by natural
disasters, and how they may have adapted to these extreme weather events.
Benzonelli, Agnese [42] see Martinón-Torres, Marcos
Beramendi-Orosco, Laura (Instituto de Geología, UNAM), Ana Soler-Arechalde (Instituto de Geofísica, UNAM), Galia
González-Hernández (Instituto de Geofísica, UNAM) and Linda Manzanilla (Instituto de Investigaciones Antropologicas,
UNAM)
[10]
A High-Resolution Chronology for the Palatial Complex of Xalla Combining a Bayesian Radiocarbon Model with Archaeomagnetic
Ages
A high-resolution chronology for the palatial complex of Xalla, excavated by L. R. Manzanilla from 2000–2019, was constructed
combining archaeomagnetic dates, a Bayesian radiocarbon model, and detailed information about sample type and archaeological
context. The Bayesian model was calibrated using the Oxcal 4.3 program (Bronk Ramsey 2009) with the IntCal13 calibration curve
(Reimer et al. 2013), includes 42 radiocarbon ages grouped in 6 phases. The first group includes samples from the roofs of large
precincts with ages earlier than expected for Classic Teotihuacan period, suggesting a problem of inbuilt age (McFadgen 1982). The
11 archaeomagnetic ages were classified in unburned samples, related to the time of manufacture, and burned samples, related to
fires either by rituals or during the Big Fire associated to the abandonment of the site. The calibrated ages have more precise
intervals, allowing to distinguish different phases. By contrasting these with the archaeomagnetic ages, it was possible to identify the
different construction phases and to confirm that big beams had inbuilt ages raging between 50 and 250 years. It is concluded that
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   40
by combining these two dating methods and understanding the moment that each sample type is dating, it is possible to obtain solid
and precise chronologies.
Beramendi-Orosco, Laura [10] see Soler-Arechalde, Ana
Berger, Uri (Israel Antiquities Authority) and Gonen Sharon (Tel Hai College)
[60]
Dolmen Rock Art in the Levant
Thousands of dolmens are scattered throughout the southern Levant in Lebanon, Syria, Israel, and Jordan. These megalithic
burials, dated to the early stages of the Bronze Age, are an understudied and little understood phenomenon of Levantine
Archaeology. Unlike in Europe and other parts of the world, rock art has rarely been reported from Levantine dolmens, despite more
than 150 years of research and hundreds of excavated dolmens of the thousands of megalithic structures recorded. A fortunate
discovery, in 2012, of engraved features on the ceiling of the central burial chamber of a giant dolmen in the Shamir dolmen field
has changed current knowledge. The dolmen, a multi-chamber megalith constructed using over 400 tons of huge basalt slabs and
rocks, is evidence of existence of a hierarchical society during the Levantine Intermediate Bronze Age “Dark Ages.” Since this
finding, additional rock art has been discovered, including a panel of horned animals in a dolmen in the Meshushim field. Here, we
will present the latest discoveries of Dolmen rock art in the Levant in the context of their significance to the broader phenomenon of
the mysterious megalithic burials of the region.
Bergh, Sue [258] see Edelstein, Beth
Bergin, Sean (School of Human Evolution and Social Change, ASU) and Michael Barton (School of Human Evolution and
Social Change, ASU)
[226]
Teaching Human Impacts on the Environment Using an Archaeological Perspective
As quintessential niche constructors, humans modify their surroundings in both intentional and accidental ways. The cumulative
impacts of these socio-ecological interactions, with both positive and deleterious effects, has so transformed the Earth that scholars
have labeled the most recent millennia of the human past the Anthropocene. Archaeologists are uniquely positioned to integrate
paleoecological data with our knowledge of our cultural and historical past for the purpose of explaining long-term human
environmental interactions. In this paper we describe a course we teach that is designed to examine the long history of human
environmental interaction through case studies from recent archaeological literature and assignments that promote critical thinking.
By focusing on instructive cases studies from the past we are able to provide an overview of past societies while detailing the
evidence and reasoning archaeologists use to interpret past human and environmental interactions. Assignments are designed to
teach students conceptual models used to understand human decisions and demonstrate the ways in which the choices of
individuals have cumulative effects. Learning the dynamic and lengthy history of impacts people have had on their environment can
enable students to form a better calculus to confront today’s environmental issues and create a sustainable future.
Bergin, Sean [77] see Snitker, Grant
Bergman, Stephanie [9] see Steffen, Anastasia
Bergmann, Christine (University of South Florida)
[203]
Exploring the Environmental Context of Early Settlement in the Chincha Valley, Peru
The Chincha Valley, located 200 km south of Lima, is one of the largest valleys on the south coast of Peru. Paracas, believed to be
the oldest complex society on the southern coast of Peru, occupied the Chincha Valley during the Early Horizon Period (900–200
BCE). Although Paracas is well represented in the archaeological record, relatively little is known about the populations that settled
in the region, as well as the environment in which they lived, prior to Paracas. Recent excavations at Pozuelo, the earliest known
site in the Chincha Valley, suggest the region was inhabited prior to Paracas occupation. Additionally, pollen and phytolith analyses
performed on soil from Pozuelo indicate the environmental context during initial settlement of the region was vastly different from
what is seen today. Radiocarbon dating and elemental analysis on soil excavated from Pozuelo are performed to tests the
hypotheses that inhabitants prior to the Early Horizon Period had the ability to occupy the region in the absence of irrigation
agriculture as well as use landscape modification strategies to permit the cultivation of agricultural resources.
[203]
Chair
Berikashvili, David (International Archaeological Center of the University of Georgia)
[192]
Cultural Transitions through the Centuries in the South Caucasus (New Archaeological Data from Samshvilde)
Samshvilde in the South Caucasus (Southern Georgia), is a complex and multi-period archaeological site. The historical city
occupies an impregnable location on a basalt cape flanked by the deep gorges. This distinctive landscape, combined with
environmental conditions and abundant natural resources, have attracted humans for millennia. Samshvilde and its surroundings
have been inhabited since the Neolithic era, but the urban complex dates mainly to the medieval period, under Armenian and then
Georgian control, when it became the region main fortress and political center. Recent archaeological and bio-archaeological
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                              41
studies of the site revealed the oldest stratigraphic contexts, which are represented by Neolithic and Bronze period contexts. The
stone and bone industry of Samshvilde, characteristic for the Caucasian Neolithic gives a new understanding for transitional period
from hunter-gatherers to early agricultures. Also, the discovery of the Late-Bronze cemetery in Samshivlde is an important
phenomena for understanding the cultural processes at the end of II millennia. Future expansion of the project, priorities, as well as
the methods of conservation will be presented. The results of the studies of medieval Samshvilde, located at the Armenian-Georgian
border will be also presented.
Berkebile, Jean [255] see Forste, Kathleen
Berkebile, Jean [235] see Turner, Michelle
Berman, Mary Jane (Miami University) and Ivan Wehner (Miami University)
[252]
Theorizing Lucayan Ceramics: Perspectives from the Central Bahamas
Palmetto ware is the ubiquitous locally made pottery associated with the Lucayans, the indigenous inhabitants of the Bahama
archipelago. The earliest published descriptions of Palmetto ware regard it as largely uniform, possessing little variability. Typically,
ceramics were lumped into a few categories (plain ware, basketry-impressed ware, sherds with incision or punctuation). At the time
that these ceramic descriptions were published, there were no radiocarbon dates for the sites from which they originated. Once sites
started to be dated chronometrically, however, it was found that this pottery came from Late Lucayan period assemblages. Older
occupations, which we attribute to the Early Lucayan period, had not yet been recognized. Over the past two decades, Early
Lucayan period sites from islands in the central and northern Bahamas have been excavated and their ceramic assemblages have
been studied. Differences in several ceramic attributes between the two periods are observed. The intra- and inter-island similarities
observed for each period suggest clearly defined constellations of practice. We examine the technological, morphological, and
stylistic differences in assemblages from both periods and address performance characteristics, modification of culinary practices,
and changes in gender task and time allocations to explain the observed temporal variability.
Berman, Mary Jane [59] see Beamer, Dawn
Berna, Francesco [263] see Kulick, Rachel
Bernard, Henri (Universidad Veracruzana) and Sara Ladrón de Guevara (Universidad Veracruzana)
[191]
Stone Figurines of the Middle Formative in Mesoamerica
The first reported green stone figurines from controlled excavations in Mesoamerica occur in Middle Formative (900–400 BC) contexts.
Among the best known are those from Offering 4 at La Venta. Mid-twentieth-century excavations at La Venta, conducted by Mathew
Stirling, Philip Drucker, and Robert Heizer also produced the largest number of in situ figurines found. Few other examples have been
found outside this site, in places like Arroyo Pesquero or Cerro de las Mesas. This presentation will address the range of objects
reported with archaeological contexts, to observe the temporality, region where they appear and with their associated elements. A
stylistic analysis on figurine will be presented and compare with the definition based on the observations made by various authors to see
if all the objects can be included in the same style. In addition, we will distinguish similarities and differences in their final deposition, to
observe possible relationships with documented Mesoamerican rituals for other regions and temporalities.
Bernardini, Wesley [98] see Solometo, Julie
Berner, Jack (University of California, Los Angeles) and R. J. Sinensky (University of California, Los Angeles)
[148]
Reconstructing Household Architecture in the Petrified Forest Region of Northern Arizona, AD 200–600
The Petrified Forest region of Northern Arizona hosted a dense concentration of mobile farmers during the Early Brown Ware
Horizon (AD 200–550). During this interval, large habitation sites with upwards of 20 pit structures were frequently located in
prominent places on the landscape, such as tall isolated mesas. One such site, Flattop, was excavated by Fred Wendorf in 1949,
and was recently the subject of low-impact test excavations conducted by UCLA. To better visualize how Flattop might have
appeared while occupied and following abandonment, this poster offers geospatial reconstructions of different types of structures at
Flattop using two-dimensional and 3D maps at multiple scales. These include a site-wide map displaying structure orientation and
layout, 3D maps of individual structures, and a profile visualization of two structure’s botanical assemblages. Wendorf’s 1953 report
and recent excavations suggest architectural variability among structures within Flattop, notably: small, circular, slab-lined structures
and pit structures with extended slab-lined entries. To better visualize distinctive assemblages in burned and unburned structures,
reconstructions incorporate botanical data from recent analysis of flotation samples from two pithouses.
Bernstetter, Jessica (University of Missouri), Kate Trusler (University of Missouri) and Wayne Lorenz (Wright
Paleohydrological Institute)
[159]
Space and Visual Display in the House of Efebo: A Case Study for Water as Wealth in Roman Pompeii
The introduction of the Aqua Augusta, also called the Serino Aqueduct, greatly changed how Pompeii and other towns in the Bay of
Naples managed water. Before the aqueduct, water was accessed using wells or rainwater stored in cisterns. The arrival of the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      42
Aqua Augusta in the first century CE supplied Pompeii with vast quantities of water which fed public fountains, public baths, and
private homes. While public fountains provided people with drinking water, wealthier homes could install lead piping and pay for
private access to the aqueduct water. Using the House of Efebo as a case study, this paper explores how high-status households
used water and space to visually display their wealth with a variety of elaborate water features such as fountains, pools, impluvia,
and even private baths. During the 2018 and 2019 field seasons, the Pompeii Sanitation and Water Project surveyed the House of
Efebo, among others, to record and measure water features and metal detect for buried lead piping. This paper discusses the
survey results and illustrates how the House of Efebo used space and elaborate water features to display wealth and status, and
how those features influenced the function of household spaces.
Bernstetter, Jessica [159] see Trusler, Kate
Berquist, Stephen (University of Toronto)
[106]
Tecapa: Monumental Evidence of Sociopolitical Transformation on the North Coast of Peru, 800–1000 CE
Tecapa, located along the southern desert margin of the Jequtepeque Valley, is one of only a small number of monumental sites to
have been both constructed and abandoned within the “Transitional Period” (800–1000 CE) of the north coast. As such it provides a
critical window into sociopolitical developments in the Jequetepeque and larger Andean region during the Middle Horizon. Erected
alongside the Late Moche (600–800 CE) Huaca Colorada, the builders of Tecapa eschewed traditional Moche aesthetics and
iconography. Material culture and architecture are heavily influenced by contemporary assemblages from the Cajamarca highlands.
While similar sites on the coast have been construed as intrusive highland “colonies”, evidence at Tecapa points toward a different
interpretation: local coastal communities actively collaborating in the construction of Tecapa and participating in the ceremonial
activities hosted by it. Yet the most striking aspects of Tecapa are its architecture and spatial organization. Configured in orthogonal
patio groups arrayed around a massive plaza, Tecapa must clearly be put into conversation with the Wari phenomenon. However,
the utter absence of any other “Wari” features as well as the strong indications of continuity with local practices past and future
necessitate reassessing the genealogy of this spatial configuration.
Berry, Miranda [37] see Nash, Brendan
Berry, Nora (Texas State University), Christina Conlee (Texas State University) and Deborah Spivak (Washington
University, St. Louis)
[243]
A Ceramic Analysis of the Middle Horizon site of Huaca del Loro
Since being labeled the type-site for the Loro ceramic style, Huaca del Loro has been thought to play a central role in cross-cultural
relationships of Middle Horizon south coastal Peru. As a local Middle Horizon style, Loro ceramics sit between the Nasca and Wari
styles. This begs the question about the resounding connection that Huaca del Loro had with the Wari state. The authors analyzed
ceramics from the 2019 field season at Huaca del Loro to understand how their contexts related to their overall styles and forms. Of
the five sectors at the site, three were excavated and investigated this season including areas with Wari imperial architecture, a
cemetery, and an area of local-style architecture. The form, function, and style of ceramics were recorded from each of the sectors
in order to understand the groups that lived there and how they may have interacted. The assemblage consisted of Loro, Wari, and
Late Nasca styles. The percentages, placements, and distributions of different ceramic styles throughout the site suggest a different
type of relationship between the Wari and the Las Trancas Valley than previously thought.
Berryman, Judy [122] see Walker, William
Berryman, Stanley (New Mexico State University)
[269]
Return to Santee Greens: How the Ethnohistoric Village of Micheagua (SDI-5669) Continues to Inform about the Late Holocene in
Southern California
The Santee Greens village site, CA-SDI-5669 (Micheagua) was first recorded in 1977) as a large Late Holocene habitation area along
the San Diego River in Santee, California. (S. Berryman, 1977 and J Berryman 1981). A new look at this site is currently underway
using the extensive database recovered by the 1970’s excavation which included excavation of controlled trenching, auger units, and
standard units resulting in 480.49 m3 screened and analyzed. The excavated village area covered 29,074 m2 with two occupation
periods, AD 760–1030 and AD 1735–1890. This is the story of the excavation 223,236 artifacts, including 46,753 ceramic sherds, 718
projectile points, 83,000 stone flakes, tools, beads, ritual items, and special studies. This new look involves using the existing data,
additional C14 dates, obsidian and chert sourcing, and data from a recent excavation within SDI-5669 but outside the boundaries of the
original excavation. Santee Greens shows what was old can be used to develop new ways of looking at the past.
Berube, Eloi [211] see Johnson, Lisa
Berumen, Sara, Meredith Chesson (University of Notre Dame) and Susan Sheridan (University of Notre Dame)
[35]
Uncharted Territory in Emerging Urbanism: Gender, Life Course, and Lived Experience of Urbanizing People Buried in Charnel
House A56, Bab adh-Dhra’, Jordan
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       43
Charnel house A56 at Bab adh-Dhra’, Jordan offers a fascinating case study to explore the nature of change and continuity when
community members transformed their unwalled village into a fortified town site during the transition from Early Bronze Age (EB) IB
to early EB II (ca. 3050–2950 BCE). Throughout the southern Levant, EBA people decide to enclose their communities with large
fortification systems, spurring the development of small-scale urbanism. While many economic practices in these agro-pastoral
communities may have been similar, the way they organized their daily lives throughout their life course may or may not have
changed in these new urbanizing communities. This poster presents the analysis of skeletal remains and material culture from
charnel house A56, located in one of the region’s few large, well excavated cemeteries. Excavated in 1979, the human remains and
accompanying material culture have not been analyzed until now. Traditional bioarchaeological and archaeological methods will be
combined with feminist approaches to the life course in order to explore the lives of these individuals. This analysis provides greater
understanding into the ways that urbanizing cultural forces transformed, or left unchanged, the lives of Bab adh-Dhra’’s inhabitants.
Betancur, Sebastián [246] see Weber, Marion
Bethard, Jonathan [169] see Bews, Elizabeth
Bethke, Brandi (University of Oklahoma), Emily Lena Jones (University of New Mexico), Gregory Hodgins (University of
Arizona) and William Taylor (University of Colorado Museum of Natural History)
[119]
Archaeofaunal and Biomolecular Evidence for Early Adoption and Use of Domestic Horses in the American West
Although horses are linked with drastic social and economic transformations to Indigenous societies in the Americas following their
introduction, the early adoption of horses by Native peoples is poorly chronicled in the archaeological or historic records. In tandem
with historic and ethnohistoric accounts, the multimethodological study of archaeological horse remains from museum collections
using both osteological and biomolecular techniques (radiocarbon dating, ancient DNA, stable isotopes, and ZooMS) provides a
powerful framework for understanding the spread of horses and their impact. Contrary to some historical models, our analysis of
archaeological horse remains from museum collections across the American West suggests a rapid and widespread incorporation of
domestic horses into some Indigenous lifeways and cultures by the mid-seventeenth century—along with insights into the
management techniques, equipment, movements, and feeding practices used by early horse cultures.
Bettencourt, Luis (University of Chicago, Mansueto Institute for Urban Innovation)
[26]
Discussant
Bettencourt, Luis [26] see Smith, Michael
Betti, Lia [159] see Briggs, Emily
Bettinger, Robert (University of California, Davis)
[253]
Two Only Slightly More Complicated Models of Technological Investment
Expanding upon an earlier paper by Ugan, Bright, and Rogers (2003), in 2006 Bettinger, Winterhalder, and McElreath (2006)
presented a simple model to formalize rational investment of time in tool making: how to make the best performing tool possible in
the least amount of time, where tool performance is measured by the rate at which resources are procured or processed when using
it. The resulting model was correct in structure but not in the definition of variables or the conclusion that it implied that more costly
and less cost effective, but better performing, tools are a response to increasing volume of handling, which is true but not implied by
the model. I correct the definition of variables in the original model, draw different implications from it, and present two equally
simple but differently structured models that maximize returns, rather than return rates, per unit of time.
Betts, Colin (Luther College)
[63]
Multi-Instrument Geophysical Survey of an Effigy Mound Site in Allamakee County, Iowa
This poster presents the results of a multi-instrument geophysical survey of two Keyes phase (AD 700–1000) bird effigy mounds
from the Capoli Bluff site (13AM204) in northeastern Iowa. Three remote sensing techniques—magnetic gradiometry, soil resistivity,
and ground penetrating radar—were used to investigate the subsurface characteristics of the Capoli site effigy mounds. The
purpose of this research was to document the geophysical signatures of mound construction. As the material vestiges of the ritual
practices involved in mound ceremonialism these data are essential for gaining a fuller understanding of the effigy mound
phenomenon. The surveys yielded complementary insights into the methods of mound construction, internal structure, historic
disturbances, and documented significant differences between the two mounds. This research provides important clues to the
nature of Capoli site mound ceremonialism and more broadly establishes a reference point for guiding and interpreting future
geophysical surveys of effigy mounds.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     44
Bevan, Andrew
[42]
Discussant
[42]
Chair
Bevan, Andrew
[48]
Computational Models of Human Settlement Behavior: An Overview of Current Methods and Motivations
Computational models of human settlement have been noticeable features of intra- and interdisciplinary research for several
decades, whether such models focus on the present day, on the historically documented near-present or on deeper archaeological
time-scales. Now is a useful moment to revisit the pedigree of these different strands of research, as well as what problems and
potential they hold today and what problems they seek to address in future. This paper leaves to one side those models primarily
concerned with the ‘pure prediction’ of past settlement intensity (e.g., those intended to predict and protect dwindling heritage
resources: a very important but different objective), and instead will take stock of where we are in terms of developing computational
models that help us understand issues such as changing locational priorities in the past, the emergence or disintegration of
settlement sizes and hierarchy, altered subsistence or territorial strategies, or indeed patterns of short or long distance cultural and
economic interaction. Emerging from an exciting and diverse range of settlement modeling applications today are also several
persistent challenges in urgent need of wider debate.
Bevan, Andrew [42] see Li, Xiuzhen
Bews, Elizabeth, Zsolt Nyaradi (Haáz Rezso Múzeum), Jonathan Bethard (University of South Florida), Katie Zejdlik
(Western Carolina University) and Andre Gonciar (ArchaeoTek-Canada)
[169]
An Osteobiography of a Juvenile Individual from Papdomb, Tranyslvania
Frank Saul introduced the term osteobiography in 1972, which he described as a way to discern specific life patterns from individual
remains. Recently, archaeologists have expanded upon Saul’s ideas by combining osteological analyses, archaeological evidence,
and historical documentation to construct life portraits of individuals, and the societies in which they lived. Using an
osteobiographical approach, this paper examines a juvenile individual from a medieval mortuary context in the Hungarian region of
Transylvania. This individual displayed bilateral clavicular rhomboid fossae and was buried with a headdress. The presence of a
rhomboid fossa on the left clavicle indicates with 92.2% probability that the individual is male; however, few studies have explored
this osteological indicator in non-adult individuals. This is notable because a small number of juveniles at the site were buried with
headpieces, while the vast majority were not. Given the presence of rhomboid fossae in this individual and its reliability for sex
estimation in adults, this individual’s headdress could shed light on sex-specific mortuary treatment at Papdomb. This case study
therefore presents a framework for identifying divergent mortuary practices based on sex, specifically the use of headdresses as
cultural symbolism amongst the medieval population at Papdomb.
Bey, Bridget (Washington University, St. Louis) and Jane Buikstra (Arizona State University)
[169]
Puberty in Prehistory: Pubertal Timing in the Late Woodlands
The major physiological changes of puberty parallel different phases of the pubertal growth spurt, and therefore the phases of
puberty, are identifiable at sites of skeletal development. Shapland and Lewis (2014, 2013) developed a composite method of
pubertal phase assessment based on evaluation of six skeletal sites using Medieval English adolescents (tenth–seventeenth
centuries). The current paper assesses the applicability of Shapland and Lewis’ method with Middle and Late Woodland (100 BC–
1000 AD) Native American remains from the lower Illinois River Valley. This study of Late Woodland adolescents is the first
assessment of pubertal development in Prehistoric Native Americans and demonstrates that Shapland and Lewis’ method can be
applied to prehistoric remains. As predicted, the Woodland adolescents experienced late pubertal stunting similar to what Shapland
and Lewis (2016) observed in their English sample, which suggests that pubertal timing in Medieval England and Prehistoric
America differed from pre-industrial societies. This data may also support Shapland and Lewis’ theory that malnutrition and disease
strongly affected puberty, but further analysis is required. Verification of the Shapland and Lewis’ method is important for
bioarchaeology since the estimation of pubertal phase improves understanding of underlying health patterns related to the social
change from child to adult.
Bey, George (Millsaps College)
[158]
Discussant
Beyin, Amanuel [36] see Durham, Jordan
Bianchi, Pablo (ANPCyT - IMHICIHU)
[233]
About Clay and Food: Assessing Local Manufacture and Use of Pottery during the Late Holocene in the Middle Chico River Basin
(Patagonia, Argentina)
The presence of pottery in Central-South Argentinian Patagonia has been accounted by several authors over the years. It has been
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       45
proposed that pottery was a late development by hunter gatherer groups with high mobility ranges. The scarcity and heterogeneous
distribution of this technology over the whole region bring serious difficulties for the assessment of its origins, production locations
and uses. Some authors (Goñi 2010; Cassiodoro 2011) proposed that the production of pottery to the West was related to a
reduction in group mobility. However, the case is not so clear to the East. A general characterization of an assemblage of potsherds
recovered in an intermediate space between the coast and the forest (Estancia 17 de Marzo) is presented. The goal is to discuss
the origin of the clay used for the manufacture of the vessels, as well as their utilization for resource processing activities. In order to
achieve our objective we conducted petrographic, stable isotope and FT-IR microscopic analysis. The results obtained enabled us
to explore the technological strategies developed by highly mobile societies during the Late Holocene.
Bibby, David (Regierungspräsidium Stuttgart)
[24]
Stratigraphy and the Harris Matrix in the German-Speaking Area 1986–2019
Stratigraphic discussion is present in all the German-speaking countries of Europe, though it sometimes takes surprising turns for
the uninitiated. Maybe this is because in the German-speaking area of Europe archaeology is for the most part not studied as such,
but, for example, as subjects such as “Prehistory,” “Past and Early History,” “Provincial Roman Archaeology,” or “Medieval
Archaeology.” And it seems as if stratigraphic awareness very much depends on the “type” of archaeology learned and practiced. It
could be postulated: “the later the epoch, the higher the stratigraphic awareness,” and there is a higher likelihood that a Harris
Matrix might appear in a report of a medieval excavation than of a loamy wide-area prehistoric excavation, where the question as to
whether a posthole with fill should receive one number or two might still get asked and discussed, often quite dogmatically. On the
other hand, some of the best stratigraphic thinkers are from German-speaking countries and a number of internationally recognised
digital Harris Matrix tools have their origins there too. This contribution attempts to analyses how these contradictions fit together, on
the basis of the contributors almost four decades in Germany as excavator, stratigrapher, and computer archaeologist.
Bicho, Nuno (Universidade do Algarve), Jonathan Haws (University of Louisville), João Cascalheira (ICArEHB -
Universidade do Algarve), Célia Gonçalves (ICArEHB - Universidade do Algarve) and Mussa Raja (ICArEHB - Universidade
do Algarve)
[250]
Stone Age Archaeology in the Elephant River Valley, SW Mozambique
Located between modern-day South Africa and Tanzania, both of which with well-known and extensive Stone Age records,
Mozambique and its Stone Age sequence remain largely unknown in the broader context of African Pleistocene prehistory. This is
despite the country’s critical position linking southern and eastern Africa, and of its clear potential to inform various models about
recent human evolution. Here, we present the results of field survey, testing and archaeological excavation in the Elephant river
valley, in the Massingir region of SW Mozambique. The Stone Age research took place between 2015 and 2019 and dozens of
surface sites were found with ESA, MSA and LSA assemblages. Three sites were excavated, providing important lithic and organic
collections as well as absolute dates: Mapa, Txina-Txina, and Machampane 1.
Bicho, Nuno [34] see Gonçalves, Célia
Bicho, Nuno [11] see Haws, Jonathan
Bielenberg, Aliosha (Brown University), Charles Steinman (Brown University), Soumen Mallick (Brown University) and
Michele Hayeur Smith (Brown University)
[50]
The North Atlantic Wool Trade, ca. 1000–1400: A Strontium Isotope Approach
North Atlantic islands were colonized by settlers from Norway and the British Isles in the ninth century, bringing agricultural practices
from Northern Europe. Wool and fish dominated exports from Iceland from the Viking Age, though the impact of the wool trade
remains understudied. We examine textile collections from museums to explore the intensity and extent of this trade by strontium
isotope analysis. The data we find provide us with information about how wool moved across the North Atlantic during this period. In
turn, this helps us understand when and how wool began to connect very distant communities. We draw on our specific case study
to offer suggestions on how to better use strontium isotope data for archaeological purposes and how to improve our methods of
data collection and analysis. Our paper focuses especially on the challenges of reconciling archaeological and geochemical
methods, approaches, and data.
Biggie, Michael [178] see Ellis, Olivia
Biggs, Jack (Michigan State University), Amy Michael (University of New Hampshire) and Gabriel Wrobel (Michigan State
University)
[240]
Buried in the Maw of Xibalba: The Bioarchaeology of the Sac Uitzil Ba Maya Rockshelter in Central Belize
Previous research on Maya rockshelter use in central Belize has shown that most mortuary rituals occurred during the Late
Preclassic and Protoclassic periods by local rural village communities. Recent excavations at Sac Uitzil Ba (SUB), a small
rockshelter mortuary site, adds to this emerging picture of the ritual landscape of the Caves Branch River Valley. In 2017, work
carried out by the Central Belize Archaeological Survey (CBAS) exposed 5 in situ primary burials, at least 4 more individuals from
looted contexts, and an array of burial goods. Similar mortuary behavior patterns were noted at the proximal Caves Branch (CBR)
and Sapodilla (SDR) rockshelter sites also excavated by CBAS. Indeed, the findings from SUB underscore the need for further
research into the funerary treatment of agrarian villagers in the Late Preclassic to Protoclassic periods. Discoveries such as a
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      46
metate (SUB), jadeite beads (SUB), special use areas with ceramic sherd offerings (SUB, SDR), intact grave vessels with primary
burials (SUB, CBR), polychrome vessels (SUB), and varying interment patterns indicate that rockshelters, a largely understudied
space, are complex and rich sources of data regarding early Maya rural life.
Billadello, Janine (The Graduate Center, CUNY)
[233]
Lipids Analysis on Precolumbian Ceramics from the Copan Valley, Honduras
Excavations in the Copan Valley, Honduras have recovered volumes of ceramic material over the years. While much effort has been
devoted to the study of these collections, data directly concerning what was cooked or otherwise processed in particular vessel
types remains scarce. The ability to recover biochemical traces of plants and animals from the paste of unglazed ceramic vessels
has enhanced archaeological interpretations of ancient pottery use in some regions, but such methods have not been widely utilized
in Mesoamerica. This paper presents the preliminary results of one technique, lipid residue analysis, which was carried out on
potsherds sampled from two socioeconomically distinct residential settlements dating to the Late to Terminal Classic period.
Ceramic types from the royal-residential compound known as Group 10L-2 at Copan are compared to those from the site of Río
Amarillo, a rural satellite community located east of Copan. The presentation will explore whether the data derived from lipids
analysis of these potsherds can add to or refine our current understanding of the relative status of these sites, and their relationship
throughout the period surrounding Copan’s decline.
Billeck, William
[203]
pXRF Analysis of Opacifiers in White Glass Drawn Beads from Nineteenth-Century North American Plains Indian Village Sites and
Trading Posts
Small white drawn glass beads are common in historical archaeological assemblages and have very limited stylistic chronological
variation. A pXRF study of nineteenth-century Native American and trading post sites in the Plains demonstrates a pattern of
change in opacifiers from antimony to lead-arsenic. The transition from antimony to lead-arsenic begins in the first quarter of the
nineteenth century and by the mid-nineteenth century lead-arsenic dominates. Beads with lead-antimony as an opacifier also occur
but only in the uncommon, larger drawn beads. pXRF is a nondestructive method that can help date glass bead assemblages by
using one of the most commonly encountered glass bead varieties.
Billman, Brian (UNC & MOCHE, Inc) and Patrick Mullins (University of Pittsburgh)
[174]
From Temple to Town: A Social History of a Four-Valley Region on the North Coast of Peru between 1000 BC and AD 1
The period from BC 1000 to AD 1 was a time of significant regional sociopolitical change on the north coast of Peru. This period
spanned the rise and fall of Chavin regional influence and the subsequent development of a mosaic of polities (seniorios) across the
north coast. We present a reconstruction of the social history of of four-valley region, consisting of the Chao, Viru, Moche, and the
Chicama Valleys, during the last millennium BC based on our analysis and interpretation of regional settlement patterns (n > 2,000
sites) and changes in ceremonial, public, and defensive architecture. We found evidence of significant sociopolitical change in this
region between BC 500–300, including abandonment of all Early Horizon ceremonial centers; aggregation of population into large
settlements and settlement clusters; a sharp increase in the total area of habitation sites; redistribution of most regional population
into defensible settings; and construction of the first defensive fortifications in these valleys. Similar patterns of change were found
across the four-valley region. We propose that competition over irrigated coca fields in the chaupiyunga was the primary source of
violent conflict in the four-valley region and adjacent valleys, beginning in the Salinar phase (circa BC 400–1 AD).
Billman, Brian [174] see Mullins, Patrick
Binetti, Katie [8] see Ferraro, Joseph
Bingham, Dayle [66] see Thompsett, Neil
Binning, Jeanne (California Department of Transportation)
[232]
Bipolar Reduction Revisited
Over the past 20 years, the recognition and implications of bipolar reduction debitage in the archaeological record have finally been
accepted as an important consideration in lithic analysis. In some prehistoric contexts, it is critical that bipolar debitage be
recognized to prevent a misinterpretation of aspects hunter and gatherer behaviors related to mobility, procurement, accessibility of
tool stone, and the desire for raw materials with specific qualities. Critical factors to be considered are discussed and examples are
presented.
Birch, Jennifer (University of Georgia), Megan Conger (University of Georgia), Sturt Manning (Cornell University) and Louis
Lesage (Huron-Wendat Nation)
[12]
Reframing Timescales for Longhouse and Community: Radiocarbon Chronologies for Enhanced Ancestral Wendat Household and
Community Histories
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    47
In this paper, we consider how high-precision chronologies informed by radiocarbon dating and Bayesian modeling are causing us
to rethink local and regional histories of ancestral Wendat village life. Our research is concerned with developing enhanced
chronological resolution for the period between AD 1450–1650 when the escalation of conflict, large-scale population movements,
confederacy formation, and incipient European contact was reshaping the geopolitical environment in the northeast. Our approach
goes beyond simply locating houses in time. We consider how the replotting of archaeological history in a refined, absolute
timeframe permits a reexamination of the relations, dispositions, and motivations of Wendat household and community members.
This interpretive context is then used to reframe archaeological evidence for variability in household design, use, and the practices
and relationships household and community members engaged in at selected village sites. Particular emphasis is placed upon
variability in the ways in which households became incorporated into existing communities at several different village sites. The
resulting insights permit the writing of archaeological histories that position people, rather than generalized processes, at the
forefront of our understandings of the archaeological record. Such reexamination of histories and context helps descendants to
better understand the life and times of their ancestors.
Bird, Darcy (Washington State University), Kyle Bocinsky (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center) and Tim Kohler
(Washington State University)
[229]
A Comparative Approach to Paleodemographic Proxies: A Case Study in the Southwest
Paleodemographic research is currently undergoing a fluorescence in different representative proxies, from increasing research on
the effect of taphonomic bias on radiocarbon ages (Bluhm and Surovell 2018) to the addition of fecal stanol concentrations in lake
sediment as a robust population proxy (White et al. 2019). We ask: how closely do independent population proxies correspond to
each other and, presumably, population? We compare two population proxies: occupational histories modeled using surface finds
employing ceramic typologies anchored via dendrochronology (Ortman et al. 2007), and smoothed curves provided by tree-ring
dates treated by the protocols typically used for summed probability distributions of 14C dates. We use the Village Ecodynamics
Project (VEP) database for VEP North (most of the central Mesa Verde region in southwestern Colorado) and VEP South (most of
the northern Rio Grande region of New Mexico). We provide an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the two methods
considering the archaeological and taphonomic issues in the respective areas.
Bird, Darcy [26] see Freeman, Jacob
Bird, Douglas (Penn State University)
[117]
Discussant
Bird, Douglas [15] see Codding, Brian
Birge, Adam (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[200]
Movement, the Sacred, and Appropriations: Inka-Carangas Interactions in Sajama, Bolivia
When the Inka arrived in the Sajama region, they encountered the Carangas, a pastoralist group, living in pukaras along a corridor
between the coast and the highlands. Based on limited ethnohistoric sources, the Carangas allied with the Inka against the
neighboring Pacajes and, in exchange, allowed the Inka to pass through the region. This relationship was marked materially in the
Sajama with Inka styled portable goods and limited Inka constructions. It is unclear how exactly the Carangas benefited from Inka
imperialism, which is typically marked by reciprocity. This paper argues for the hegemonic control of the Sajama Carangas and the
local appropriations of Inka imperialism into the sacred landscape and local political systems. By taking a collective action approach,
I argue that the Carangas accepted Inka imperialism as it afforded them protection and allowed elites access to Inka-local goods.
This exacerbated local power struggles resulting in increased factionalism that eroded capacity to organize collective action.
Evidence of these interactions may be found in the selective consumption of Inka goods, use of Inka high-altitude sanctuaries, and
the practice of ceques that continued into the historic period.
Birge, Adam (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[224]
Chair
Birkett, Courtney [9] see McDaid, Chris
Birkmann, Joseph [148] see Norris, Austin
Birtell, Tabitha and Emily Schach (Arizona State University)
[260]
Degenerative Joint Disease of the Spine at the Site of Yaracachi: Considering Labor Practices during the LIP and Late Horizon
Degenerative joint disease (DJD), sometimes referred to as osteoarthritis (OA), is not a single disease but can be recognized as a
common reaction pattern of joint tissues to several types of injury. While several risk factors may lead to the development of DJD,
certain occupational or mechanical stresses have been recognized as important causes of this pathological condition. Participation
in various physical activities can place different types of physical stress on the skeletal system which manifest in different forms on
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      48
the surface of bone. The following research documents DJD of the spine in individuals from the Yaracachi site of Moquegua, Peru.
Dating to the Late Intermediate (ca. AD 1000–1476) and Late Horizon (ca. AD 1476–1530) periods, this collection includes the
remains of more than 1000 individuals which were unearthed during a 2010 rescue excavation. This study explores the possible
relationship between degenerative joint disease (DJD) and corvée labor imposed by the Inka as the Moquegua region was
integrated into the expanding Inka Empire.
Bischoff, Robert (Arizona State University)
[17]
Geometric Morphometric Analysis of Hohokam Projectile Points from the Tonto Basin
Projectile points are often used as material markers of identity; however, in the Southwest United States, they are often eclipsed by
discussions of ceramics once these enter archaeological assemblages. This study is designed to investigate how identity and
interaction can be studied using projectile point morphology in this region. Traditional analysis of projectile points often uses visual
identification, the presence or absence of discrete characteristics, or linear measurements to classify the point as a distinct type.
Geometric morphometrics provides better tools for analyzing, visualizing, and comparing 2D and 3D shapes. As a test of the
effectiveness of various geometric morphometric methods, I analyzed projectile points from the Tonto Basin, collected during a
series of major archaeology projects conducted in advance of the expansion of the Roosevelt Reservoir. I also include modern
replications of projectile points and points located in other areas of the Southwest for comparison. Elliptical Fourier analysis and
landmark-based analyses will be conducted with the intent to identify discrete clusters of similar projectile points and compare the
effectiveness of each method.
[17]
Chair
Bishop, Anna
[130]
Internal Variations among the Elite Classic Maya at El Zotz
This paper discusses the internal structure of the elite Classic Maya at the site of El Zotz, in the Petén region of Guatemala. By
examining the behavior of elites living in different parts of El Zotz at the end of the Late Classic, I will consider whether the
aristocracy of the Pa’ka’n court acted as a cohesive unit with shared behaviors, or if they were segmented with significant variation
in practices between groups. The extent to which nobility differed at the same site, and in what ways they differed, can shed light on
the internal organization and relations of the Maya elite at a small royal center. This paper uses material evidence, with an emphasis
on ceramics, to ask questions about a variety of behaviors, such as domestic, ritual, and external trade practices.
Bishop, Anna [206] see Garrison, Thomas
Bishop, Katelyn (University of California, Los Angeles)
[98]
Ritual Practice, Ceremonial Organization, and the Value and Use of Birds in Prehistoric Chaco Canyon, New Mexico
In the North American Southwest, the long-term centrality of birds to Pueblo ceremonial life has been demonstrated both
ethnographically and archaeologically, where whole birds and their parts have been frequent participants in or components of ritual
practice. Despite the wide acceptance that Chaco Canyon was a central location for ceremony and ritual in the northern Southwest
during the Pueblo II period, few details of the nature of ritual practice have been reconstructed. This paper explores the use and
significance of birds in Chaco in order to reconstruct details of ceremonial life during the canyon’s major occupation (AD 850–1150).
Seven museum collections were examined to produce a dataset that presents all avifaunal remains excavated over the last 130
years. Results not only shed light on the nature of Chacoan ritual, but also demonstrate the importance of (re)examining collections
from historic excavations, and the value of using legacy and archival data to enhance provenience and contextual information. The
focus of this research on uniting historically produced collections with archival documents and legacy data was inspired and made
possible by the work of Stephen Plog and the mission of the Chaco Research Archive, which serves as an exemplary model for
such work.
Bishop, Katelyn (University of California, Los Angeles)
[129]
Chair
Bishop, Ronald L. (Smithsonian Institution)
[168]
Discussant
Bishop, Ronald [237] see Robinson, Eugenia
Bishop, Ronald [128] see Zralka, Jaroslaw
Bisulca, Christina (Detroit Institute of Arts), Marilen Pool (Arizona State Museum) and Nancy Odegaard (Arizona State
Museum)
[258]
Plant Exudates of Arizona: Use, Materials Properties, and Testing
In the material culture of the American Southwest, several plant and insect exudates were utilized as adhesives, coatings, paints,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    49
dyes, as well as for medicinal purposes. Their use is described in ethnohistorical and anthropological accounts. However, many of
these materials are misidentified in these accounts and subsequently in collection records, often due to problems with
nomenclature. As each of these exudates is chemically distinct with different physio-mechanical and bioactive properties, correct
identification is critical to understanding their use. As part of a long-term study, we are undertaking a comprehensive survey of
collections from the greater Southwest from the archaeological to the historic periods. To date over 300 exudate samples from
artifacts across multiple institutions have been analyzed with Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). Concurrently we are
investigating the physical properties of these exudates to gain insight into their processing and application. Understanding materials
properties combined with use patterns in artifacts is crucial to a holistic understanding of materials selection. Given the limited
availability and costs of instrumental analysis, this study also assessed practical, inexpensive methods for characterizing these
materials.
[258]
Chair
Biwer, Matthew (University of California, Santa Barbara) and Aleksa Alaica (University of Toronto)
[61]
Middle Horizon Cuisine: Paleoethnobotanical and Zooarchaeological Evidence from Quilcapampa La Antigua, Sihuas Valley,
Arequipa, Peru
The details of how and when Wari influence reached Arequipa in the Middle Horizon can be realized through dietary patterns and
cuisine. Paleoethnobotanical and zooarchaeological assemblages from the Wari-affiliated site of Quilcapampa La Antigua indicate
that maize, quinoa, chuño, and camelid remains were common throughout the few decades that this site was occupied. There are
distinct spatial differences in the distribution of food patterns and diachronic shifts in the way that guinea pigs were used suggesting
that near the end of occupation direct Wari influence may have weakened. The botanical and faunal data also speak to the
extensive mobility of populations in Arequipa during the Middle Horizon with eventual abandonment of mid-valley sites, which
includes Quilcapampa. We argue that a closer examination of foodways can provide an important perspective of the influence of
non-local powers. In the case of Arequipa, dietary practices were being employed by inhabitants of Quilcapampa that align with Wari
traditions until the interregional interaction diminished and the site was ceremonially abandoned.
Biwer, Matthew [86] see Jennings, Justin
Blaber, Thomas [119] see Musch, Abigail
Black, Reece, Nicholas Herrmann (Texas State University) and Todd Ahlman (Texas State University)
[215]
Modeling the Past: Using Structure from Motion (SfM) Photogrammetry to Record the Sugar Works of a Statian Plantation
This study utilizes Structure from Motion (SfM) photogrammetry as a documentation tool to understand the layout and usage of Site
SE095, a sugar works, on the Dutch Caribbean island of St. Eustatius. The research goals are to create a spatially referenced three
dimensional model of SE095, identify the foundations, extant structures, and features as they relate to sugar and rum production,
and to compare the site layout to other sugar works from across the Caribbean. AgiSoft Metashape Professional was used to create
the model by aligning a photoset of the structural remains. These models are assessed to determine whether there are any
identifiable features associated with sugar refining and rum distilling. The building configuration and organization is compared to
other plantation and structure layouts from Caribbean plantations with well documented architectural features. SfM photogrammetry
helps improve our recording possibilities because it creates accurate and spatially referenced three dimensional models.
Black, Stephen (Texas State University, San Marcos)
[40]
Discussant
Black, Valda (Washington State University), Marco Antonio Naveros Guizado (Universidad Nacional San Cristóbal de
Huamanga), Beatriz Lizarraga Rojas (Universidad Nacional de San Antonio Abad del Cusco) and Danielle Kurin (University
of California, Santa Barbara)
[224]
Bioarchaeology of Imperial Relations: Chanka and Inka Interactions at Sondor
An empire expanding into a previously established community can have significant impacts on the identity and culture of the
conquered. The degree of imperial influence can vary depending on negotiations set into place between the invaders and native
communities. A prominent example of these negotiations of imperial control occurred in the prehistoric highlands when the Inka rose
to power during the Late Horizon (LH, AD 1400–1532). One social area the Inka targeted when incorporating communities into the
empire was the alteration of their ancestor associations and behaviors (ayllu obligations), which makes mortuary studies a key part
of investigations into Inka imperial influence. This project focuses on the Chanka, a culture that developed during the Late
Intermediate Period (AD 1000–1400) and were known infamously by the Inka as a group of warriors they conquered in battle before
expanding into the rest of the Andes. However, archaeological evidence found at the site of Sondor, in the Andahuaylas region of
Peru, shows a different type of relationship between the Chanka and Inka during the LH. Here we will present preliminary findings
from the recent excavations at Sondor, which shows multiple styles of mortuary behavior and ceramics, with variation seen within
and between contexts.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         50
Blackman, David, Donna Nash (UNCG) and Emily Schach
[242]
Spatial Analysis of Burial Populations at Yarakachi, Moquegua, Peru
In 2009 while breaking ground for a new bus terminal in the city of Moquegua, a previously unknown cemetery was discovered in
the area of Yarakachi. Burials from this site date from the Late Intermediate Period through the Late Horizon. Analysis of ceramics
found in these tombs show that the cemetery was used by the Gentilar, Tumilaca, Chiribaya, San Miguel, Porabaya, and Inka
cultures for several centuries. GIS was used to examine the location of tombs with material cultural affiliated with these different
styles. In addition, analysis of the types of grave goods was examined to assess the presence of social differences amongst the
burial populations. These preliminary assays will direct future research to understand the interactions between groups during the
use of the cemetery and to chart any changes through time from the LIP to Late Horizon in terms of burial goods or tomb
architecture.
Blackwood, Emily (University of Maine)
[194]
Applying Virtual Reality to Archaeological Analysis: Reconstructing the Ostra Collecting Station.
The use of virtual reality (VR) to understand archaeological contexts is still new and under development. Most efforts focus on
monumental, above-the-surface structures, but my research explores the potential of incorporating below-the-surface excavation
data into an immersive and interactive, 3D-virtually simulated environment based on site data. Incorporating VR into archaeological
analyses provides an interface in which data can be manipulated to test various research hypotheses and which can be
continuously updated as new or additional data become available. The Ostra Collecting Station, a mid-Holocene site located in
northern Peru, is an excellent candidate for this type of exploration; the ancient shoreline is still visible adjacent to the site, but the
present-day shoreline is currently located 5km to the west. Reconstructing archaeological sites in VR allows researchers to visualize
their appearance and geographic context during use and to depict the transition to abandonment much more effectively than when
using traditional 2D representations.
Blair, Elliot (University of Alabama)
[29]
Making Community at Mission Santa Catalina de Guale: A Social Network Analysis of Population Aggregation in Seventeenth-
Century La Florida
Ethnohistorical research on the Spanish mission communities of La Florida has done much to document and elucidate complicated
patterns of indigenous population relocations. These migrations, aggregations, and dispersals—due to multiple factors such as
epidemics, Spanish reducción policies, and flight from antagonistic native groups—resulted in the formation of complex and diverse
colonial social networks. In this presentation I explore this process at Mission Santa Catalina de Guale (GA), a seventeenth-century
Spanish Mission located on St. Catherines Island, Georgia. By combining compositional analysis of glass beads and social network
analysis (SNA), I explore how the circulation of glass beads played an important role in the formation of an aggregated, pluralistic,
colonial community.
Blakeslee, Donald (Wichita State University)
[6]
Assessing the Intensity of Bison Processing
Determining the extent to which sedentary people hunted and processed bison is difficult. The numbers of bison bones in habitation
sites depend on a number of variables such as distance to the kill, use of bones for tools, and trade in bone tools. In addition, the
hunting method used determines the visibility of kill sites. The pedestrian surrounds of the Central and Southern Plains are like the
charges on horseback of the historic period; they are nearly impossible to detect. This presentation examines the feasibility of using
chipped stone tool assemblages to assess a combination of volume and intensity of bison processing. Frequencies of tool types,
modal forms at time of discard, evidence for hafting, and other considerations allow assessment of relative intensity of bison
processing.
Blancas, Jorge [133] see Barba, Luis
Blanck, Allyson (UCLA)
[228]
A Service Dog in the Field: Accommodating Disabled Archaeologists and Nontraditional Medical Equipment
There are many things one expects on a field site: a plethora of trowels, interns and students working away—yet it is not expected
to see someone with a disability. Archaeology as a field of study often shies away from including and accommodating disabled
voices, and it has created a general environment in which those with disabilities are unsure if they will be welcomed or accepted, let
alone accommodated. Disability encompasses a large range of individuals, and many different types of medical equipment can
accompany disabled individuals. One nontraditional type of medical equipment is a task trained service dog, which are often
essential to the well-being of their handlers. In collaboration with the Institute for Field Research and the Irish Archaeology Field
School, I was granted the opportunity to attend the field school at Ferrycarrig in County Wexford with my Service Dog, Bo. In this
paper I will describe the process of applying to and attending a field school with a service dog, along with an introduction to the
current state of disability in archaeology and theoretical actions that might be taken by other field schools hoping to engage with
disabled archaeologists.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     51
Blanke, Kimberly [187] see Cagney, Erin
Blatt, Samantha (Idaho State University)
[153]
Moderator
[153]
Discussant
Blatt, Samantha (Idaho State University), Shanda Putnam (Idaho State University), Amy Michael (University of New
Hampshire) and John Dudgeon (Idaho State University)
[240]
Dark Matters of the Dark Market: Curation, Authentication, and Repatriation of Two Midcentury Shrunken Heads
Tsantsas, ritual shrunken heads (SH), were created by the Shuar of Ecuador and Peru to capture the vengeful spirits (muisak) of
enemies. The postmortem artifacts were used to generate fear in adversaries, but also as means to socio-economic ends: the
powerful muisak were used by Shuar men to harness and direct female labor. After the 1850s, increased European contact led to
production and sale of commercial grade SH for Westerners who considered the tsantsas macabre souvenirs. Monetization and
counterfeit manufacture reflects the modern practice called, “dark tourism,” or the patronizing of sites associated with death.
Europeans were dark tourists purchasing (what they viewed as) post-human commodities, thus driving their expedient manufacture.
Two alleged tsantsas, acquired by 1950s tourists, were donated to the Idaho Museum of Natural History. The SH were analyzed
using metric, morphological, microscopic, and chemical analyses of hair, skin, and fibers. Analytical tools including laser ablation-
inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy, fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and scanning electron microscopy revealed
that the tsantsas are likely human, but with mixed ceremonial and commercial features. Determining authenticity has implications for
future repatriation and/or curation and highlights the investigative role of anthropology in addressing ethical consumerism and dark
tourism collections.
Blatt, Samantha [240] see Effingham, Joseph
Blatt, Samantha [270] see Peterson, Kateea
Blatt, Samantha [76] see Slane, Brittany
Blecha, Erika (Center for Big Bend Studies)
[16]
The Boulder Glyphs: An Analysis of Prehistoric Conflict and Historic Ranching Lifeways along the Big Bend of the Rio Grande
In 2018 the Center for Big Bend Studies of Sul Ross State University began a thorough investigation and documentation of over 200
petroglyphs pecked on small, vesicular basalt boulders located in the Sierra Vieja breaks, a subset of the Chihuahua Desert near
the Rio Grande in far west Texas. The recorded images on the boulders span from anthropomorphic and zoomorphic figures, to
abstract geometric designs, and historic brands and initials. The variability in iconography suggests the petroglyphs were made by
both prehistoric and historic individuals, offering us the opportunity to study a time transgressive phenomenon not reported from the
region and with few corollaries outside of the area. The most common themes depicted on the boulders are indigenous intergroup
conflict and historic brands. Geospatial analysis indicates there are patterns in the dataset, and using both ethnographic and historic
county records has helped form an initial interpretation for these localized petroglyphs. This paper will discuss the preliminary
analysis of these boulder glyphs, including the common themes of the images, spatial patterns, and records research.
Blessing, Matthias, Patrick Schmidt (University of Tuebingen) and Claudio Tennie (University of Tuebingen)
[162]
On the Role of Birch Tar Production in the Discussion of Cognitive Complexity in Neanderthals
Birch tar production by Neanderthals has been interpreted as one of the earliest manifestations of modern cultural behavior. This is
because birch tar production per se was assumed to require a complex setup, in which birch bark is heated in anaerobic conditions.
We could demonstrate that recognizable amounts of birch tar were likely a relatively frequent byproduct of burning birch bark under
aerobic conditions. When birch bark burns close to a vertical to subvertical hard surface, such as an adjacent stone, tar is naturally
deposited and can be scraped off the surface. The burning of birch bark near suitable surfaces provides useable quantities of birch
tar in a single work session (3h; including birch bark procurement). Chemical analysis of the resulting tar showed typical markers
present in archaeological tar. Mechanical tests verify the tar’s suitability for hafting and for hafted tools use. Given that similarly
sized stones as in our experiment are found in archaeological contexts associated with Neanderthals, the cognitively undemanding
connection between burning birch bark and the production of birch tar would have been readily discoverable multiple times. Thus,
the presence of birch tar alone cannot indicate the presence of modern cognition and/or cultural behaviors in Neanderthals.
Bliege Bird, Rebecca [15] see Codding, Brian
Blija, Hannah [229] see Sherman, Jason
Blitz, John (University of Alabama) and Lisa LeCount (University of Alabama)
[54]
Grinding It Out: Ancient Maya Embedded Economies and Changing Ground Stone Densities in Households at Actuncan, Belize
In Classic Maya economies, artifact distributions alone do not neatly reflect modes of production and exchange. The simultaneous
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    52
existence of multiple modes of production (domestic, specialized, ritualized, etc.) and exchange (gift giving, tribute extraction, and
markets) in households complicate our understanding of the strength of any given aspect. We utilize a diachronic perspective,
multiple lines of evidence, and artifact densities standardized by excavation volume at the site of Actuncan, Belize, to elucidate
changes in the strength of production and exchange modes in Preclassic and Classic phases. Our focus is on ground stone
densities as a measure of maize-grinding intensity across elite and common households. Data indicate that commoner households
always ground more maize than elites, but intensity peaked in the Late Classic period, after which it declined. It is tempting to
suggest that this pattern is linked to population decline following the collapse of Naranjo’s political power over the nearby provincial
center of Xunantunich. However, Actuncan demographics do not change substantially, agricultural fields show improvements, and
markets continued to be held in the Terminal Classic period. Therefore, we suggest changes in maize-grinding intensity were due to
the shrinking of regional political hierarchies and declining tribute demands.
Bloch, Lindsay (Florida Museum of Natural History, UF) and Emily Kracht (Florida Museum of Natural History, UF)
[196]
Production Origins of Palmetto Ware Pottery in the Bahamas
Palmetto ware is a low-fired and friable earthenware that was developed by the Lucayans after their settlement in the Bahama
archipelago ca. AD 700. The production and use of Palmetto ware have been poorly understood, in part because a complete vessel
has never been recovered and the vessels typically break into very small sherds. The primary identifying feature is abundant burned
conch shell temper, unique to this ware. The limestone islands in the Bahama archipelago do not contain large clay deposits;
instead, small pockets of clayey material develop in beach and mangrove settings. Here, we discuss an ongoing project to
characterize clays available to the Lucayans in the Bahamas, and recover the “recipe” for Palmetto ware. Using mineralogical,
elemental, and functional analysis, we tested a variety of clays from two islands: Great Abaco and Long Island, coupled with
analysis of archaeological sherds from the same locales. Results demonstrate the Lucayans’ strategic use of raw materials in a
limited resource environment.
Blohm, Tre (University of Montana), Jordan Karsten (University of Wisconsin, Oshkosh), Ryan Schmidt (University of
Porto, Portugal) and Meradeth Snow (University of Montana)
[244]
Paleomicrobiological Analysis of Tripolye Genomes from Verteba Cave, Ukraine
Paleomicrobiology is becoming an increasingly interesting subdiscipline of anthropology by being able to bridge the gap between
archaeology and genetics in novel ways. Understanding the microbial community in the past can provide insight into human activity
and cultural changes, their domesticated animals, and their environment. By analyzing the microbial classification from 106 genome
samples from Verteba Cave, Ukraine, we can obtain a more comprehensive understanding of processes occurring during the
Eneolithic in Southeastern Europe. This includes agriculture subsistence, large and dense settlements, and domestication, all
associated with the Tripolye culture. This environment resulted in a complex bacterial environment that provides evidence for the
presence of diseases in humans, animals, and maybe even plants, and aids in demonstrating the vast shifts in human subsistence
and resulting ramifications of the Neolithic transition.
Blom, Deborah (University of Vermont)
[61]
Chair
Blom, Deborah [61] see Martinez, Marcos
Blomster, Jeffrey (George Washington University) and Victor Salazar Chávez (George Washington University)
[211]
The Work of Jaguar Bones and Feline Imagery at Early Horizon Etlatongo, Oaxaca, Mexico
Jaguars and other felines play central roles in origin narratives, cosmologies and political authority in Mesoamerican societies, yet
actual jaguar remains and feline imagery are uncommon for the Early Horizon, from 1400–1000 calibrated BCE, especially in the
highlands. Feline imagery appears in the stone sculptural corpus of the Gulf Olmec urban center of San Lorenzo, with both
naturalistic examples as well as transforming figures. Feline imagery, however, has not been documented in San Lorenzo’s ceramic
figurine corpus, nor have jaguar bones been reported in the site’s faunal corpus. At the highland site of Etlatongo, in the Mixteca
Alta of Oaxaca, Mexico, recent excavations have explored both Early Horizon domestic and public space. Actual jaguar bones,
possibly from the same young individual, were found in the public space where one bone had been used as a tool; this animal, or
parts of it, must have arrived at the site through interaction networks. The public space also yielded ceramic figurines exhibiting
feline imagery. We argue that the different media in which felines were materialized, both actual jaguar remains as well as ceramic
imagery, in a public component of Etlatongo complemented and contributed to increasing complexity in cosmology, ontologies, and
society.
Blomster, Jeffrey [39] see Breault, Sarah
Blomster, Jeffrey [235] see Salazar Chávez, Victor Emmanuel
Blomster, Jeffrey [189] see Vidal-Guzmán, Cuauhtémoc
Blumenfeld, Dean (Arizona State University)
[7]
Borders and Boundaries: Spatial Analysis of Urban Zones of Ancient Teotihuacan
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       53
The architectural map produced by René Millon’s Teotihuacan Mapping Project allows a fine-grained investigation of two features
poorly understood for ancient cities. First, I use a kernel density analysis of residential structures to assess the differential population
densities of the city. There is considerable variation in local densities within the urban area. Second, I test several spatial models of
settlement boundaries to investigate the periphery of the city. Peri-urban areas are the transitional zones between what is
traditionally considered urban and rural. Documenting these fringe zones is crucial for understanding the effects of urbanization on
rural land. This analysis opens the door for future research pertaining to urban sprawl, internal demographic variation, and spatial
inequality.
Boal, Zachary (Wake Forest University) and Paul Thacker (Wake Forest University)
[36]
Magdalenian Technology and Raw Material Economy at Espadanal, Portugal
Espadanal is the only known, stratified, open-air Upper Paleolithic archaeological site buried within an aggrading floodplain context
in central Portugal. Much attention has been focused on the EUP assemblages from the deepest archaeological levels of
Espadanal. This poster focuses on the equally important Early/Middle Magdalenian deposits. Our lithic assemblage analysis
integrated conventional study of technological organization and typology with a framework for understanding raw material selection
practices. Retouched tool abundance and diversity along with extensive evidence of core maintenance and tool resharpening
strategies support a working hypothesis that the location was a medium-duration campsite during the Magdalenian. Despite the very
close proximity of the floodplain to the Azinheira Ridge chert source and in marked contrast to the EUP levels, Magdalenian foragers
at Espadanal did not extensively reduce more massive, early-stage chert cores or manufacture large tool blanks. Artifact use-life
practices and debitage analysis indicate the transport and conservation of prepared, fine-grained chert tools and finished cores to
the campsite, supplemented by reduction of quartz raw material cobbles available on-site. The Early/Middle Magdalenian
assemblages at Espadanal document raw material conservation within reliable technologies, indicators of highly mobile settlement
strategies in central Portugal following the Last Glacial Maximum.
Bocinsky, Kyle (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center), Stefani Crabtree (Santa Fe Institute) and Sarah Oas (Arizona State
University)
[171]
Notes on Biodiversity and Food Risk: A Reanalysis of Subsistence Data from the Central Mesa Verde Region
Food insecurity is a principal form of environmental risk encountered by human societies; ergo, human attempts to buffer
environmental risk are often attempts to enhance food security. Here, we embark on an ambitious reanalysis of subsistence data
from across the Central Mesa Verde region of southwestern Colorado. Using tools from the Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR),
we integrate faunal and archaeobotanical datasets from the Dolores Archaeological Program and the Crow Canyon Archaeological
Center’s numerous research projects, and explore risk buffering strategies such as food diversification, niche construction,
biodiversity enhancement, landrace development and maintenance, food exchange, and food storage. We use an explicitly
ecological approach within a complex systems framework, where humans are embedded in nested and evolving trophic networks.
We present our preliminary observations, and set forth a research program to detail ancestral Pueblo food resilience that has
implications for future food security in dryland environments and beyond.
Bocinsky, Kyle [229] see Bird, Darcy
Bocinsky, Kyle [125] see Gillreath-Brown, Andrew
Bocko, Grace [167] see Wilson, Jeremy
Boehm, Andrew (Museum of Natural and Cultural History, University of Oregon)
[75]
Revisiting the Faunal Collections from Fort Rock and Connley Caves, Oregon
The earliest excavations at Fort Rock and Connley Caves, Oregon, were conducted in 1938 and 1967. Archaeologists have
continued to revisit these sites in the intervening years, as recently as 2019. These sites have produced large, albeit fragmented,
faunal assemblages from the Late Pleistocene to the Holocene, yet only one faunal analysis has examined the assemblages and it
was limited to taxonomic identification for environmental reconstruction. However, Connolly and colleagues recently suggested that
the fragmented nature of the Fort Rock assemblage indicate intentional bone breakage by humans. This project re-examines the
faunal assemblages from the Cressman, Bedwell, and Connolly excavations to evaluate burning patterns, surface modification,
fragmentation, and intentional breakage. The results can help elucidate the taphonomic history of these Great Basin rock shelters,
improving our understanding of human and non-human processes at these sites.
Boger, Rebecca [252] see Perdikaris, Sophia
Boileau, Arianne (University of Florida)
[27]
The Inside/Outside Connection: A Spatial Analysis of Faunal Remains from Contact Period Maya Elite Structures at Lamanai, Belize
During the colonial period, the Maya living in frontier zones retained much of their community-level sociocultural and hierarchical
systems. At Lamanai, Belize, recent excavations of three elite residences provide an opportunity to examine the relationship
between status and animal use. In particular, one of the structures is hypothesized to be the residential compound of a Maya
community head. I investigate if spatial faunal patterns can help separate Lamanai’s elite based on their political status (ruling vs
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        54
non-ruling elite) and provide support for the possible identification of the Colonial ruler’s residence. To do so, I compare faunal
patterns among elite households and consider space use as it relates to activities involving animals. Spatial patterns are examined
using taxonomic and skeletal data as well as anthropogenic modifications, such as burning, fracture patterns, and butchery marks.
These methods allow me to assess whether different elite households had access to and/or controlled different sets of animal
resources (both in terms of taxa or skeletal portions) and engaged in different practices involving animals and animal parts (e.g.,
rituals, artifact manufacturing, provisioning). Patterns revealed by other artifactual data are also considered. This study provides
insight into Lamanai’s sociopolitical composition during Spanish contact.
Boileau, Arianne [178] see Thornton, Erin
Boisvert, Richard (NH State Conservation and Rescue Archaeology Program)
[170]
Mike Collins in the Bluegrass: Foundations and Contributions at the University of Kentucky
Michael B. Collins began his academic teaching career at the University of Kentucky in 1971 and continued through 1982. During
that time he mentored many graduate students, including this author, who went on to long and productive careers. His character,
scholarship and dedication have been constant and durable as well as his humor and unforgivable punning. This paper will provide
insights into his career with examples from both professional engagement and personal anecdotes with the goal of illuminating this
early segment of his development as a world class scholar and archaeologist. It will come full circle with the reunion of mentor and
student by way of nine expeditions of volunteers from New Hampshire to the Gault Site excavations
Boisvert, Richard [66] see Oberheim, Paul
Boles, Steve
[166]
Cahokia’s Wandering Supernaturals: What Does It Mean When the Earth Mother Leaves Town
A Cahokian female figurine recovered from Ohio in 1935 was recently brought to light. Although this example is made from
limestone, it is identical in all other aspects to the Cahokian flint clay suite. Additionally, the limestone was sourced to the St. Louis
formation, leaving little doubt as to its origin. This example adds to the growing number of Cahokian female figurines recovered
outside Greater Cahokia and a re-evaluation of their role in Cahokian religion is explored via ethnographic accounts and
archaeological data.
Bolnick, Deborah [169] see Locker, Angelina
Bomkamp, Samantha (University of Wisconsin- Milwaukee)
[120]
Digging into Collections: Ceramic Analysis of Casas Grandes Vessels at the Milwaukee Public Museum
A collection of 82 ceramic vessels from the Casas Grandes (Chihuahua, Mexico) cultural region is curated at the Milwaukee Public
Museum. This collection was accompanied with little to no provenance information and no research has been conducted on the
materials since they came to the museum in the 1970s. Research is currently underway to bright light and information to the
collection. Ceramic analysis was performed on each vessel with the use of a coding scheme recording many attributes (e.g., form,
orifice, neck length, rim shape, temper, external and internal treatment, paint color, decoration, texture). Thereafter, typology and
time period was determined for each vessel. Iconographical studies are currently being performed focusing on duality symbolism
and human and animal icons
Bomkamp, Samantha [229] see Sherman, Jason
Bonacini, Elisa (University of South Florida), Davide Tanasi (University of South Florida), Laura Harrison (University of
South Florida) and Kaitlyn Kingsland (University of South Florida)
[104]
3D Depth Sensing Applied to the Case Study of the Prehistoric “Genovese” Cave in the Levanzo Island (Trapani, Italy)
The Genovese Cave, discovered in 1949 on the islet of Levanzo in the Egadi Islands (western Sicily), has prehistoric engravings
and painted art with the most complex pictures and largest cycle of depictions in the south-central Mediterranean. The red-painted
figures are dated to the Late Mesolithic (ca. 7000 BC), and the black-painted figures to the Late Neolithic-Chalcolithic (ca. 3500 BC).
Terrestrial laser-scanning and micro-digital photogrammetry of the entire site was performed to study the layout of the paintings and
observe them from multiple viewpoints and different types of lighting. The high level of detail of the texturized 3D models is providing
additional appreciation of the layout and composition of the scenes, helping particularly in visualizing overlapping scenes on stone
independently by changing viewpoints and illumination. The current research suggests that the observation point and the lighting
were the main factors to consider in accessing some images, and indeed obscuring others. This makes it possible to re-read the
multilayered scenes depending on different viewpoints. This may reveal a path within the cave along which scenes are revealed in
succession, or different areas in which the viewpoints concentrate, pointing to separate panels, perhaps marking different times of
use of the cave.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        55
Bond, Stanley (National Park Service)
[160]
Exploring Different Confidentiality Standards between Archaeological Resources Protection Act, Section 9 and Title 54 (54 U.S.C.
307103) (Formerly National Historic Preservation Act, Section 304)
There are significant conflicts with the handling of confidential or sensitive cultural resources information between ARPA and Title
54. These are the two laws often cited when an organization or individual requests the release of archeological information. This
paper will compare these two laws that exempt archaeological site information from Freedom of Information Act requests and
discuss the implication of their differences.
Bond, Stanley [160] see Knox, Corey
Bond Reis, Lucas (University of Arizona)
[4]
Southern Je Archaeology in the Itajaí Valley, South Brazil: The Tobias Wagner Site and Its Regional Context
The ancestors of the Kaingang and Laklano-Xokleng indigenous people, labeled by archaeologists as Southern Je, have been living in
south Brazil since at least 100 CE. In the Itajaí Valley (Santa Catarina State), there are dozens of archaeological sites related to these
people, and the Laklano-Xokleng people are still living there in an indigenous reservation. Here I present the results of the research
conducted by the LEIA/UFSC team in the Tobias Wagner site, where 18 pit houses were identified and ceramics, lithics, and
archaeobotanical remains were recovered. Ceramics were analyzed through FTIR and SEM-EDS to be characterized spectroscopically.
Charcoal remains were identified according species (Araucaria Angustifolia) and genus (Magnolia). So far, it is knowing that this site
was occupied in two periods: 900–1300 cal CE and 1600–1650 cal CE. The results are interpreted in different scales (micro, meso, and
macro), and according to Zedeño’s (1997; 2008) history of territory formation proposal in a long-term perspective.
Bondura, Valerie (Columbia University)
[91]
Discussant
Bongers, Jacob [174] see Chicoine, David
Bongers, Jacob [21] see Larios, Jennifer
Bongiovanni, Rosie [169] see Izzo, Victoria
Bonine, Mindy, Katherine Seikel (AmaTerra Environmental) and Timothy Griffith (AmaTerra Environmental)
[194]
Introduction to the Headwaters Site, New Braunfels, Texas
From mid October 2018 to early April 2019, archaeologists from AmaTerra Environmental, Inc., Texas State University and the
Center for Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted data recovery excavations at the
Headwaters Site (41CM204), in New Braunfels, Texas. The Headwaters Site is located on a deeply-stratified terrace adjacent to
Comal Spring, which is the headwater for the Comal River. This perpetual source of water provided and attracted numerous
resources for prehistoric peoples in Central Texas, who used the site more or less continuously for at least the last 8,000 years. As
such, the remains of such habitations are embedded in the landscape, and excellently preserved. This paper presents the initial
results from the excavations at the Headwaters Site, including the 25+ hot-rock cooking features, knapping debris dumps, stone
tools, faunal remains, and unique artifacts recovered from the site.
Bonine, Mindy [176] see Seikel, Katherine
Bonthorne, Emma [240] see Fitzpatrick, Leslie
Bonzani, Renee (University of Kentucky) and Bruce Manzano (Zooarchaeological Consultant)
[254]
Hands-on Archaeological Pedagogy: Case Example Teaching Food Pathways in Ancient and Modern Times
Active participation and hands-on analysis and activities in college level classes can draw students with diverse interests into
classes of archaeology. To move away from straight lecturing about archaeological principles, the authors developed a class on
paleoethnobotany and zooarchaeology which actively involves students in understanding the principles and methods of these fields
of study and gives them the opportunity to analyze the archaeological remains themselves. Group work also allows them to
investigate the cultural uses and nutritional values of the botanical and faunal resources identified and develop new business
strategies utilizing the resources in modern markets. Students with varying majors have taken the class over the last four years. An
outline of the class design and statistics on students’ declared majors will be presented.
Book, Bianca (Florida State University)
[66]
A Stable Isotope Analysis of the Archaic Windover Population’s Diet (8BR246)
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      56
Carbon and nitrogen data, gathered from a stable isotope analysis, was used to reconstruct the diet of the Archaic period Windover
(8BR246) burial population. The isotopes of carbon and nitrogen were selected for analysis due to their relation to the prevalent food
resources found in terrestrial and oceanic settings. The sample consists of 40 fragmentary bone samples taken from the lesser
trochanter of the proximal end of the femur. The femur has one of the slowest remodeling rates within the human body and will
therefore produce a long term signal of diet. Twenty well-preserved women, 15 men, and 5 subadults of known age and sex were
selected for analysis. The establishment of cohorts within the stable isotope analysis sample will allow the dietary results of the
analysis to be compared to one another, uncovering trends in their ancient cultural practices and foodways. This study aims to
produce a reconstruction of Windover diet and to uncover patterns of diet between cohorts within this population that can lend itself
to their Archaic Native American culture.
Boomgarden, Shannon (University of Utah), Brendan Ermish (University of Utah), Jordin Muller (University of Utah),
Duncan Metcalfe (University of Utah) and Stefania Wilks (University of Utah)
[245]
Actualistic Experiments in Archaeology: Farming and Storing Maize in Range Creek Canyon, Utah
At the Range Creek Field Station in east central Utah, researchers have had the unique opportunity to conduct repeated actualistic
experiments, under modern environmental constraints, to better understand past human behavior related to farming and storing
maize. This poster summarizes the goals, expectations, methods, results, and on-going difficulties of actualistic experiments
designed to collect quantitative data on the costs and benefits of growing and storing maize. The data collected under modern
environmental constraints is then used to better understand the archaeological record of Fremont farmers living in Range Creek
Canyon between AD 900 and 1200. While we have had significant breakthroughs in understanding the trade-offs associated with
irrigating with simple tools, we have had major difficulties in other areas of our experiments including pest damage to crops
(primarily grasshoppers) and pests stealing food from storage granaries (primarily squirrels and pack rats). Encountering
unanticipated problems and making decisions to best mitigate these issues has significantly changed our understanding of the ways
past human forager/farmers would have also modified their behavior to increase their productivity. These difficulties have been
extremely informative and continue to shape our experiments and future research questions.
[245]
Chair
Boomgarden, Shannon [245] see Ermish, Brendan
Boomgarden , Shannon [245] see Muller, Jordin
Boomgarden, Shannon [245] see Springer, Corinne
Boomgarden, Shannon [245] see Wilks, Stefania
Boot, Elena (Northern Arizona University)
[211]
Investigating Evidence for Child Sacrifice in Maya Lowlands
Throughout the Maya lowlands, archaeologists have recovered substantial evidence for the practice of human sacrifice. In several
cases, the primary victims in these rituals were children and infants. In this presentation, I will review archaeological, iconographic,
epigraphic, and ethnohistoric records for further evidence of child sacrifice. In addition to recording the context or location for these
practices, my research also provides important information on the significance of child sacrifice in both time and space. It sheds light
on the reasons children were chosen for sacrifice, and whether this practice was directly associated with specific Maya ideologies.
The main research was conducted in Actun Tunichil Muknal cave, where I recorded the evidence for child sacrifice and compared it
further with other cases of the ritual in the Maya lowlands. I also examine the Classic Maya mythology and inscriptions for the roots
of the practice. Throughout the research, I test a hypothesis whether child sacrifices were associated with rain ceremonies as a
tradition of considerable antiquity in Mesoamerica, especially prevalent during the Terminal Classic period in the Maya lowlands.
Borck, Lewis (University of Missouri Research Reactor)
[70]
Discussant
Bord, Arik (Texas A&M University) and Charlotte Goudge (University of Bristol)
[146]
Record or Be Forgotten: Site Visualization and Climate Change
Under most circumstances, site preservation is best when climate conditions are stable. The impending threat of climate change,
therefore, presents some serious challenges for in situ site preservation and monitoring. Additionally, extreme weather events
caused by climate change put otherwise stable archaeological sites at higher risk. Fortunately, advancements in photogrammetry
and 3D recording technology in recent years provide an easy and inexpensive method for accurate digitization of site morphology.
This presentation will discuss some ongoing and recent projects utilizing various techniques, including 3D visualization methods, to
record, preserve, and reconstruct historical maritime landscapes and cultural resources and present possible future applications of
the technology.
Boren, Roger
[16]
Rock Art Studies in the Big Bend Region of Eastern Trans-Pecos Texas
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     57
A sweeping curve of the Rio Grande, located in the eastern Trans-Pecos area of Texas, defines a region known as the Big Bend.
The area consists of more than three million hectares or over eight million acres. The three counties of Brewster, Jeff Davis, and
Presidio constitute the area of the Big Bend. This talk outlines the history of rock art observation and recordation in the region
beginning with an eighteen-day wagon tour of the area by archaeologist Charles Peabody and his wife in 1909. During the tour,
Peabody reported and briefly described six rock shelters, each containing pictographs. In the 1930s, there were brief areal rock art
recording efforts by Forrest and Lula Kirkland and by archaeologist A. T. Jackson. From that time until the turn of the twenty-first
century, various interested avocationalist and fine arts professionals have carried the mantle of rock art studies and recordation
efforts in the Big Bend with varying results. We will review some of these efforts along with select representations of the diverse rock
art of the region.
Borgens, Amy (Texas Historical Commission)
[18]
The Dugout and the Lost City
A chance discovery by a fisherman in late 2018 has revealed an enigmatic Texas coastal site. A 20-ft dugout canoe, uncovered by
recent storm activity, was embedded in a larger archeological context suggestive of both nineteenth-century ranch features and
early twentieth-century coastal developments. Research indicates the site may be associated with the John Singer Ranch—a Civil
War-era settlement popularized in Texas treasure-hunting folklore for Singer’s fabled lost cache of coins and jewels. Dubbed the
Lost City after it was discovered eroding out of the beach in 1931, the site of the ranch remains uncertain in this dynamic coastal
environment. While the discovery of this curious south Texas archeological site may begin a new chapter in this more than century-
old search, it comes with the very real danger of reigniting interest in the “treasure” and looting on private and public property.
Boric, Dusan (Columbia University) and Paul Duffy (Columbia University/University of Toronto)
[135]
Chronological Perspectives on the Spread of Agriculture in Southeastern Europe
Neolithic studies in Europe have recently seen the impact of two very different sets of approaches to building chronological
frameworks using radiocarbon dating. On the one hand, archaeologists have used radiocarbon dates as proxies for levels of human
activity on past landscapes by employing summed probability distributions of radiocarbon measurements. This approach has tended
to show little concern for the “messiness” of specific site and local level regional histories, largely focusing on the statistical
robustness of large series of radiocarbon dates. The other approach has been to use a Bayesian statistical probability framework
with site stratigraphies and carefully chosen contexts to build both site-specific and wider regional histories. In this paper, we
evaluate the merits of these two approaches by dealing with the chronological record of the Early Holocene southeastern Europe.
We discuss how the two different approaches to building chronologies stem from different and sometimes conflicting theoretical
perspectives. We highlight how foragers and farmers impact landscapes differently, and how the resulting site visibility impacts each
of these methodological approaches. Finally, we warn of the danger of conflating different scales of analysis when building a “big
picture” by obliterating the small scale.
Borreggine, Marisa (Harvard University), Evelyn Powell (Harvard University), Richard Meadow (Harvard University), Jerry
Mitrovica (Harvard University) and Christian Tryon (Harvard University)
[162]
Paleocurrents in a Least-Cost Pathway Model of Human Dispersal from Sunda to Sahul, 65–45 Kya
The timing of human colonization of Sahul, potentially as early as 65 ka (up from the previous 42 ka) has revised our understanding
of the dispersal of anatomically modern humans (AMH). This movement represents, to date, the earliest known AMH long distance
migration by sea, implying significant levels of complex language, marine technology, and colonization abilities. The pathway
analysis applied to migration models generally utilizes a combination of eustatic sea level, low-resolution ancient topography, and/or
present-day ocean currents. Using robust paleotopography and sea level reconstructions based on geophysical modeling of ice age
dynamics and paleoclimate simulations using the Community Earth System Model (CESM1.1.1) and MIT General Circulation Model
(MITgcm), we retrodict paleocurrents for 65–45 ka. The reconstructed ocean currents and topography determine potential pathways
for migration from Sunda into Sahul. The least-cost pathway analysis applied to the migration model is a function of time at sea and
island-to-island intervisibility. We seek to identify the most favorable time and path of migration into Sahul. We establish a new
method for applying cost analysis to migration pathways and lay the framework for estimating paleocurrents using global and
regional climate models, while also providing insight into the first peopling of Sahul.
Borrero, Luis [119] see Morello Repetto, Flavia
Borrero, Mario (University of California, San Diego), Luke Stroth (University of California, San Diego) and Geoffrey
Braswell (University of California, San Diego)
[130]
Crumbling Walls: Terminal Classic Maya Collapse and Abandonment of Nim Li Punit, Belize
This paper will present a synthetic review of the Terminal Classic collapse of the Maya site of Nim li Punit, Belize, based on new
data from recent architectural excavations and artifact analysis. These lines of evidence show that around AD 800 the site saw the
cessation of elite activities, the halting of new constructions, the disrepair of existing architecture, and ultimately the abandonment of
the site. The data presented will illuminate the nature of abandonment of one of the major Southern Belize centers at the close of
the Classic period. We will examine theories on the processes of state collapse and consider the archaeological evidence from our
site and how it may fit into these narratives. Finally, we will conclude by exploring the possible internal regional dynamics of the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        58
Southern Belize Region during this major period of social change and transformation.
[130]
Chair
Borrero, Mario [197] see Stroth, Luke
Borzic, Igor [85] see Zaro, Gregory
Boshoff, Jaco [273] see Lubkemann, Stephen
Boshoff, Jaco (IZIKO Museums of South Africa) and Stephen Lubkemann (George Washington University)
[273]
Archaeological Identification, Investigation, and Implications of the Portuguese Slaver Sao Jose Paquette de Africa
In December 1794 the São Josè Paquete de Africa foundered near Cape Town, South Africa while transporting over 500 slaves
from Mozambique destined for northeastern Brazil, resulting in the death of over 200 souls. This presentation reviews the process
through which independent lines of archaeological and archival evidence were mustered to locate and identify the shipwreck, and
reviews the ongoing archaeological finds on the site since its identification. It also examines how this work is pioneering new
approaches in maritime archaeology on several interrelated and mutually informing fronts, including: technical understanding of
shipwreck environments and site formation processes, critical interrogations of the concept of “archaeological site” itself, and
modalities of engagement with stakeholder communities including descendant communities in South Africa and Mozambique.
Boss, Olivia [38] see Fahey, Brian
Bossio, Laura (University of Michigan)
[176]
Analyzing Funerary Items and Assessing Interaction at the Williams Mortuary Complex in Northern Ohio
The Williams Mortuary Complex, consisting of a Transitional Archaic–Woodland (1000–600 BC) cemetery and associated
crematory, is situated along the Maumee River of northern Ohio. Excavated in the 1970s, these sites contain diagnostic features of
funerary complexes, including Red Ochre and Glacial Kame. Funerary items are here analyzed to reveal insights on interaction
throughout the Great Lakes Region.
Bostwick, Todd [71] see Mitchell, Douglas
Boudreaux, Edmond, Vincas Steponaitis (University of North Carolina) and Stephen Harris (University of Mississippi) and
Tony Boudreaux
[202]
Exploring the 1730 Battlefield at the Grand Village of the Natchez Indians
In 1730 an army of French, Choctaws, and other Native American allies attacked the Natchez Indians near their principal town,
called the “Grand Village,” in reprisal for a Natchez attack a few months before which destroyed the nearby French colony, including
Fort Rosalie. Anticipating a counterattack, the Natchez had built two forts, called Valeur and Farine, near the Grand Village. When
the French arrived, they laid siege to these forts, established firing positions on and around the mounds at the Grand Village, and
proceeded to dig a sap toward Fort Valeur. After several days of skirmishing, the Natchez escaped the siege and left the area. A
recent study of contemporary French maps has identified the general locations of the two Indian forts, the sap, and two mounds (no
longer visible) that served as French firing positions. This paper reports on geophysical surveys and excavations at Grand Village
that have identified the location of one of the “missing” mounds.
Boudreaux, Tony [202] see Boudreaux, Edmond
Boulanger, Matthew (Southern Methodist University)
[30]
Lithic-Sourcing at the Crossroads: Lessons from a Half Century of Provenance Studies
Geochemical studies directed at establishing the provenance, or source, of material culture have long been part of the archaeologist’s
tool kit, though for much of this time the instrumentation used for these studies was the purview of specialized laboratories. Today,
instruments capable of producing geochemical data are increasingly found in the hands of individual archaeologists, leading to a
proliferation of geochemical-sourcing data generated on-site and in situ. The increasing ubiquity of analytical instruments spells
important changes for archaeology in general, and for lithic-sourcing studies in particular. An historical perspective on the evolution of
geochemical lithic-sourcing studies is potentially beneficial to helping navigate these changes. Here, I present a discussion of the
development of lithic-sourcing by geochemistry over the past 60 years, casting a critical eye toward lessons that may be learned by past
successes and past failings. Recognizing and acknowledging the historical context of geochemical lithic-sourcing allows us to make
well-informed decisions regarding the directions in which our current research should head.
Boulanger, Matthew [55] see Jorgeson, Ian
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       59
Boulotis, Christos [196] see Tsai, Che-hsien
Bousman, Britt (Texas State University)
[19]
Discussant
Bousman, Britt (Texas State University), Kristen Wroth (Universität Tübingen), Chantel Tribolo (Université Bordeaux
Montaigne), Lloyd Rossouw (Florisbad Quaternary Department, National Museum) and Michael Toffolo (Université
Bordeaux Montaigne)
[162]
New Stone Age Excavations at Lovedale and Damvlei in the Modder River Valley, South Africa
In 2019 excavations were undertaken at the Middle Stone Age site of Lovedale and the Later Stone Age site of Damvlei in the
Modder River valley west of Bloemfontein in the Free State Province of South Africa. Previously geoarchaeological research
identified five alluvial terraces in the valley and the current preliminary excavations from these sites recovered in situ artifacts from
two of these terraces. Lovedale is situated in the Lovedale Terrace that appears to date to the Middle Pleistocene. Preliminary
analysis of the stratigraphy and artifacts at Lovedale demonstrates that recovered in situ artifacts are from a single occupation
characterized by a unique form of MSA point, which exhibits a manufacturing process that differs from triangular MSA points
resulting in bifacially trimmed bases and possible use impact-fractures. Damvlei is in the Orangia Terrace. This terrace is dated to
the Late Pleistocene and Holocene at the site of Erfkroon located ~10 km downstream. The stratigraphy and artifacts at Damvlei
indicate a Holocene LSA occupation that has similarities to other sites in the region, such as Baden-Baden and Florisbad. OSL,
micromorphological, and phytolith samples from both sites will provide more detailed chronological and paleoenvironmental
information for these occupations and the region.
Bousman, Britt [170] see Horn, Marty
Bovy, Kristine (University of Rhode Island), Michael Etnier (Western Washington University), Virginia Butler (Portland State
University) and Sarah Campbell (Western Washington University)
[129]
Patterns of Fragmentation and Burning in the Ciwicen Bird Assemblage (Washington State)
Archaeological bird assemblages in the Pacific Northwest (USA) tend to receive less taphonomic investigation than mammal
assemblages. An exception is Ciwicen (45CA523), a large ancestral village of the Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe, located on the shore
of the Strait of Juan de Fuca, Port Angeles, Washington. As part of our large human ecodynamics research project, we explored
and compared patterns of fragmentation and burning for all classes of vertebrates, including mammals, birds, and fish. Complete
elements were rare for both mammals and birds, and both were more frequently burned than fish. However, there were also
interesting differences between the mammal and bird assemblages. For example, murre, duck and shearwater humeri were
frequently broken mid-shaft and partially burnt along the broken edges. In addition, high rates of calcined murre bones and thermal
features in certain areas of the site may indicate locations where intensive seabird processing occurred. Here we discuss the ‘life
history’ of bones from different taxonomic groups, synthesize taphonomic information on the bird remains specifically, and examine
social factors, such as feasting, which may influence how bones were processed at the site.
Bow, Sierra [60] see Simek, Jan
Bowden, Taylor (Texas State University), Todd Ahlman (Texas State University), Ashley McKeown (Texas State University)
and Nicholas Herrmann (Texas State University)
[215]
Exploring Free and Enslaved African Lifeways: An Isotopic Study of an Eighteenth-Century Cemetery (SE600) on St. Eustatius,
Caribbean Netherlands
Multiple isotope analyses of skeletal tissues are a useful tool for exploring lifeways of past populations. Isotopic analysis of
Caribbean populations is still in its infancy, making the technique a useful tool for learning about these populations. St. Eustatius is a
small island in the Dutch Caribbean that served as the cornerstone for trade throughout the region. This study examines the lifeways
of enslaved and free Africans residing on the island using stable isotope analysis. An analysis of diet, nutrition, and residential
history of 11 individuals buried at Site SE600 was completed using carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen isotopes from bone collagen and
bone bioapatite. The analysis results demonstrate significant variation in oxygen isotopic values from expected values for the region
suggesting the people interred in the cemetery did not grow up on St. Eustatius. The nitrogen isotopic analysis results indicate a
dependency on marine resources for protein.
Bowden, Taylor [76] see Jacobson, Jodi
Bowen, Corey (University of Illinois, Chicago) and Benjamin Schaefer (University of Illinois, Chicago)
[160]
Cultural Heritage Politics and Pokémon Go: A Preliminary Case Study of the Gamification of Archaeological Sites in Andean South
America
The mega-popular Pokémon video game series challenges players to collect and train the titular creatures to compete in strategic
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    60
battles. Exploration features prominently in the games; players must traverse expansive fictional regions to advance the plot or to
find one-of-a-kind Pokémon. Players may even visit archaeological sites to encounter Pokémon based on hieroglyphs, sarcophagi,
or Jōmon period ceramics. In 2016, Niantic Inc. published the enormously successful Pokémon Go, which brought this same
formula into an augmented reality mobile game. The virtual Gyms and Pokemon of Pokemon Go are overlain on the real world map
and correspond to real locations. With prominent archaeological sites such as Tiwanaku, Huacas del Moche, and Huaca Pucllana
being turned into in-game Gyms, the line is blurred between fictional sites in the Pokemon franchise and actual historical sites. This
paper discusses how the unsolicited inclusion of Andean archaeological sites in Pokemon Go contributes to the Western
construction of Latin America as a “postcolonial playground” that exists to be explored, discovered, and conquered by tourists. We
address the tacit assumptions in the creation of virtual Pokemon Go locations out of tangible cultural sites and the implications this
may have for contemporary valuations of archaeological heritage.
Bowen, Elena [268] see Muros, Vanessa
Bowers, Jordan (University of Texas, Austin)
[108]
Understanding Textile Production at Cividade de Bagunte
Textiles are a near ubiquitous feature of human society from antiquity through present-day. Unfortunately, most places around the
world do not have the environmental conditions that allow for the preservation of textiles and the many tools associated with textile
production. At Cividade de Bagunte, the only evidence for textile production consists of loom weights and spindle whorls, which
represent only a small fraction of the tools that would have been necessary to produce textiles. In this paper, I analyze the spindle
whorls and loom weights recovered during excavations at Bagunte, as well as what is missing from the archaeological record, to
make broad interpretations regarding the modes of textile production at the settlement in order to understand how Bagunte’s
inhabitants produced textiles from raw materials.
Bowman, R. Doyle [193] see Beach, Sonya
Bowman, Robert [202] see Sattler, Robert
Boyadzhiev, Kamen (National Archaeological Institute with Museum, Bulgaria)
[85]
Tell Yunatsite, Southern Bulgaria: New insights on the Fifth Millennium BC in the Balkans
The prehistoric tell at Yunatsite in the Maritsa River valley (Southern Bulgaria) is among the biggest tell sites in the Balkans. During
large-scale excavations, a Medieval cemetery, a fortification from the Roman period, and layers from the Iron Аge, Early Bronze
Age, and Chalcolithic have been revealed. The studies in the last years are concentrated on the thick Chalcolithic layer (fifth
millennium BC). They reveal a complex settlement and social structure. The tell itself is actually the fortified part of a larger
settlement that emerged around the beginning of the fifth millennium BC. Long-distance trade and craft specialization have been
attested. The copper tools and pottery crucibles suggest local metallurgical production, while a small golden bead dated to the mid-
fifth millennium BC is one of the earliest golden artifacts known so far in the world. The final Chalcolithic settlement was destroyed
by an enemy attack around 4200 cal BC and provides important evidence for the end of the Copper Age cultures in the Balkans.
The presentation highlights the most interesting results from the latest excavations and their significance for understanding the
cultural processes, technological innovations and social dynamics in the fifth millennium BC Balkans.
Boyd, Carolyn (Texas State University) and Ashley Busby
[16]
Mapping the Multisensory Experience in Pecos River Style Rock Art
Pecos River style (PRS) rock art is characterized by finely painted anthropomorphic and zoomorphic figures arranged in highly
ordered, complex compositions. Figures are frequently portrayed with a series of dots, lines, or a combination of the two emanating
from or into an open mouth. This paper describes and analyzes the context, attributes, and image-making process of this
pictographic element for 83 PRS figures. We discuss patterns in shape, color, and arrangement of the pictographic element, as well
as clues to its broader semantic meaning through a study of context and the painting process. In Mesoamerica, artists used similar
graphic devices to signify and activate the senses. Visual stimuli triggered auditory and olfactory responses in the viewer. Sound
and scent, in the form of song, heated oratory, and aromatic fragrances, were agentive, intimately associated with creation and
concepts of the soul. We suggest that PRS artists used graphic devices similarly, to transform the ephemeral and intangible
qualities of hearing and smell into something enduring and palpable. Their representation in the art provides insight into the culture’s
conception of the senses, how they conceived and categorized reality, and how they experienced the art and the information
encoded in it.
Boyd, Douglas
[192]
Buried Bottle Borders: A Nineteenth-Century German Immigrant Tradition in Texas
In 2015 and 2016, archaeological investigations at the historic Frost Town site near downtown Houston uncovered two unusual
features—alignments of buried, upside-down bottles. The smaller feature had 15 in situ bottles in a single line. The larger feature
had several displaced bottles and 44 in situ bottles that spanned a distance of 25 ft. and formed an L shape. The bottles are ceramic
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        61
ale and seltzer containers and glass wine, liquor, and beer bottles. The bottle types and markings all indicate manufacture in the
latter half of the nineteenth century, and probable feature construction in the 1870s or 1880s. Archival and oral history evidence
indicates these features were associated with German immigrant households, and they represent decorative bottle borders along
the edges of flower gardens and walkways. Data have been gathered on dozens of sites in the eastern half of Texas, and these
bottle gardens are a tradition strongly linked to German immigrants. Garden bottle borders have been re-created at two historic
German house sites in central Texas. One historic bottle garden has survived and is still maintained by the National Park Service at
the historic Oakland plantation in Louisiana.
Boyd (Starks), Jessica
[190]
Rediscovering the Past: Preservation of the Historical Collections at the Tulsa, OK, Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 577
Veterans of Foreign Wars Posts (VFWs) are overlooked resources for American history and archaeological collections. The facilities
receive numerous donations from members and their families, as well as the local community, yet often lack financial resources and
collection management knowledge to preserve these collections. The Tulsa, Oklahoma VFW Post 577 resides in a building that was
constructed in 1920 as a National Guard Armory and in 1921 acted as a command post for the City of Tulsa during the Race
Massacre. In 1946, the Tulsa VFW took over the building and has served the veteran community for over 70 years. In the last 100
years the facility has acquired a vast collection of artifacts and materials relating to local and national history. Utilizing the Standards
and Excellence Program (StEPs) developed by the American Association for State and Local History, I developed a collections
management system and trained post members in long term preservation of the VFW’s collection.
Boyle, Peter and Janine Hernbrode
[25]
Bell Rocks and Music Making at the Cocoraque Butte Rock Art Site
The Cocoraque Butte Complex, the largest rock art site in Southern Arizona, contains over 130 boulders that ring with a distinct bell-
like pitch. These boulders are distributed among the petroglyphs and show clear evidence of use during pre-contact times. Such
boulders have been reported globally, but their sound properties have rarely been studied quantitatively. We recorded all bell rocks
found at the site and analyzed their sound spectra to identify the fundamental frequency (i.e., pitch) characteristic of each one. The
boulders resonated at a wide range of frequencies spanning three musical octaves and are positioned in such a way that musical
interaction is possible. The sound of the bell rocks is clearly audible in two large areas on the desert floor, which may have served
as gathering places within the group of boulder-covered hills containing the bell rocks and rock art. The petroglyphs include images
associated with the Flower World, a spiritual realm that is also associated with the sound of bells. We suggest that the bell rocks at
Cocoraque Butte may have been used in “participatory music” as a component of social or ceremonial gatherings, consistent with
ethnographic information regarding the modern O’odham.
Bracamonte Lévano, Edgar (Museo Tumbas Reales de Sipán)
[106]
Ritual Areas in Santa Rosa de Pucalá and Its Implications in Territorial and Sociopolitical Dynamism in the Lambayeque Valley, AD
650–950
Santa Rosa de Pucalá is a ritual monumental area in Lambayeque Valley. Recent researches show us an increase in ceremonial
practices, from 670 CE (Santa Rosa Phase 1), especially human sacrifices, changes in burial patterns, and arriving of foreign materials
(obsidian, Cajamarca and Wari pottery). In Santa Rosa Phase 2 (750 CE) ceremonial architecture keeps local traditions, but Cajamarca
and Wari pottery increases, and Mochica style keeps variating. In Santa Rosa Phase 3 (850 CE) occurred a drastic change in ritual
areas. A D-shaped Wari structure appears, and Cajamarca pottery has striking decrease. It shows us a short time of Wari
predominance, although it is not clear yet. Santa Rosa Phase 4 (900 CE) is remarked by the D-shaped structure destruction. In the
other hand, orthogonal architecture, burials with different orientation, and a funerary chamber of an elite woman with Mochica patterns
appear. Evidence of ritual areas points to be the main reason to generate territorial dynamism and sociopolitical transformations from
mobility of population and the integration phenomenon that occurs in ceremonial activities. I will explore sociopolitical implications in
Mochica local elite when Santa Rosa de Pucalá got a religious prestige and became a social interaction focus.
[106]
Chair
Bracken, Justin (CUNY Graduate Center)
[265]
Maya Fortifications: Monumentality and Movement
Expanding survey coverage in recent years, using lidar along with more traditional on-the-ground and remote sensing methods, has
uncovered a more extensively constructed landscape in and around Maya sites than had been realized previously. Among the most
prominent and cohesive of these features are fortifications, once thought to be rare in the Maya world but increasingly seen to be
prevalent in a variety of regions from the Preclassic through the contact periods. As large-scale, collaborative construction projects
whose results were highly visible to the local populace, fortifications are usually monumental, and their durability ensures their
continued significance across generations and even discontinuities in occupation. They thus can function as symbols of place and
as conceptual delimiters of occupied space. Simultaneously, their physical attributes channel and restrict movement across the
terrain, as they were designed to do. The spatial implications, both for settlement patterning and physical impact upon human
movement, are investigated at Muralla de León, a small fortified site located on Lake Macanché in the Petén Lakes Region.
[265]
Chair
Bradley, Benjamin (Southern Illinois University), Joshua Cannon (Southern Illinois University), Kendra Kennedy (Southern
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      62
Illinois University), Gary Tippin (Southern Illinois University) and Kayeleigh Sharp (Southern Illinois University)
[254]
Phone-y Archaeology: Teaching Archaeology Using Mobile Apps
How might we create engaging environments that better educate and broaden the resources available in the classroom? We believe
that education must focus on creating immersive experiences for the student in modern and accessible ways. This presentation
discusses our digital applications made for mobile devices, along with our approach to immersive learning. Our VRchaeology project
utilizes the accessibility of mobile phone applications to expose the diversity of local histories and teach archaeological principles.
These applications were created with Unity and Agisoft Metashape, using augmented reality (AR), 3D virtual artifacts, 360° video,
and virtual reality (VR) to teach archaeological concepts. For the past two years, our team at SIU had concentrated on developing
two mobile applications. Thus far, we have developed apps focused on a precolumbian site in Lambayeque, Peru, the other based
on a Freedman community in southern Illinois. Using these sites as the setting, we combine the accessibility of today’s mobile
technologies with hands-on curriculum to create more enriching and localized experiences. By bringing these new tools into the
hands of learners, we expand the repertoire of archaeological pedagogy.
Bradley, Bruce (University of Exeter)
[170]
Discussant
Bradley, Cynthia (Primitive Tech Enterprises)
[73]
Partnership through Time: Forty-Five Years of Ancestral Pueblo Research with Bruce A. Bradley
In 1974, graduate student and rising archaeologist Bruce Bradley invited me, an aspiring physical anthropology undergraduate, to
join his excavation research at Wallace Ruin, an Ancestral Pueblo site in southwestern Colorado. Little did I suspect that my uptake
of this opportunity would lead to decades of joint research at this site, as well as many others. In addition to the bioarchaeological
and archaeological research opportunities I encountered thereby, decades of this intellectual, and social, partnership has given me
first-hand knowledge of the experiential and philosophical underpinnings that shaped Bruce’s research approaches. In this session
honoring Bruce Bradley’s decades of contributions to a wide range of archaeological endeavors, I utilize information from Wallace
Ruin to emphasize key points regarding his undertakings and perspectives about Ancestral Pueblo research specifically,
archaeology in general, and the role of archaeologists in the wider world.
Bradley, Erica (University of Nevada, Reno)
[66]
The Core of Western Stemmed Tradition Technology: Exploring the Role of Bifaces as Mobile Cores by Great Basin Paleoindians
Clovis artifacts have long served as the basis for understanding Paleoindian technological organization; however, recent investigations
suggest that Western Stemmed Tradition toolmakers may have employed a technological organization different than Clovis toolmakers.
For instance, some authors argue that the Western Stemmed Tradition was not centered on bifacial cores, a hallmark of Clovis
technology, but this notion has not yet been systematically tested. Research conducted over the past two seasons by University of
Nevada, Reno’s Great Basin Paleoindian Research Unit (GBPRU) at 35Ha840, a large Western Stemmed Tradition site in southeastern
Oregon, offers an opportunity to test the hypothesis that large bifaces served as mobile cores. In this poster, I examine attributes of
numerous sourced obsidian flake tools from 35Ha840 using methods defined by Eren and Andrews (2013). More broadly, my study
contributes to our understanding of Western Stemmed Tradition tool kits and how they compare to Clovis tool kits.
Bradley, Kevin (Veterans Curation Program), Erin Cagney (Veterans Curation Program) and Scott Oliver (Veterans Curation
Program)
[187]
A Landscape Revealed: Analysis of Surface Finds from Fort Delaware
From 1993 to 1996, Delaware State Park personnel conducted a shoreline survey of the quickly eroding beaches around Fort
Delaware, a Civil War prisoner camp located on Pea Patch Island in the Delaware River. By the mid-1990s, erosion exposed the
nineteenth-century landscape that had previously been buried, revealing thousands of artifacts and the foundations of several
buildings. The southeast corner of the island, just outside the fortification walls, was used by Union forces and civilians as officer’s
quarters, shops, and laborer’s shanties. The controlled survey of that area resulted in the collection of nearly 11,000 remarkably
intact artifacts, which are currently being catalogued and analyzed for the first time by the Veterans Curation Program (VCP) in
Alexandria, Virginia. This poster will present the VCP’s analysis of the ceramic assemblage recovered from the survey and discuss
what the material culture, along with the historic records, contributes to our interpretation of daily life in this unique setting.
Bradley, Kevin [187] see Oliver, Scott
Brady, James (Cal State L.A.)
[137]
Chair
Brady, James (Cal State L.A.)
[168]
Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis at Naj Tunich: The Economics of Pilgrimage Production
The largest known human gatherings occur in connection with pilgrimages, a fact not lost on the geography of religion which
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     63
recognizes the power of pilgrimage centers to be important markets and to establish infrastructure around themselves. The
economic importance of pilgrimage centers in Mesoamerica is well documented in the case of nineteenth-century Esquipulas and
Cogolludo suggests that the sacbe system in the center of Yucatán was constructed expressly for the pilgrimage traffic to Cozumel.
Ron Bishop’s neutron activation analysis of the protoclassic ceramic from Naj Tunich forcefully changed our thinking about the
ceramic and formed the basis of our recognition of a specialized ceramic production for pilgrimage.
Brady, James [137] see Saldana, Melanie
Brady, Ryan, Brad Comeau (Dudek), Loukas Barton (Dudek) and Nick Hanten (UC Davis)
[236]
Toolstone Acquisition in the Interior of California’s South-Central Coast: Raw Material Extraction in the Mid- to Late Holocene
The use of local vs. non-local toolstone sources can reveal much about past hunter-gatherer behavior. Toolstone-acquisition-related
decisions reflect past people’s settlement strategy –”mapping on” or logistically exploiting a stone resource, raw material quality, and
environmental productivity. Our sample of nine sites is an optimal geographic context within which to investigate patterns related to
toolstone acquisition in a toolstone-rich environment. In total, Dudek excavated over 40 m3 of soil and recovered over 51,000
artifacts from sites within a 4,400-acre area. The project sites demonstrated varied strategies toward accessing and using the
primary quarry sources, as well as more secondary ones. When combined with the information collected from excavated sites on
adjacent properties (specifically from the coast and interior of Vandenberg Air Force Base), these data shed light on the many ways
that raw material acquisition shapes patterns of regional hunter-gatherer settlement, subsistence, trade, and exchange.
Brady, Scott [13] see Sportman, Sarah
Brandon, Alan [19] see Sun, Nan
Brandt, Steven (University of Florida), Rachel Brown Reid (Virginia Tech University), Isabella Crevecoeur (University de
Bordeaux), Mica Jones (Washington University, St. Louis) and Marie Matu (University de Bordeaux)
[171]
Islands in the Stream: Human Reliance on Inselbergs as Islands of Resilience and Security in Arid Late Pleistocene (MIS 2) and
Holocene Somalia
Drawing upon recent lithic, faunal, bioarchaeological, and demographic analyses of curated archaeological material, our paper first
highlights hunter-gatherer use of southern Somalia’s granite inselbergs as “islands of resiliency and risk” during periods of extreme
aridity such as MIS 2 (~28–12 cal ka) and the Last Glacial Maximum. We then consider foragers’ utilization of inselbergs as relative
“islands of plenty” during the semiarid “African Humid Period” ~ 15–5 cal ka. This is followed by farmer, and pastoral use of granite
hills as “islands of food production” in the semiarid to arid Late Holocene. The paper ends with a brief discussion of the
contemporary use of inselbergs as “islands of stability and security” in an arid, war-torn world.
Brannan, Stefan (New South Associates) and Mark Smith (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers)
[132]
Reuniting Families: The Excavation and Repatriation of Burials from the Carlisle Indian School Cemetery
The Carlisle Indian Industrial School was located on the current campus of the U.S. Army Garrison in Carlisle, Pennsylvania. The
school was established in 1879 and operated until 1918. While in operation, it provided education and training to more than 10,500
Native American children in an effort to assimilate them into European American customs and culture. The Carlisle Indian School
Cemetery was established for the burial of Native American students who died while attending the school, later relocated to the
Carlisle Barracks Post Cemetery. Starting in 2017, the United States Army National Military Cemeteries (ANMC) and Corps of
Engineers (USACE) embarked upon a program to return decedents placed in the Carlisle Indian School Cemetery to their families.
In this paper, we will discuss the efforts of the ANMC/USACE to contact and coordinate with the numerous descendent families
connected to the Carlisle Indian School Cemetery, describe the protocols of the archaeological exhumation and support provided to
those families during the recovery of their loved ones, and examine how families have welcomed their kin home. We highlight the
role that Dr. Michael (Sonny) Trimble has played throughout the project. Note: No human remains will be shown or discussed.
Braswell, Geoffrey [130] see Borrero, Mario
Braswell, Geoffrey [72] see Herr, Sarah
Braswell, Geoffrey [197] see Stroth, Luke
Bray, Tamara (Wayne State University)
[61]
The Vital Matter of Food: Reflections on Material Agency and the Intersection of Matter and Meaning
It is a basic truism that food has both symbolic and material dimensions. But anthropologists have generally tended to focus on the
semantic and communicative aspects of culinary and eating practices. In this paper, I advocate for foregrounding the matter of food
and its capacity to generate not only biological effects but public and social ones, as well. The notion of trans-corporeality, hinted at
in various Andean texts and contexts, offers a potential way forward in thinking about the indivisible entanglement of the social and
material in our engagements with food. Approaching archaeologically-defined food-related assemblages from the theoretical
perspective of trans-corporeality can help to apprehend the subtle ways that biological or ecological systems entangle with social
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      64
and political ones.
Breault, Sarah (George Washington University), Jeffrey Blomster (George Washington University), Daniel Pierce
(University of Missouri Research Reactor) and Michael Glascock (University of Missouri Research Reactor)
[39]
Local and Imported Ceramics from a Feasting Assemblage at Etlatongo: Preliminary INAA Results
Instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) conducted on a late Middle Formative ceramic sample recently excavated at
Etlatongo, in the Mixteca Alta of Oaxaca, Mexico, demonstrates both local ceramic production and regional interaction with the
Valley of Oaxaca. A total of 78 vessel fragments dating to the initial Late Formative (Yucuita phase, 500–300 BCE) were recovered
from one feature at Etlatongo; of these, 30 were selected for INAA in order to test hypotheses about the origin of particular vessels
based on their suspected provenance as determined through visual analysis, with a mix of local and imported vessels, particularly
gray wares, included. INAA indicates the sample is composed of six groups, and that the vessels are predominantly of local origin.
Of 30 vessels, INAA indicates that eight grayware specimens were imported from the Valley of Oaxaca. The remainder were locally
produced, including two specimens that were left unassigned in our six groups. The presence of imported vessels and the
proportion of local versus imported ceramics from this feature, interpreted as the remains of a feasting event, illuminates
relationships between elites at this early urban center with their contemporaries in the Valley of Oaxaca.
Breiter, Sarah (Northwestern University)
[272]
The Landscape Materialized in Late Medieval Houses
Social and political ideologies are entangled in the management and control of the ecological landscape. When relations between
social institutions shift, it impacts how people interact with their local environment. In this paper, I explore how these relationships
are visible within the fabric of a building. During the sixteenth century and seventeenth century, English people were subject to
religious conflict, political change, and a shifting economic system. Earlier institutions that governed and controlled access to natural
resources had weakened toward the end of the medieval period. An emerging group of wealthy peasants, merchants, and small
landowners prospered in and around many of England’s market towns. They built, and rebuilt, their houses, benefiting from
increased access to building materials from the local landscape. This paper explores a few of the houses built in the market town of
Bury St. Edmunds. Embodied in the fabric of each building are entanglements of labor, environmental resources, and power.
[272]
Chair
Brennan, Michael [53] see King, Eleanor
Brenner Coltrain, Joan [15] see McCool, Weston
Breslawski, Ryan [55] see Jorgeson, Ian
Brewer, Jeffrey (University of Cincinnati) and Christopher Carr (University of Cincinnati)
[20]
Assessing Small Depressions as Community Quarry-Reservoirs: A Case Study from the Classic Maya Site of Yaxnohcah
Small depressions are a ubiquitous landscape feature throughout the karstic Maya lowlands. As the focus of increasing systematic
study over the past two decades, these features have been assessed as serving various roles in household activities among the
Classic period Maya. Ongoing archaeological and remote sensing research from the site of Yaxnohcah in southern Campeche,
Mexico, examines the location, dimensions, origin, and function of eight of these depressions. Excavation data indicates that at least
some of these water tanks (N=5) evolved from quarries, which were lined with a watertight seal following the extraction of limestone
for building material. Lidar-directed pedestrian survey identified many additional depressions suitable for water storage, and
displaying evidence of quarrying activity, close to residential structures. Supplementary water management and residential data
from Yaxnohcah emphasize the spatial and temporal relationships between quarrying, construction, settlement, and water storage
at the site throughout the Classic period.
Bria, Rebecca (Boston University)
[174]
Temples and Tombs, Fields and Feasts, Pots and People: Shaping a New Social World after Chavín in Highland Ancash, Peru
During the period of Chavín’s religious and cultural dominance (900–500/400 BC), Andean social life was broadly shaped through
interactions between religious devotees and priests, the key ritual objects and materials they brought together in temple spaces, and
the stone deities in these places who mediated, if not controlled, order in the world. This paper examines the material actions
through which people at Hualcayán (highland Ancash, Peru) constructed a new social world after Chavín. In particular, it considers
how they created a new grounds for sociality between particular people, places, things, and deities during the Huarás phase (400–1
BC), and how these practices both explicitly contrasted and directly built upon the social relationships that undergirded Chavín
society. Through a consideration of a wide variety of evidence, including Hualcayán’s temple spaces, burial practices, ritual foods,
ceramic forms, and feasting materials, this paper explores the methods and moments that were critical to bringing a new society into
being, as well as defining who and what were essential to its creation.
Bridgman Sweeney, Kara (Georgia Southern University), Lilith Logan (Telfair Museums) and Raymond Phipps (Georgia
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     65
Southern University)
[259]
Reconciling Histories of Urban Enslaved Persons in Antebellum Savannah
The historical and archaeological record concerning plantation-based enslaved persons in the United States is extensive, but
interdisciplinary research regarding urban enslaved persons in Savannah (Georgia) is lacking. Recent salvage archaeology
fieldwork focused on spaces immediately adjacent to the original subfloor kitchen of an extant building in the heart of the Savannah
National Landmark Historic District. We compare archaeological evidence at a former private residence (ca. 1819–1875), to archival
documentation for persons and activities at the property. Previous archival research indicates that Juddy Telfair, an enslaved cook
and servant, was present at the property beginning ca. 1832. Researchers identified changes over time in varied suites of cultural
material, working within and away from a builder’s trench. We documented patterns of refuse disposal that are not in keeping with
City ordinances in the pre-Emancipation era. Excavations to the base of the subfloor kitchen produced a large sample of
Colonoware pottery (including rim, body, and base sherds). We also examined patterns in food remains (e.g., oyster, fish, chicken,
cow, goat, and pig) from these same depths. These cultural deposits correspond to Juddy Telfair’s documented period of service at
the property.
Briggs, Emily (University of Minnesota), Lia Betti (University of Roehampton), Todd Rae (University of Roehampton),
George Kamenov (University of Florida) and John Krigbaum (University of Florida)
[159]
A Multi-Isotopic Approach for Estimating the Geographic Origin of Individuals Buried in the Late Saxon Cemetery at Priory Orchard,
England
This study seeks to address questions concerning migration using a multi-isotopic approach as it applies to the late Saxon (ninth–
thirteenth centuries) cemetery of Priory Orchard in Surrey County, Southeast England. Using the results from this analysis, the
effectiveness of a multi-isotopic approach for reconstructing mobility within this context will be evaluated. The site of Priory Orchard
was first noted in 2007 and excavated in 2014 by The Surrey County Archaeological Unit, and the human remains are currently
being housed at the University of Roehampton, London. Analysis of the remains is ongoing, but thus far over 300 individuals have
been identified. A random sample representative of the entire population was collected, consisting of 83 teeth including incisors,
canines, premolars, and molars from a combination of males, females, adults, and juveniles. A sub-sample of 50 tooth enamel
samples were taken for preliminary analysis with a preference for molars from individuals of known age and sex. All 50 samples
were analyzed for carbon and oxygen, and of these, 24 samples were also analyzed for strontium and lead. The results of this study
indicate that most individuals have a local isotopic signal, but with some individuals displaying values that could potentially indicate
non-local origins
Bright, Lisa
[153]
Discussant
Brighton, Nancy
[132]
The Right Thing to Do: Reestablishing Relationships for New York City’s African Burial Ground
In 1991, the New York African Burial Ground was rediscovered as part of the construction of a federal office building in lower
Manhattan, setting the stage for intense and extensive discussions not only about slavery and the lives of enslaved people in
colonial New York, but also about collaboration with the public and descendant communities as part of federal archaeology projects.
After a decade of analysis and research, there was sporadic planning for the final publication of reports, the reinterment of the
individuals, and the site’s memorialization. Ineffective communication between the federal government, the public, and the Howard
University research team, and changes in leadership at the General Services Administration and the research team occurred as
new discoveries pulled everyone in other directions. The project remained in limbo. Originally requested to help with another site,
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, under the direction of Sonny Trimble, was asked to develop a plan with the researchers, the
federal government, and the public to bring the story of the African Burial Ground home to New York City. Concentrating on the
common goal of reburial and remembrance, the Corps reconnected everyone to finally realize this goal.
Britt, Krystal (University of Illinois, Chicago)
[79]
Geochemical Analysis of Mogollon Brown Ware from the Middle Little Colorado River Valley, Northern Arizona
This poster explores Pueblo III period (1125–1275 C.E.) ceramic production practices in and around the middle Little Colorado River
valley of northern Arizona. Groups occupying the region during the Pueblo III period maintained highly diverse ceramic interaction
networks; however, utility ware assemblages at regional Pueblo III sites are almost universally dominated by Mogollon Brown
Wares. I explore Mogollon Brown Ware production practices using a combination of archaeometric techniques, including laser
ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) and petrographic analysis. To date 292 ceramic sherds
(corrugated Mogollon Brown ware) and 10 local clay samples from seven Pueblo III sites have been analyzed using laser ablation-
inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) and 55 ceramic sherds and clay samples have been subjected to
petrographic analysis. In this poster I summarize the results of these analyses and explore the possibility of local production
practices and unique intraregional manufacturing traditions.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    66
Britt, Tad, David Watt (Tulane University and NCPTT), Kory Konsoer (Louisiana State University), Mark Rees (University of
Louisiana, Lafayette) and Samuel Huey (University of Louisiana, Lafayette)
[9]
Risk Analysis and Mitigation Strategies for Anthropogenic Disasters along Louisiana’s Gulf Coast
Anthropogenic disasters in the Mississippi River Delta have overwhelmed conventional resource management. Coastal erosion,
subsidence, and sea-level rise are rapidly obliterating the archaeological record along Louisiana’s Gulf Coast. A multi-institutional
consortium for Mississippi River Delta Archaeological Mitigation (MRDAM) has developed a risk assessment matrix resulting in
strategies to stem the ongoing loss of cultural heritage. Data recovery, salvage, site triage, regional sampling, mitigation banking,
and creative mitigation represent alternative measures to be pursued in consultation and partnership with Native American tribes
and coastal communities.
Brochado De Almeida, Pedro
[108]
Bagunte: Learning Behaviors from Reconstruction and Excavation
The work of excavation and reconstruction of the Cividade de Bagunte’s Iron Age extant structures has revealed traces of earlier
structures and refuse pits that provide new evidence and challenge previous interpretations. Similarly, the work of reconstruction
and conservation has confronted us with ethical and practical dilemmas. This paper discusses how the new evidence and
reconstruction techniques provide information about past human behavior.
Brock, Amanda (University of Florida) and Rosario Beatriz Pajuelo Montes (Representative of Caraz Cultura Association)
[57]
Time Narratives of Community Relationships with the Archaeological Site of Tumshukaiko
Archaeological sites are dynamic spaces that continue to be modified and transformed through the present by contemporary
environments and communities who engage with them in their everyday lives. Interactions include tourism, looting, ceremonies,
local historical documentation, site occupation, or storytelling of lived experiences at or around the site. By documenting these
interactions and paying attention to the local relationship with the site, archaeologists may gain insight into both contemporary site
transformation processes and local issues concerning the protection and preservation of the archaeological site. The following paper
focuses on the local histories and contemporary interactions of the archaeological site of Tumshukaiko, which is a Late Archaic/
Early Formative period (2500/2000BC) site (Bueno 2005, 49) that has been occupied for much of the Holocene through the present.
Its located in the Callejon de Huaylas of Ancash, Peru and just north of the small city of Caraz in a high tourist region and dynamic
environment. When considering future research plans at the site, the documentation of these stories of interaction plays a significant
role in understanding contemporary and recent historical changes, identifying community issues as the basis for collaboration, and
reinforcing community identity and values with the archaeological site.
Brodbeck, Mark [142] see Stewart, Caitlin
Broderick, Lee [62] see Houle, Jean-Luc
Brody, Rachel [56] see Mills, Rebekah
Brook, George [198] see Franco, Nora
Brooks, Allyson
[116]
Moderator
Brooks, Lauren
[165]
From Boom Town to Ghost Town: The Historical Significance and Cultural Impacts of Harquahala Mine
Gold and silver deposits hidden in Arizona’s desert landscape have had a tremendous impact on the history and culture of the state.
As prospectors discovered gold and silver near the Colorado and Gila Rivers, word of desert riches spread and itinerant miners
followed mere rumors of strikes throughout Arizona, venturing out into the remote hillsides. Boom town after boom town materialized
across Arizona’s desert and the population of the new territory quadrupled between 1860 and 1870. Some of these settlements
turned into thriving communities that are still “booming” today out in the desert, far from major metropolitan cities. Others were
ephemeral, thriving only while precious metals could be pulled from the earth. In either instance, these boom towns greatly impacted
the development of Arizona, both geographically and culturally. My paper will focus on these ephemeral settlements, centering on
the Little Harquahala Mining District and Townsite. By highlighting Harquahala and recent surveys conducted at the site, I will
demonstrate how it affected and continues to impact the culture and history of Arizona- both in its infancy as a boom town and today
as a ghost town, drawing in both locals and travelers to interact with its history.
[165]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        67
Brooks, Lauren [56] see Mills, Rebekah
Brotherson, David (University of Sydney)
[28]
Commerce, the Capital, and Community: Trade Ceramics, Settlement Patterns, and Continuity throughout the Demise of Angkor
The conventional narrative for Angkor’s decline, based solely on textual sources, is problematic. While the impact of various
environmental, political, cultural, and economic factors is debated, the date range and manner in which Angkor depopulated are yet
to be identified archaeologically. Traditionally, studies of Angkor have focused on architecture, statuary, and epigraphy. More
recently, research has considered the environment, landscape and nonelite forms of material culture. This research focuses on
ceramics as a proxy for residential occupation and identifies temporal and spatial patterning in a representative assemblage. From
2012 to 2014 the Greater Angkor Project conducted the first systematic survey of the habitation mounds of Angkor, from the urban
core to the periphery. A surface collection of diagnostic ceramics was collected. The bulk of the material was Khmer, but tradewares
from China, Thailand, and Vietnam function as crucial temporal markers, especially for the post-fourteenth century. Ceramics
analysis confirms a significant drop in cultural material in the fifteenth–sixteenth centuries, and an influx of lower quality utilitarian
wares in the eighteenth–nineteenth centuries. While Angkor may have lost its strategic importance, a residual population still
engaged with an international trade network as it flourished.
Brouwer Burg, Marieka (University of Vermont)
[14]
Modeling Preceramic Occupation around the Wetlands of the Low-Lying Coastal Zone
The Preceramic period in Mesoamerica (c. 7000–2000 BCE) is often characterized as a transition from hunter-gatherer Paleo-
Americans to emergent farming communities. Most Preceramic finds occur on the surface and lack archaeological context.
However, during a 2017 field season a dense in situ Preceramic deposit was identified at the Crawford Bank site on the shore of the
Crooked Tree Lagoon in the low-lying coastal zone of northern Belize. This site contains a rich and distinctive deposit of Preceramic
stone tools and freshwater shell artifacts suggesting that these foragers adapted uniquely to this regional wetland microenvironment
which lacks arable land but is rich with fish, Mollusca, and durable Logwood resources. Lithic use-ware analysis suggests wood-
working activities and finds of a barbed Lowe point (likely hafted to throwing/thrusting wooden spears) suggests spearfishing
activities. Combining the archaeology with multiple geospatial technologies, the evolution and nature of these intimate human-
environment interactions is examined. Modeling a range of paleoenvironmental data against the distribution of Preceramic tools
from Crawford Bank and other parts of this low-lying coastal zone provides a potential means for predicting where fishing and
incipient agriculture developed, in some cases separately, as key adaptive strategies during this transitional period in prehistory.
Brown, Alexander (Panamerican Consultants)
[231]
“Party Theory” and the CRM Dataset
“Party Theory”, as presented here, draws from a performance-based perspective, seeking to integrate localized social behavior of
individuals in virtually instantaneous timeframes (essentially “events”) within interactive frameworks at broader scales. The mico-
scalar definition of inter-personal interaction and the material engaged in this activity seeks to understand a more or less real-time
attribution of significance to material; it is hoped that this understanding will inform the scholar’s attribution of significance to
materials, which forms the basis of more economistic network models of interaction at the inter-regional scale over the longue-
duree. This approach can make singular use of the massive dataset provided by American cultural resource management; for
example, temporal sites of historic farm buildings and pre-contact lithic scatters rarely see intensive academic investigation, yet can
provide insights into how certain materials can incite or enable the inter-personal interaction that aggregates into the broader flow of
social activity over time. This paper explores the possibilities of populating our macro-historical frameworks with the real activity of
isolated events.
Brown, Clifford [126] see Neff, Hector
Brown, David (University of Texas, Austin)
[201]
Squaring the Circle: Settlement Planning in the Late Prehistoric Northern Ecuadorian Highlands
While urban planning is present in many early state societies, pre-state settlement planning is not uncommon in chiefdoms, as seen
in Mississippian societies of the southeastern U.S. In Ecuador, planned arrangements of circular mounds can be seen on the
coastal plain and the western slopes, though little is understood of their functional relationship to those societies. The near absence
of excavated village areas in the northern sierra of Ecuador limits the study of village planning but occasional clustering of
Integration period mounds between AD 700 and 1500 suggests these features could mirror aspects of social organization. Late
Integration planning in the large monumental center at Cochasquí and contemporaneous sites might reflect still more complex social
developments during the latter part of that period. In these cases, the planned integration of mounds into agricultural spaces and the
integration of truncated pyramids into larger, coherent complexes imply an increasingly hierarchical society. If the construction of
monumental centers were intended to impress the citizenry and attract new adherents, then Cochasquí may well have been in
competition with large rival centers like Zuleta to strengthen their regional power bases during the stressed environments of the
Early Little Ice Age in northern highland Ecuador.
[201]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     68
Brown, David [201] see Ortiz, Byron
Brown, Emily (Aspen CRM Solutions)
[266]
“They Made Many Tunes”: Musical Instruments of the Pueblo Peoples of the Northern Rio Grande Valley
The distributions of different types of musical instruments across the American Southwest have been generally defined, but little
work has been done to tie these data to studies of ethnogenesis, migration, and language groups. This paper examines
archaeological, musicological, ethnographic, and historical data on instruments from archaeological sites from the Four Corners
area and northern New Mexico in the context of what is known about the movement of different culture and language groups. It
presents a more fine-grained analysis of instruments such as wooden and bone flutes, bone whistles, bone and shell tinklers, gourd
rattles, clay and stone bells, and bone rasps as they relate to the language groups of the Pueblo peoples of the northern and middle
Rio Grande Valley.
Brown, Erin (Carson National Forest), Maria Jonsson (Carson National Forest) and Travis Kern (Carson National Forest)
[214]
Then and Now: A Photographic Essay of the Civilian Conservation Corps on the Carson National Forest
After the Great Depression the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) was needed to help citizens across the United States regain their
economic footing and help the environment recover from overuse and devastating drought. It was a time of great change for both
the American People and the environment that would continue to affect the lives of following generations. This photographic essay
is a comparison of historic and modern photographs, and sketch maps collected throughout the past 86 years of CCC camps and
CCC work projects on the West Zone of the Carson National Forest, New Mexico. These recordings give us a snapshot in time that
improve our understanding of how these men shaped the world around them, how land management was changed during and after
the Great Depression, and how the CCC had a lasting impact on the landscape.
Brown, James (Washington State University), Douglas McFarland (Pacific Northwest National Laboratory), Zach Allen
(Central Washington University) and Steven Hackenberger (Central Washington University)
[8]
Early Holocene Paleosol and Associated Sea Level Estimate for the Southern Salish Sea of the Central Northwest Coast
Early Holocene Salish Sea levels ranged from 10–15 m below current sea level. Sea level rose sharply before 7,000 years ago and
then slowed. Sea levels are better documented for the Gulf of Georgia than the Puget Sound. Reports in 2014, originating from the
construction of a light rail transit system in Tacoma, Washington, proposed that cordage found in drill cuttings was associated with a
7,800-year-old paleosol, deeply buried below marine sediments and the 5,700-year-old Mount Rainier lahar deposits (Osceola
Mudflow). In 2016, six additional boreholes recovered no artifacts. In situ sediment samples from those boreholes were analyzed
using magnetic susceptibility (MS), particle size analysis, and XRF. Data confirmed that a mature paleosol is buried at a maximum
depth of 25 m below surface, and a more recent paleosol is buried 3 m below surface. MS and other data suggest that the deeper
mature paleosol developed over a period of 3,000 years. Sea levels for this locale during the early Holocene may have been 3–4 m
lower than previously proposed. These findings must be reconciled with the 1.5–4 m subsidence hypothesized for locales south of
the Tacoma Fault Zone 1,000 years ago.
Brown, James (Northwestern University)
[47]
A Brief History of Mississippian Period Art Styles in the American Southeast
Focused stylistic analysis over the past 60 years has made clear that graphic depiction of the creator forces became a vehicle of
artistic expression for southeastern societies. Between 1200 and 1400 expression was nearly ubiquitous by including, without being
confined to, pottery surfaces, marine shell, sheet copper, and stone sculpture. Distinct styles arose within major territorial spaces
that entered into “conversations” with each other. Thus structural parallels arose. Each was tied to a distinct life-world that was not
interchangeable with others. These life-worlds are subject to analysis.
Brown, Jordan [140] see Maher, Lisa
Brown, Kaitlin (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[239]
Exploring the Waning Spanish Frontier at Mission La Purísima Concepcíon
Although often viewed as one phase in California history, the Mission period encompasses multiple social and economic shifts that
had transformative effects on local indigenous populations. Whereas the initial goal of the Spanish mission system was to make
indigenous peoples into loyal subjects, new policies under Mexican rule called for social equity among all ethnic groups—as outlined
in historical documents such as the “Plan de Iguala.” In this paper, I explore how the Chumash of south-central California navigated
these crucial shifts in colonial policy using archaeological materials from Mission La Purísima Concepcíon located in Lompoc,
California. Previous research has identified two distinct stratigraphic/chronological contexts that date to both these periods. Using
existing collections and recent archaeological investigations during the summer of 2019, I discuss similarities and differences in
labor practices, trade and exchange, and spatial organization among the single Chumash community that lived at the Mission over
time.
Brown, Kaitlin [239] see Rotella, Brianna
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        69
Brown, Kelly [187] see Howe, David
Brown, Kenneth
[40]
Sampling for Snails at Genevieve Lykes Duncan
Snails are moisture-sensitive organisms, so systematic sampling for snails was done in 2013 as part of the multiproxy set of
paleoenvironmental studies done at Genevieve Lykes Duncan. A 2.74 m long column of sediment samples was collected from the
arroyo wall, extending from the surface to below the principal occupation zone. The column spans the entire Holocene, but cuts only
partway into the lower gravel bar, not penetrating Younger Dryas sediments. Thirty samples at 10 cm intervals produced 451 kg of
analyzed sediment and 874 specimens, wet-sieved through nested 2 mm, 1 mm, and 0.5 mm sieves. Specimen density is low
(about 2 sp/l), taxonomic diversity is low (7 taxa), no large-bodied terrestrial taxa are present, and at least three of the four terrestrial
taxa are arid-tolerant habitat generalists; among these, age profiles vary by species. Aquatic taxa (nearly all juveniles) are present
only in the bottom half of the profile, disappearing in the upper gravel. Like the terrestrial taxa, these are resilient habitat generalists,
suggesting the creek consisted of shallow, stagnant pools with low flow. This study suggests this lowland basin aridified quite early
in the Holocene, earlier than surrounding higher elevation regions.
Brown, Linda [127] see Jackson, Sarah
Brown, M. Kathryn (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[158]
Preclassic Foundations in the Mopan River Valley, Belize
Our understanding of the Preclassic landscape in the Mopan River valley has increased dramatically over the past two decades
suggesting a more robust population present than previously thought. Our earliest evidence of human occupation in the Mopan
valley dates to the archaic period. Early ceramic producing communities were present by 1000 BC as seen from Cunil phase
ceramics found deeply buried at Xunantunich, Actuncan, and hinterland sites. Early public architecture in the form of E Groups
emerge on the landscape during the Middle Preclassic period as seen at Early Xunantunich and Las Ruinas de Arenal. During the
Late Preclassic, E Groups and other monumental architecture become more widespread laying the foundation for Classic period
construction efforts. This paper presents our current understanding of the Preclassic landscape and charts the pathways to
complexity in the Mopan valley.
[158]
Chair
Brown, M. Kathryn [158] see Horowitz, Rachel
Brown, M. Kathryn [185] see Yaeger, Jason
Brown, Mary
[60]
Rock Art Communication Processes: Reconceptualizing Form, Function, and Framework
Rock art is an artifact, yet it is analyzed as artwork. Two-dimensional forms confound many traditional archaeological methods.
Thus, research questions are restricted to formal attributes and the stylistic comparison of subject matter. As a result, rock art sites
are largely ignored by the archaeological community in favor of those possessing 3D artifacts such as lithics, ceramics, and
architecture. This has direct implications for constructing a viable methodology to tackle questions about rock art production and
use. Rock art acts as a conduit for human/object, human/location, and human/nonhuman communication processes. Evaluating
such processes necessitates reconceptualizing rock art as an image-object. Behavioral Communication Theory presents the best
framework for analyzing the artifact’s visual and non-visual performance characteristics as communication processes. The broad
applicability of the framework is demonstrated by comparing two rock sites in southern New Mexico. This comparative analysis
reveals how a behavioral communication approach allows us to break free from the limitations of 2D approaches to tap the data
potential of rock art sites in New Mexico, and beyond.
Brown, Matthew [61] see Belisle, Veronique
Brown, Robert [104] see Tanasi, Davide
Brown Reid, Rachel [171] see Brandt, Steven
Browne, Cameron [175] see Crist, Walter
Brunelle, Andrea [66] see Hart, Isaac
Bruniaux, Guillaume [107] see Lueth, Friedrich
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         70
Bruno, Maria (Dickinson College), Christine Hastorf (University of California, Berkeley), Sherilyn Fritz (University of
Nebraska), José Capriles (Penn State University) and Alejandra Domic (Penn State University)
[59]
Persistence in the Face of Change: Integrating Paleoenvironmental and Archaeological Datasets from the Southern Lake Titicaca
Basin of Bolivia
The southern basin of Lake Titicaca is a key location for paleoenvironmental and archaeological research into past human-climate
dynamics in the Andes. This shallow basin is particularly sensitive to climate change: in dry periods the lake level falls, in wet periods it
rises. The basis is also rich in archaeological sites dating to the first settled agro-pastoral communities 4,000 years ago through the
development of complex societies, particularly the Tiwanaku state. The first generation of researchers here documented broad trends in
climate and societal change. Here we integrate fine-grained datasets of diatoms from lake cores as well as patterns in plant and animal
remains recovered from excavations by the Taraco Archaeological Project. Rather than attempt to identify where major changes “match
up” between datasets at particular moments in time, we take a broader look at the tempo and scales of change that people and
landscape in the basin experienced between 4,000 and 500 years ago. We find that high variability in wet/dry climates and lake levels
was actually the norm across this time; yet, we find the construction of a socioenvironmental system characterized by the persistence
and resilience of subsistence practices, particularly through a combination of fishing, herding, and farming.
Bruno, Maria (Dickinson College)
[88]
Discussant
Brunso, Karen
[49]
Control Alt Repatriate: Using NAGPRA CUI Regulations to Regain Our Culture
The NAGPRA CUI regulations provide a key tool for tribes to repatriate their ancestors. CUI allows tribes to use their traditional
knowledge to show their connection to their ancestors in the NAGPRA process. This traditional knowledge has made some
archaeologists very uncomfortable due to the lack of “scientific data” to provide a connection to collections. However, the CUI
regulations affirm that the connection tribes feel to these ancestors is significant and cannot be ignored. Through CUI’s affirmation,
tribes are beginning to take control of their ancestors and their culture.
Bruwelheide, Karin [173] see Owsley, Douglas
Bryant, Jeff (SUNY Albany) and Jeffrey Glover (Georgia State University)
[271]
Comparing Coastal Subsistence and Inland Trade of Marine Fish, Using Otoliths from the Ancient Maya Sites of Mayapán and Vista
Alegre
Otoliths, or fish ear-stones, offer tremendous data potential on fish species, coastal ecology, fish demography, and the harvest
behaviors of ancient people. To explore which species may be selected for inland transport versus coastal consumption, this paper
compares the species composition of fish at Mayapán, with those collected at the site of Vista Alegre, excavated by the Proyecto
Costa Escondida. Issues of differential preservation and recovery methods are explored, with a focus on otolith-to-body-size ratios
of fish are affected by ecosystem type, and how the species recovered can affect our understanding of available fishing technology
and behaviors. Recommendations will be offered on future directions for archaeological otolith studies.
[271]
Chair
Bryant, Paula [213] see Meierhoff, James
Bryant, Paula [160] see Porubcan, Paula
Bryce, Joseph (Brigham Young University), Spencer Lambert (Southern Methodist University) and Brady Robbins
[148]
Worked Bone Gaming Pieces among the Fremont: A Case Study from Wolf Village, Utah
Worked bone gaming pieces likely served an important role at Fremont communal structures. In this research, we present our
findings on recreating the life history of Fremont gaming pieces at Wolf Village, a habitation site in northern Utah. Previous studies
have hypothesized that the Fremont at Wolf Village blended both gaming and ritual. The context of the Wolf Village gaming pieces
supports this hypothesis, since many gaming pieces were expediently made and deposited within a thick midden overlying a large
communal structure at the site. By evaluating the life history of Fremont worked bone gaming pieces—including recreating their
stages of production, potential uses, and disposal contexts—archaeologists can better understand the function of these artifacts
among the Fremont.
Bryce, William [229] see Harte, Marybeth
Bryce, William [69] see Whittaker, John
Bryne, Stephen (ICF) and Shane Sparks (ICF)
[252]
The Pitas Point Site: A Chumash Village Site in Ventura County, California
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      71
The Pitas Point site (CA-VEN-27/240), a named Chumash village during the late prehistoric period, is located on the southern
central coast of California. First recorded in 1960, the site was excavated by a team from the University of California Los Angeles in
1969–1970 for the realignment of the U.S. 101 highway. A full excavation report was never produced but a summary article of the
previous work and results was published in 1983 (Gamble 1983). Recently, archaeologists from ICF revisited the site during the
Seacliff Siding Project conducted for the Federal Rail Authority and the California Department of Transportation, District 7. The site
was in danger of being impacted by the construction of a railroad track siding by the Union Pacific Railroad (UP). Following a study
and recommendations by ICF, UP redesigned the project and shortened the siding in order to avoid the site. The authors and the
paper discuss the ethnographic and environmental setting of this important Chumash village site and summarize the previous
investigations conducted at the site and the recent project.
Buchanan, Briggs (University of Tulsa), Danielle Macdonald (University of Tulsa) and Kyleigh Royal (University of Tulsa)
[17]
Evaluating the Effects of Parallax in Archaeological Geometric Morphometric Analyses
Geometric morphometrics is a powerful set of techniques that can be used to visualize and analyze the shape of artifacts. With the
growing use of GM in archaeology it is critical to understand limitations in the way it used in our field. One such potential limitation is
parallax, or the effect of the position of an object in relation to the camera. We designed an experiment to assess the effect of
increasing parallax by photographing artifacts at close range (50 cm) and systematically shifting the fixed angle of the camera in four
steps: 0º, 5º, 10º, and 20º. We took digital images of 30 microlith artifacts from three Jordanian sites at each of the camera angles.
We then digitized the outline of each artifact using 24 landmarks. Our subsequent discriminate analyses of microlith shapes grouped
by camera angle shows that they are statistically indistinguishable from each other, which suggests that within these parameters
parallax has little effect. While taking digital images directly above artifacts is ideal, the angle at which previously published
photographs of artifacts is sometimes unknown. Our findings suggest that this is not problematic, as variation in camera angle does
not significantly alter images for use in GM analyses.
Buchanan, Briggs [26] see Hamilton, Marcus
Buchanan, Briggs [232] see Mraz, Veronica
Buchanan, Briggs [236] see O’Brien, Michael
Buchanan, Meghan (Auburn University)
[70]
Discussant
Buck, Caitlin and James Zeidler (Colorado State University)
[24]
Tephrostratigraphic Correlation and Ceramic Seriation in Bayesian Calibration: A Case Study from Coastal Ecuador
The radiocarbon record from sustained archaeological field research in the Jama Valley of coastal Ecuador has provided a robust
dataset for Bayesian chronological modeling using multiple archaeological sites from a valley-wide landscape (Buck et al.
1996:226–232; Zeidler et al., 1998; Buck and Zeidler, in prep.). This paper delves into greater detail on the development of the
model’s prior probabilities that utilized iterative multi-site stratigraphic sampling coupled with ceramic seriation for correlating key
events (volcanic ashfalls) and longer phases of cultural occupation across the valley landscape over 3,600 calendar years. While
correlation of three principal volcanic ashfalls (tephras) was straightforward in most cases and greatly aided in the initial Bayesian
modeling, recent tephrochronological studies on a macroregional scale have identified additional tephras in the Holocene
stratigraphic sequence of the Jama Valley that are not readily identifiable in sampled archaeological contexts. Two possible reasons
for this are identified, the first being closely spaced volcanic eruptions, depositing different tephras in rapid succession, and the
second being cryptotephras in archaeological contexts that may have resulted from human disturbance processes. Potential
solutions are proposed that involve new techniques for in-field analysis of volcanic sediments using hand-held laser-induced
breakdown spectroscopy and/or X-ray fluorescence instrumentation.
[24]
Chair
Buck, Caitlin
[135]
Discussant
Buck, Caitlin [24] see Moody, Bryony
Buckley, Hallie [62] see Vlok, Melandri
Buckley, Michael [212] see Harvey, Virginia
Buckley, Michael [244] see Johnston, Elizabeth
Buckley, Michael [120] see Pal Chowdhury, Manasij
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     72
Budar, Lourdes (Universidad Veracruzana), Sara Ladrón de Guevara (Universidad Veracruzana) and Mauricio Cuevas
(Universidad Veracru)
[227]
El pluralismo cultural de Los Tuxtlas a través de sus conjuntos escultóricos
La sierra de Los Tuxtlas, se encuentra ubicada al sur del actual estado Veracruz. Investigaciones arqueológicas recientes han
demostrado que existe un complejo sistema portuario prehispánico que se interconecta a través de todo el Golfo de México.
Durante el desarrollo de esas investigaciones se han registrado evidencias arqueológicas que permiten identificar una variabilidad
muy marcada de patrones culturales provenientes de diferentes partes de la Costa del Golfo. En este trabajo se discutirán los
rasgos estilísticos y los contextos del corpus escultórico de la porción oriental de Los Tuxtlas, con el objetivo de distinguir atributos
que nos permitan diferenciar y asociarlos a diversas tradiciones de representación durante el periodo Clásico mesoamericano, con
el fin de evidenciar los procesos de pluralismo cultural en la región.
Buehlman-Barbeau, Savanna [243] see Carline, Kristin
Buenger, Brent [62] see Gardner, William
Buffington, Abigail (William & Mary)
[125]
Palm Reading: Palm Tree Stands as Cultural Landscapes in Arid Zones
Palm trees are the anchor species that enable agro-systems to work in arid environments, like South Arabia. These plants thrive in
hot, dry climates with high water tables, where they create microclimates (lowering the evapotranspiration, improving soil infiltration,
and increasing nutrient integration within soils). These altered growing conditions support other vegetation, much of which would
otherwise fail to survive under the general conditions. Recently, agronomists in the Arabian Gulf region have explored the potential
of palm-founded oases to combat processes of desertification. In addition to creating the conditions supporting food production,
these trees are exploited for a high number of consumptive and craft practices, often maintaining a high cultural value. How old are
these landscape systems? These social systems? Biologists are still determining the biogeography, and where appropriate the
domestication history, of most palms through DNA analyses. In South Arabia, there are at least four native palms (Phoenix,
Hyphaene, Nannorrhops, and Livistona), all with ethnographic evidence of exploitation. This paper will present new palm
morphotype identifications from a phytolith (amorphous silica plant proxies, deposited in sediments post decay) study conducted on
paleoenvironmental and archaeological samples from southeastern Yemen and dating to the Arabian Neolithic (10–5 kya).
Buikstra, Jane [169] see Bey, Bridget
Buikstra, Jane [264] see Doubles, Catherine
Buikstra, Jane [260] see Schach, Emily
Bukhchuluun, Dashzeveg [62] see Janz, Lisa
Buller, Justin and Andrea Gregory
[132]
Challenges in the Recovery of Historic Military Cemeteries
In 2013 the City of New York discovered two abandoned Army cemeteries directly in the path of critical infrastructure projects and
requested that the Army take responsibility for recovery of the persons buried in the cemetery. Headquarters Department of the
Army (Office of Army Cemeteries) responded by having Dr. Michael “Sonny” Trimble lead the effort to promptly recover the remains
in a dignified manner. This paper focuses on the complexities and challenges of executing such a challenging project due to limited
budgets, extremely tight time frames, the very public location of the cemeteries, and numerous players involved in the planning and
execution.
Bullion, Elissa (University of Pittsburgh) and Sean Greer (University of Missouri)
[261]
Perceptions and Care of Disability in Early Islamic Central Asia
In this paper, we apply an index of care approach to a case study of an individual with Progressive Pseudorheumatodi Dysplasia
from an early Islamic cemetery at the site of Tashbulak in southeastern Uzbekistan. Joint degeneration and progressive
impingement of nerves would have severely limited individual TBK_Br08’s ability to eat, drink, and stay clean. We situate this
individual’s needed care within the context of Islamic philosophy and contemporary medical approaches with regards to disabled
individuals. The Qur’an and Sunnah address not only the importance of caring for ‘disadvantaged people’ by all Muslims, but also
their rights within society, including marriage and ownership of property. The Tashbulak individual was cared for over a period of
several years, and despite requiring increasing levels of care, and lived at least into early adulthood. In death, TBK_Br08 was buried
according to Islamic prescription, in the same manner as other, non-disabled individuals at Tashbulak. Much research on early Islam
in Central Asia focuses on the where and when of the religion’s spread. This paper examines the human dimension of early Islam in
Central Asia, and creates a framework for future studies of disability in the early Islamic world.
Bunce, Michael [19] see Linderholm, Anna
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    73
Buonasera, Tammy (University of California, Davis)
[83]
Considering Women’s Tech Choices: Grinding Efficiency and Performance Characteristics of Hunter-Gatherer Milling Tools
Milling tools were a cornerstone of many plant-based hunter-gatherer economies. Women are often involved in food processing and
would have used these tools, in some cases daily, to expand the breadth of foods available for consumption. Despite their important
economic role, few studies have compared differences in the performance of various ground stone designs common to hunter-
gatherers in California, or elsewhere. Here, experimental small seed and acorn/nut processing rates are compared for three mortar
and two grinding slab designs. Results indicate some unexpected relationships between different interior mortar shapes and seed
processing. In particular, large mortars with deep and broad interiors are highly effective tools for producing flour from both small
wild seeds and acorns. Though expensive to manufacture and transport, mortars with large bowl-shaped interiors would have been
excellent for long-term use in settings where multiple types of plant resources were processed into finer particles. Conical mortar
shapes are good for acorn processing, but poor for processing small seeds into flour. Shallow mortars and small grinding slabs are
the least productive but least expensive tools.
[83]
Chair
Buonasera, Tammy [83] see Goring, Daniel
Buonasera, Tammy [83] see Zhang, Peiqi
Burentogtokh, Ja [62] see Gardner, William
Burger, Rachel (Southern Methodist University)
[129]
Birds as Thought: Avifauna and Coalescence at Sapa’owingeh in Northern New Mexico
The diversification of avifauna in Pueblo IV (AD 1300–1600) assemblages is widely recognized as a marker of the ceremonial
elaboration that accompanied the coalescence of groups into large ancestral Pueblo settlements. Archaeologists have argued that
such rituals were integrative, but this assumption downplays the ecological aspects of religion and the context within which it
developed. Using perspectives derived from zooarchaeology and ethnobiology, this paper examines the relationship between birds
and humans at Sapa’owingeh (LA306), an ancestral Tewa site in northern New Mexico. Analysis of the faunal assemblage shows
that birds were food, had ritual meaning, and supplied the tools for ritual acts. Avifauna diversity and use was highest leading up to
peak occupation, supporting the use of birds for community security in late prehistoric Pueblo populations. These patterns can
further our understanding of Tewa animal management, ritual practices, and of birds as an expression of Tewa worldview.
Burger, Richard (Yale University)
[174]
Discussant
Burger, Richard [182] see Salazar, Lucy
Burgio-Ericson, Klinton (University of New Mexico)
[165]
Pecking in Strange Places: Rock Art and Seventeenth-Century Zuni Missions
Prehistoric rock art of the Southwest has been subject to significant surveying and study, but much of this scholarship overlooks
examples pertaining to the Spanish colonial period and missionary activities. This talk considers two petroglyphic slabs from the
collections of the National Museum of the American Indian, which were once incorporated into Franciscan mission structures at the
ancestral Zuni pueblos of Hawikku and Kechiba:wa in western New Mexico. Drawing upon the particularities of individual artifacts to
open broader considerations of rock art as a component in the colonial built environment, careful examination of the Zuni
petroglyphic slabs suggests that their incorporation in the missionized pueblos was neither accidental, nor manifested simple
syncretism or assimilation. Rather, each of these artifacts evidences the work of multiple hands, and points to active strategies of
subtle resistance to conversion and assimilation, yielding hybrid objects at the intersection of Spanish and Pueblo cultural systems.
Details of the slabs’ construction and interpretive insights from descendant community members indicate subtextual reiterations of
Zuni cultural identity in the face of colonial pressures, helping to contextualize the mission petroglyphs and offering evidence for the
strategic agency of individual Native artists under Spanish rule.
Burham, Melissa (University of Arizona)
[128]
Social and Political Collapse, Resilience, and Transformations in the Protoclassic Maya Lowlands: A View from Ceibal, Guatemala
During the Protoclassic period (ca. 100 BC–AD 300), many centers across the Maya lowlands collapsed while others thrived
seamlessly into the Classic era. This paper draws on evidence from minor temple groups around the epicenter of Ceibal,
Guatemala, to explore how populations participated in the formation of complex social and political systems, and how they
responded to periods of instability. Recent evidence suggests populations were organized into discrete, heterarchically-oriented
corporate groups during the Late Preclassic (ca. 350–100 BC) and Protoclassic periods. In the face of social unrest, these groups
terminated their local temples and abandoned the city, leaving a power vacuum for a small population residing in the epicenter. As
Inomata et al. (2017) explain, the Ceibal dynasty emerged during this period of decline, perhaps under the auspices of more
powerful kingdoms in Central Petén. I examine how outlying corporate groups simultaneously constrained and laid the foundation
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    74
for a truly centralized ruling body. The physical and political infrastructures established during the Protoclassic, combined with the
absence of competing leaders, may have been key to Ceibal’s re-florescence in the Classic period.
[128]
Chair
Burke, Adam
[30]
The More the Merrier: Using a Suite of Analytical Techniques to Arrive at Reliable Chert Ascription
Determining the provenance of Florida cherts has been a major goal of archaeological researchers in the state for decades, and
inquiry has largely focused on refining the existing petrographic and microscopic methods. When these methods of provenance
were first developed, geochemical approaches using X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) were tested and determined to have
little application for reliable chert characterization. While this early research demonstrated that XRF was not an appropriate method
for characterizing Florida cherts, other research has shown that Instrument Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA) and Laser Ablation-
Inductively Coupled Plasma- Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) have shown potential for chert characterization in the greater
southeastern United States. This presentation will review recent successes in geochemical analyses of Florida cherts while also
discussing why XRF failed where INAA and LA-ICP-MS have shown promise. A detailed understanding of regional geology and
geomorphology is critical to a successful provenance study. Additionally, local taphonomic processes can introduce an added set of
geochemical variables that must be accounted for. By addressing chert provenance studies from the ground up, researchers can
move toward more reliable ascription. A systematic and multimethod approach to geochemical characterization within a regional
geological framework is recommended for future provenance studies in Florida.
[30]
Chair
Burkett, Kenneth (Carnegie Museum)
[60]
On the Rocks at Parkers Landing
In northwestern Pennsylvania, only a very few special places still exist where evidence of prehistoric activities can be found as part
of the undisturbed natural landscape. The Parkers Landing Petroglyphs (36CL1) is one of the rarest and perhaps the most
significant of these sites. For many generations native people visited this riverbank site on the Allegheny River to inscribe images of
humans, fish, birds, animals, and their tracks as well as mythological figures and other abstract forms into the rocks. This paper will
and present an updated overview of this important site and discuss its seasonal use and relationship to other rock art sites within the
Upper Ohio Valley.
Burks, Jarrod (Ohio Valley Archaeology, Inc.) and Albert Pecora (Ohio Valley Archaeology Inc.)
[188]
The Last Great Escape: Recovery of 1st Lt. Ewart Sconiers, an American WWII Bombardier Imprisoned at the Stalag Luft III POW
Camp
Like many recoveries, locating 1st Lt Ewart Sconiers required research, persistence, and good old-fashioned luck. While imprisoned
at the Stalag Luft III POW camp in German-occupied Poland, complications from an injury sent Sconiers to a hospital in a
neighboring town—where he died. His burial occurred in a nearby municipal cemetery. During the Russian occupation of Poland,
the aboveground cemetery features were “erased” and memories of the American POW’s grave faded. In 2013 Ohio Valley
Archaeology Inc. (OVAI) volunteered its time and equipment to conduct a geophysical survey in the cemetery, now a park in Lubin,
Poland. Results of the survey work, along with WWII-era aerial photography and graveside imagery, identified two areas of interest
excavated by OVAI in 2015 in agreement with DPAA. Trench 1 at the edge of the cemetery uncovered the graves of infants. Trench
2 revealed fourteen burials within or scattered between seven graves. Bone distribution patterns and evidence of an intrusive trench
excavation suggested an upper set of graves had been removed. Concurrent with our excavations, Sconiers’ headstone was
discovered in a recently-posted online photograph from a French military cemetery in Gdansk, Poland. A positive identification was
subsequently made by DPAA.
Burks, Jarrod [176] see Snider, Joseph
Burnell, Taylor (University of San Diego) and Mark Sutton (University of San Diego)
[258]
An Integrated Chemical and Palynological Approach to Identifying Prehistoric Adhesives in the Southwest and Great Basin
The use of various organic resins as mastics and sealants in prehistoric North America is well documented in the archaeological and
ethnographic records. While the utilization of the creosote lac resin by people in western North America is known, resinous material
discovered in an archaeological context is most often attributed as being from the genus Pinus without formal analysis, partly due to
the difficulty and cost in the standard methods of identification. Here, three new techniques that can be used in conjunction for the
identification of resinous materials that are simpler and more cost-effective than previous methods are offered and will hopefully
allow for the further study and understanding of this ancient material science.
Burnett, Paul (SWCA Environmental Consultants) and Jonathan Libbon (SWCA Environmental Consultants)
[77]
Archaeological Spatial Patterning in Northern Ohio
Spatial patterning of archaeological resources is commonly discussed in regional summaries of prehistory; however, the basis for
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   75
these interpretations can be based upon a limited number of sites and researcher experience, which can result in interpretations that
are not necessarily grounded in replicable studies. Taking a different approach, we researched a sample of nearly 13,000
archaeological resources from four physiographic regions in northern Ohio: Lake Plains, Till Plains, Glaciated Allegheny Plateau,
and Unglaciated Allegheny Plateau. Looking at archaeological occurrences from the Paleoindian to Protohistoric time periods, we
identify trends in archaeological site placement using statistical correlations between archaeological sites and environmental
parameters. Archaeological resources tend to be strongly correlated with elevation, topographic roughness, distance to waterbodies,
and distance to stream confluences. Other significant correlations were found between sites and height above surroundings, slope,
aspect, and distance to streams. Building from these correlations, we produced a series of probability models and associated maps
that depict the relative likelihood of site occurrence. The result is a comprehensive, replicable summary of trends in site location
through time across northern Ohio.
Burningham, Quintessa (University of Idaho)
[204]
Northern Ute Adaptations to Forced Relocation: An Analysis of Commodities on the Uintah and Ouray Reservation (1880–1910)
The turn of the twentieth century was a period of transformation for the Utes in northeastern Utah. Forced to compete for their
traditional resources with Euro-American settlers, and to do so within the restrictions of the reservation system imposed by the
federal government, the Utes could no longer rely solely on those traditional resources to sustain themselves. Despite changes to
material culture and attempts by the United States government to assimilate American Indian groups, the Utes retained their cultural
values and practices by adapting them to fit their new environment and resources, including those brought by settlers. Using a
combination of historical records and archaeological evidence, I am examining the incoming wave of material culture and how the
Utes accepted, altered, and resisted these changes.
[204]
Chair
Burns, David (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[158]
Investigations of an Early Maya Ball court at Las Ruinas de Arenal, Belize
Las Ruinas de Arenal, located in the Mopan River valley of western Belize, is a medium sized ceremonial center. Arenal was first
settled in the Middle Preclassic and was occupied through the Late to Terminal Classic. Recent research by the Mopan Valley
Preclassic Project has investigated the ball court attached to the eastern side of the site’s E Group complex. Investigations of the
ball court in 2018 and 2019 have yielded data relating to architectural form, construction sequences, and ritual activity. The earliest
version of the ball court dates to the Late Preclassic period, suggesting the importance of the ballgame within early Maya society in
the Mopan valley.
Burns, Gregory (University of Utah)
[15]
Monetized Trade and Correlated Risk in Central California
Isotopic evidence suggests use of shell bead money in Central California developed during a time of high environmental uncertainty
and decreasing social trust. Monetized exchange likely played a role in risk mitigation while maintaining independence of small
groups. As a utility maximizing form of sharing, the role of trade in mitigating risk from variance that is uncorrelated in time and
space is evident. This study explores the relationship between trade network function and parameters of correlation in resource
variability. Observations of ethnographic exchange in California are consistent with the requirements of trade for overcoming
correlated variability.
Burns, Samuel (Oregon State University), Sam Stone (Oregon State University) and Rafaella Lisboa (California State
University, Northridge)
[195]
Overcoming Barriers: Pleistocene Migration and Archaeological Paradigms
Recent discoveries at Cooper’s Ferry and Cedros Island have demonstrated that the initial migration into the Americas involved
people with diverse subsistence strategies and multiple technological systems who occupied early, but substantial, Pacific Coast
and Columbia Plateau settlements. Long-standing models for Pleistocene migration into the Americas focused on a single
subsistence model (megafauna hunting), a single technological system (fluted point assemblages), and a single entry route (the Ice-
Free Corridor). That the story of the initial migration is more complicated than this should not be surprising; the long-lasting
entrenchment of such simplistic archaeological models should be. We argue that this entrenchment is largely attributable to the
historical lack of diversity within the archaeological community. If we are going to tell the stories of our species, we need an
archaeology that is open to diverse and traditionally marginalized voices. This requires a dedication to eliminating participation
barriers in our field: academic cultures of abuse and impunity, imperialist attitudes toward systems of knowledge outside of the
dominant Euro-American tradition, and high financial entry costs. Until archaeology embraces the diversity of human experience
among its practitioners, it has little hope of telling the diverse stories of humanity.
Burr, Margaret (University of Oxford)
[110]
Moderator
[110]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      76
Burtenshaw, Julia (Los Angeles County Museum of Art)
[109]
“If We Understand Each Other, We Are Family”: A Case Study for Collaboratively Curating Ancient Colombian Objects in the Los
Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA)
This paper presents a case study from LACMA’s Art of the Ancient Americas department (AoAA) about a major exhibition on the
arts of ancient Colombia (Portable Universe/El Universo en tus Manos: Thought and Splendor of Indigenous Colombia. On view
2021–2022). Over the past 5 years the AoAA has been committed to developing better ethical practices for working with
Precolumbian collections and has done so primarily by strengthening the relationships with source countries and indigenous
communities. The curators of Portable Universe have spent the last 3 years collaborating with the Arhuacos of the Sierra Nevada de
Santa Marta, respecting their insistence that their knowledge is not another curiosity for the exhibit, but that they are collaborators
with an agenda and message. More than listening and learning from them, it has meant participating (practicing) what they want to
teach. Although initially contentious, a true partnership has developed and the discussions have ended up being less about the
objects held in LACMA’s collection than about the relationship being built, and about reaching a mutual understanding of the world.
Burtt, Amanda (Indiana University)
[22]
Taboo to Chew: Cultural Influences on Dog Feeding
Dog feeding strategies employed by Indigenous North Americans have been shown to vary across place and time. Human
restrictions on prey animal parts given to dogs have been recorded in the ethnohistoric record. Dog feeding taboos are transcultural
and often speak to ideas of a dog’s place among other animals and the influence dogs may have on the predator prey relationship in
future hunting events. Restrictions humans have placed on food sharing with their dogs range from mild apprehension to elaborate
rituals, with the goal of keeping balance in the natural world; especially between the domestic and wild, the owned and unowned.
This paper uses multiple lines of evidence including archaeological faunal remains, dental microwear, animal iconography, and
ethnohistoric records to investigate food sharing and feeding restrictions between humans and their dogs. Rituals and habits
performed by people can be interpreted through these lines of evidence and provide a more contextualized understanding of dog-
keeping in the past.
Burtt, Patrick “De?ileligi” [97] see Cowie, Sarah
Busby, Ashley [16] see Boyd, Carolyn
Bush, Dominic (East Carolina University), Jennifer McKinnon (East Carolina University), Erin Field (East Carolina
University), Nathan Richards (East Carolina University) and Kyra Price (East Carolina University)
[221]
Microbially Influenced Corrosion of Underwater Cultural Heritage: Importance, Challenges, and Future Directions
Aircraft were a major component of the U.S. war effort in the Pacific Theatre of WWII, and today numerous examples can be found
throughout the waters of the Asia-Pacific region. Due to their cultural and historical significance to modern stakeholders,
understanding the decay trajectories has become an important concern for maritime archaeologists. While the majority of corrosion
studies have focused on electrochemical exchanges at the seawater-metal interface, less attention has been paid to the effects of
colonizing microorganisms (e.g., sulfate-reducing bacteria) that contribute to increased rates of corrosion. This paper attempts to
address this issue by summarizing the literature on microbially-influenced corrosion (MIC) of submerged cultural heritage before
describing an ongoing project in Saipan. The latter focuses on several aircraft wrecks associated with the Battle of Saipan (1944)
and is believed to be the first study to explicitly deal with MIC of archaeological aluminum. Beyond describing recent fieldwork,
methodology, implications of results, and future avenues of research will also be discussed. Special attention will be paid to the
challenges of conducting this type of research in remote island locales in hopes of developing a set of operating procedures to be
used in monitoring MIC of underwater cultural heritage.
Butler, Joel [198] see Griffith, Timothy
Butler, Michelle (Universidad de las Américas Puebla) and Geoffrey McCafferty (University of Calgary)
[133]
Zapotec Diaspora in Epiclassic Central Mexico
Epiclassic central Mexico has long been an enigma, but recent work is bringing it into focus. As other regions are explored, they are
being integrated into a more complete and complex cultural mosaic. With the recent dating coming out of Monte Albán suggesting
that the Zapotec center remained influential in the Epiclassic, it is hypothesized that Zapotecs may have expanded into central
Mexico to fill the void left after the decline of Teotihuacan. In this presentation, we look at the cultural dynamics of Zapotec relations
in the central valleys. Specifically, we consider the case of Los Teteles, a site in the central Puebla valley that exhibited strong
Zapotec characteristics in its architecture, burials, and material culture. The site was excavated in the 1970s and reporting consisted
of one master’s thesis that was never published. We reanalyze this data in light of recent work in central Mexico.
Butler, RaeLynn (Historic and Cultural Preservation Manager)
[113]
Moderator
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   77
Butler, Virginia [129] see Bovy, Kristine
Butrón Cruz, Miguel Ángel (Proyecto Arqueológico Origen y Desarrollo del Paisaje Urbano de Tamtoc, S.L.P.) and Norma
Valentín Maldonado
[144]
La casa del linaje del Armadillo
A partir del análisis espacio-temporal del Grupo F de Tamtoc, de los contextos arqueológicos particulares de F7 y de los estudios
bioantropológicos de los individuos ahí inhumados, se discutirá el carácter de edificio y, si es posible, plantear que fue la residencia
de uno de los linajes gobernantes de Tamtoc cuyo animal totémico era el Armadillo.
Butrón Cruz, Miguel Ángel [144] see Valentín Maldonado, Norma
Buvit, Ian (Pacific Slope Archaeological Laboratory)
[140]
How Landscape Changes on Hokkaido Led Modern Humans into the Americas
From the perspective of coastal migration from the start, I contend late-glacial Pacific Rim landscape changes, especially in northern
Japan, led modern humans into the Americas. I describe events since the beginning of the global Last Glacial Maximum (LGM)
starting ~30 ka that coincided with key benchmarks in the prehistory of Hokkaido and the peopling of the New World. To start things
off, delayed onset of LGM conditions pulled ancient southern Siberians into a coastal refugium on Hokkaido 30–26 ka, then part of a
peninsula comprising Russian and Japanese islands. By 24 ka when the LGM finally arrived on the peninsula, Paleo Siberians
made their way back into northeast Asia carrying wedge-shaped microblade cores. Interstadial conditions reached PSHK by 19 ka
and human populations spiked, but by 17 ka things worsened and another exodus occurred. This time it was ancestral Native
Americans migrating into and throughout the Western Hemisphere.
Buxeda i Garrigós, Jaume (ARQUB, GRACPE, Universitat de Barcelona) and Marisol Madrid i Fernández (ARQUB,
GRACPE, Universitat de Barcelona)
[196]
The Impact of European Ceramic Technology in the Colonial New World: Relations and Influences during the Atlantic Expansion
The Tecnolonial project conducts a large scale investigation into the movement of ceramics from Europe during the colonization of
the Atlantic and Americas. It concentrates on the effects of imported pottery and craftspeople on indigenous ceramic technologies
and the nature of colonial ceramic production. To achieve this aim it has carried out an extensive characterization program of
ceramics produced during the sixteenth-seventeenth centuries in the Iberian Peninsula, establishing reference groups for key types
of pottery exported in the colonial expansion. Their origins and production technology allows an assessment of their impact on
indigenous ceramics and on the newly produced colonial ceramics. Our integrated analytical approach approach (XRF, XRD, SEM-
EDX, optical microscopy) has characterised European glazed and unglazed coarse wares, cooking wares, majolica, transport jars,
and sugar cones, along with the different indigenous pottery traditions and colonial products manufactured overseas. Sites
researched are located in the Canary Islands and the Americas, from Argentina and Chile to Canada. It is contended that
considering ceramic technological change on such a large geographical scale has distinct advantages, revealing important patterns
which shed light not only on the complexities of pottery production, but also on significant social changes which affect both colonists
and indigenous societies.
Buxeda i Garrigós, Jaume [196] see Thompson, Helen
Cabadas, Horacio (Arizona State University), Kelsi Stroebel (Arizona State University), Claudine Gravel-Miguel (Arizona
State University) and Jayde Hirniak (Arizona State University)
[38]
Testing the Adaptability of Photography Methods in Various Archaeological Contexts
Preservation of archaeological sites is an important but difficult task to accomplish. To help with such preservation, the team working
at Pinnacle Point (PP5–6) located in Mossel Bay, South Africa, developed a method to create high resolution, color-corrected, and
georectified photomosaics of excavated stratigraphic sections. The stratigraphic sections are photographed using a digital camera
and flashes in controlled settings. This methodology makes it possible to study the stratigraphy of archaeological sites remotely or
analyze plotted finds in reference to their precise location. The original PP5–6 platform design was perfectly adapted to the
challenges of PP5–6 stratigraphy but was not suitable for the archaeological sites that formed the HOMER consortium. To adapt to
these sites’ layouts, we developed a new device to use during the 2019 excavation season at Knysna Head 1 (KH1), a site located
in Knysna, South Africa, and Hora 1 in Malawi. The device worked well at KH1, a rock shelter, but faced difficulties at Hora 1. In this
poster, we present these differences and discuss their impacts on image processing, and ultimately on the final georeferenced
mosaic. We will then discuss possible changes for future equipment that would make such a method applicable to other sites.
Cabana, Graciela [169] see Fleskes, Raquel
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    78
Cabanes, Dan (Laboratory for MicroArchaeology, Rutgers University), Diego Angelucci (Universita di Trento), Valentín
Villaverde (Universidad de Valencia), Josefina Zapata (Universidad de Múrcia) and João Zilhão (ICREA, Universitat de
Barcelona)
[162]
A Microarchaeological Approach to the Use of Fire during the Middle and Upper Paleolithic at El Abrigo de la Boja, Spain
El Abrigo de la Boja offers a unique opportunity to study the evolution of fire use during the Middle and Upper Paleolithic. The site is
a small rock-shelter located in the Rambla Perea valley, along a natural communication corridor between the coastal lowlands and
the interior plateau in Murcia, SE Spain. The excavation yielded a 5-meter archaeological sequence showing a basal Middle
Paleolithic occupation below a long Upper Paleolithic sequence. Although bone is rarely recovered, the lithic assemblages are well-
preserved. The preservation of the fire remains, including ashes, charcoals, and thermally altered sediments is pristine and rarely
seen elsewhere. Here we studied the fire remains using microarchaeological techniques, namely phytolith analysis and mineral
identification through FTIR, to evaluate the anthropogenic impact on the site. The use of fire reached its maximum intensity during
the LGM, but the results also show significant differences between Middle Paleolithic and Upper Paleolithic occupations. The current
data points to changes in the occupation pattern of the site that can be linked to climatic stress and differences in the adaptation
strategies.
[162]
Chair
Cable, Charlotte (Michigan State University), Lloyd Weeks (University of New England), Kristina Franke (University of New
England) and James Roberts (University of New England)
[59]
Thriving in the Desert: Reconceiving “Marginal” Environments in Desert Arabia through the Persistent Place of Saruq al-Hadid
(Dubai, UAE)
Archaeological sites in marginal environments can act as sensitive”‘barometers” for the effects of environmental change on past
communities (and vice versa). Receiving an average of less than 35mm of precipitation per year, the hyper-arid Rub’ al-Khali Desert
of Arabia has typically been understood from just such a perspective—exploited during periods of significant climatic amelioration
such as the early to mid-Holocene Humid Phase, and depopulated during periods of climatic deterioration in so-called ‘tabula rasa’
events. However, recent research on the eastern margins of this so-called Empty Quarter provides a more complex and nuanced
picture of ancient exploitation of the desert zone. Evidence from the site of Saruq al-Hadid (Dubai, UAE) demonstrates significant,
repeated, and highly varied occupation and exploitation of the desert environment over the course of more than five millennia, from
the late fourth millennium BC to the pre-modern period. In this presentation, stratified archaeological, archaeobotanical,
zooarchaeological, and archaeometallurgical evidence from Saruq al-Hadid is used to document the fluctuating scale and nature of
human activities at the site, and its changing environmental context over the mid- to late Holocene, a period during which varied
short-term climate fluctuations can be traced against a regional background of increasing aridification.
Cable, Charlotte [185] see Quates, E. W. Duane
Cadena, Pete [77] see Snitker, Grant
Cagney, Erin, Kimberly Blanke (Veterans Curation Program) and Nancy McKenzie (Veterans Curation Program)
[187]
Empowerment through Employment: How Archaeology Is Helping Women Veterans Break Barriers
Since 2009, the Veterans Curation Program (VCP) has employed over 600 veterans of the United States armed forces as
archaeology lab technicians to assist in rehabilitating at-risk archaeological collections belonging to the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. While in the program, veteran technicians receive vocational and technology training that helps them gain access to the
mainstream job market. Many veterans face barriers to gainful employment for various reasons, ranging from the lack of a 4-year
college degree to needing a stronger community support system. Often, women veterans experience more barriers to employment
than men, owing to a variety of factors frequently linked to gender-based discrimination. The VCP supports these women by offering
stable employment, vocational training, career coaching, access to resources, and a supportive community environment. This poster
seeks to recognize and celebrate the women graduates of the VCP and demonstrate how archaeological work is helping the
women’s veteran community to overcome barriers and gain success in their personal and professional lives.
Cagney, Erin [187] see Bradley, Kevin
Cajigas, Rachel (University of Arizona)
[140]
Long-Term Effects of Human Modifications to Floodplain Soils at the La Playa Site
Early agriculturalists in the southwest United States/northwest Mexico region modified the floodplains of the Basin and Range
province to create productive agricultural fields despite arid conditions during the Early Agricultural period (2100 BC–AD 200).
Magnetic gradiometry surveys at the La Playa archaeological site (SON:F:10:3) in Sonora, Mexico, identified approximately 8,700
m2 of intact agricultural fields buried beneath the floodplain alluvium. A network of earthen irrigation canals brought water from the
Boquillas River to agricultural fields that were up to 1 km away. These soils were excavated, described, and sampled for phytolith,
textural, and micromorphology analyses. Results from these geoarchaeological analyses indicate that field soils were fine-textured,
organic-rich sediments that were saturated with water. These micromorphology and textural samples were also compared to
samples from canals and other areas on the floodplain that were not cultivated in order to understand how humans modified the
floodplain sediments to create productive agricultural soils. Phytolith data complements this information to assess changes in plant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   79
communities at La Playa over time. The documentation of these anthropogenically modified floodplain soils that are at risk of severe
modern erosion is important in the study of long-term agricultural practices in arid lands.
Calabrese, Agata (University of Sydney)
[25]
Lamenting the Dead: The Acoustic Element in Bronze Age Funerary Rituals in Syro-Mesopotamia
This paper will employ GIS in exploring the experiential aspects of the burial process in Early Bronze Age North Mesopotamia, with
a particular attention to funerary soundscapes. To investigate the potential impact of vocal and musical sound, a 10m resolution
Digital Elevation Model (DEM) was developed, and the “System for the Prediction of Acoustic Detectability” (SPreAD-GIS) was
employed to predict the potential acoustic ‘footprint’ on a series of Early Bronze Age (third millennium BCE) archaeological sites.
The results of this study suggest that music and vocalization (i.e., lamentation-singing) had strong impacts, both within the
immediate mortuary landscape and beyond. This has important mnemonic consequences for the society of the first urban centers.
The funerary arena in Early Bronze Age Syro-Mesopotamian society involved many different sensory experiences, among the most
important visibility, movement/processions, and sound. The archaeological sites of Ebla, Mari and Ugarit preserve the
archaeological/cuneiform evidence for a rich music culture associated with funerary rituals, but how this impacted on the society
remains unclear. A better understanding of the acoustic landscape will form a vital component in assessing the societal impact of
public and private funerary rituals in the first urban centers.
Caldarelli, Solange [161] see Kipnis, Renato
Cali, Denise (University of South Florida), Kaitlyn Kingsland ( University of South Florida), Davide Tanasi (University of
South Florida), Laura Harrison (University of South Florida) and Stephan Hassam (University of South Florida)
[104]
The Benefits of 3D Digital Imaging for the Study of Roman Villas in Sicily: The Villa of Caddeddi on the Tellaro River (Noto, Italy)
The Roman Villa of Caddeddi on the Tellaro River at Noto (Sicily), discovered and explored betwen late 1970s and early 1980s, is
one of the largest in south-eastern Sicily. With an extension of about 6,000 m2, the complex is organized around a central peristyle
surrounded by a colonnade, the Villa of Caddeddi has been traditionally dated on the basis of numismatic evidence to the half of the
fourth CE. Three rooms around the peristyle itself are paved with outstanding mosaic floors in African style. The excavations of the
Villa were never published and the only research generated in the last five decades was just on the style of the mosaics. In early
summer 2019, an interdisciplinary research project aimed at reassessing the complex and focusing of eventual phases of reuse in
the Late antiquity was undertaken via a combined on-site analysis of all the built stratigraphic units and architectural elements and
the overall 3D digitization via terrestrial laser-scanning and digital photogrammetry. The analysis of the data gathered on-site,
supported by new technical drawings extracted by the 3D data clearly shows the presence of multiple later phased of use and shed
light on its peculiar spatial organization.
Calla Maldonado, Sergio [4] see Capriles, José
Callaghan, Michael (University of Central Florida) and Brigitte Kovacevich (University of Central Florida)
[54]
The Ancient Maya Economy: Dual? Integrated? Embedded? Or All of the Above?
In this paper we argue that the complexity of Maya economic structures and the debates that ensue over their interpretation stem
from the fact that manifestations of those economic structures vary so greatly across time and space in the precolumbian Maya
world. Maya economies were both dichotomized along elite and commoner lines, while also integrated in some times and places.
For this reason, a priori assumptions and traditional economic models must be used with caution to characterize the entirety of the
Maya economy. The embedded nature of Maya economies further complicates interpretation as many traditional economic models
do not take into consideration the implications of the interconnectedness of social, political, and economic structures and primarily
focus on evidence of wealth accrual and power consolidation among the elite.
Callaghan, Michael [39] see Crawford, Dawn
Callaghan, Michael [5] see Whyte, Rachel
Calongos Curotto, Manuel
[105]
Between Incas and Lunahuanás: The Late Prehispanic Occupation in Lunahuaná, Peru
The historical accounts of the Cañete valley, recovered by the Spaniards, tell us that the Incas found two different kinds of reactions
to their conquest attempts: while the Guarco, in the lower valley, resisted the Incas domination; the Lunahuná, in the middle valley,
supported the Inca troops and generals. This contradiction in these different lines of evidence suggests a relative autonomy
between the groups living in the middle and lower valley of Cañete. Even though the idea of two different ethnic groups living in the
lower and middle valley has been rejected by recent archaeological studies, there is still little evidence about how people in the
middle valley organized before the arrival of the Incas and how does it change during the Inca regime. The data collected in a
survey of the Lunahuaná district in the middle Cañete valley have revealed interesting patterns regarding public and funerary
architecture. The use of GIS analysis has provided a preliminary understanding of the territorial organization in this area. This
analysis shows the presence of a recurring type of public architecture, that in many cases adopts Inca traditions. Besides it also
shows the presence of different funerary traditions present in the same sites.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    80
Camacho, Frank [100] see Vilar, Miguel
Cambranes, Rafael [206] see Garrison, Thomas
Cameron, Asa (Yale University), Bukhchuluun Dashzeveg (Yale University) and Jonathan Mark Kenoyer (University of
Wisconsin, Madison)
[62]
Making the Exotic from the Familiar: The Source and Production of Carnelian Beads during the Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age
in Mongolia
During the Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age in Mongolia, communities across the region adopted mobile pastoralism and horse-
riding technology. In conjunction with these changes in subsistence and mobility patterns, innovative funerary practices emerged
that incorporated monumental construction and new mortuary offerings. Included in these grave goods were forms of body
adornment that utilized carnelian beads. Since the first discoveries of these semi-precious stone beads, archaeologists have
speculated about the origin of the carnelian and assumed that these artifacts were exotic trade goods linking Mongolia to regions as
far as the Indus Valley in Southeast Asia. This project presents the results of LA-ICP-MS (Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled
Plasma Mass Spectrometry) and SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopy) analysis of carnelian beads from the Late Bronze Age and
Early Iron Age. These analyses provide the first data on the source of carnelian beads and their related production technology. The
results inform our understanding of craft production and exchange patterns during this period in Mongolian archaeology.
Cameron, Catherine (University of Colorado)
[131]
Hidden People in the Past: Honoring the Scholarship of Debra Martin
Because archaeologists use ancient material culture to reconstruct the lives of people in the past, they tend to find those people with
the most abundant and well-preserved property. Only the past few generations of archaeologists have looked beyond large
settlements and monumental buildings to investigate common people. But just like today’s societies, those in the past were made up
of the rich and poor, prominent and insignificant, and the truly marginal. Fifteen years ago I began to study one of the most marginal
of ancient people: captives taken in raiding and warfare. Using ethnographic and ethnohistoric records I discovered a class of
people largely unstudied by archaeologists. But how to find these people in the past? I realized that Dr. Debra Martin had, using
bioarchaeological methods, developed robust analytic tools to “see” captives and other marginalized groups in the archaeological
record. This paper explores recent developments in the study of captives and focuses especially on how the scholarship of Debra
Martin and her students has formed a critical grounding to this work.
Campagnolo, Leticia [196] see Thompson, Helen
Campbell, Rod (Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, NYU)
[210]
Violence and Complexity
What is the relationship between violence and socio-political complexity? Political theorists since the Enlightenment have debated
the relationship between violence and social order. More recently, classic neo-evolutionary theory posited an intensification of
violence attending state formation and the growth of inequality, while Keeley, in War before Civilization, argued that intercommunity
conflict is present in human societies of all scales, and Claestres showed how war could serve to defend against the growth of
hierarchy. If egalitarian does not necessarily mean pacifist, and complex polities, down to modern nation states, can have lesser or
greater degrees of violence, conflict and inequality, then what are the variables? This paper will attempt to sketch the outlines of a
theory of violence and social complexity, exploring the relationships between factors such as hierarchy, scale, and mode of
production with moral economy, ontology, and cultural models of aggression, conflict, and competition. A broad concept of violence
including physical-instrumental, structural, and symbolic violence will be employed to explore historical transformations in the nature
of violence and its relationship to socio-political order.
Campbell, Sarah [129] see Bovy, Kristine
Campbell, Stuart [120] see Pal Chowdhury, Manasij
Campbell, Wade (Harvard), Davina Two Bears (SAR) and Timothy Wilcox (Stanford University; Crow Canyon Arch. Center)
[41]
A Diné Analysis of the Praxis of Indigenous Archaeology and the Reclamation of Tribal Histories
Archaeology offers a unique methodological lens toward the study of past peoples and events. Yet despite the incredible potential of
archaeology as a tool for discussions of indigenous identity and tribal history, many indigenous communities have historically
distrusted the field. In the United States, archaeology’s connection to the late nineteenth-century colonial expansion made the rich
collection of historical and cultural knowledge it produced the domain of non-native specialists, not the source communities. Over
the past thirty years, however, archaeological research prioritizing the interests, viewpoints, and active participation of Native
individuals themselves has become more frequent. The “indigenous archaeology” movement has enabled Native researchers to
challenge long-standing misconceptions about Native histories and help preserve aspects of traditional culture at risk. Perhaps most
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   81
importantly, indigenous archaeology has continued to evolve as the current generation of Native researchers draw upon a diverse
array of methodological and theoretical influences in their work. Using a series of recent Navajo (Diné) archaeological research
projects as case studies, this paper reflects upon this innovative trend and highlights a series of themes increasingly common to
indigenous archaeological research in the twenty-first century.
Campetti, Casey (AECOM)
[114]
Discussant
Campiani, Arianna (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México) and Esteban Miron Marvan (University of California,
Berkeley)
[197]
The Functional Variability of Pottery as a Way to Evaluate Architectural Compounds’ Typology within a Classic Maya City: The Case
of Chinikihá, Chiapas
A program of intensive excavation has been carried out throughout the Classic Maya site of Chinikihá, obtaining an extensive
corpus of heterogeneous materials and data that can be analyzed beyond the chronology. In fact, the ceramic analysis can
represent another source of information if considered according to its intended use. The categorization of containers depending on
their function, their presence and frequency can provide interesting insights into the social status of a compound’s inhabitants, can
point to specific practices- or their intensity- carried out within a compound and their variability during the Ajín ceramic complex
(700–850 CE). In this presentation, we would like to present the result of the analysis that contrasts functional ceramic
categorization with the architectural compounds’ variability, where also location, frequency, labor investment and closeness to the
civic-ceremonial core are considered. Cross-referencing the ceramic functional variability with the proposed architectural typology-
also applied at Palenque- can indicate if the formal arrangement of the compounds responds to the activities suggested by artifacts
and ceramic containers´ variability.
Campos, Cinthia [147] see Hertfelder, Paula
Campos, Cinthia [79] see McGuire, Randall
Cancho Ruiz, Christian (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú) and Alicia Gorman (University of California, Santa
Barbara)
[21]
Nuevas evidencias desde Cerro Tortolita un sitio del Intermedio Temprano en la costa sur del Perú-Ica
Nuestra investigación busca entender la relación entre la religión y la política en contextos domésticos durante la época Nasca. Es
así que Cerro Tortolita (valle de alto de Ica), dada su naturaleza y escala constructiva; el cual incluye un componente ceremonial y
otro residencial; constituye un sitio de singular importancia para el evaluar cómo operan ciertos mecanismos religiosos y de
autoridad en una sección del valle poco explorada. Investigaciones previas en la “Zona Ceremonial” han permitido identificar ciertos
elementos análogos al centro ceremonial Cahuachi, incluyendo el acceso a su cerámica distintiva (Vaughn 2017). Nuestro proyecto
por su parte fue diseñado para complementar la información y establecer correlaciones entre ambas áreas. Es así que, se excavó
las viviendas ubicadas en la denominada “Zona Residencial Primaria” (al sur de la Zona Ceremonial), un área que contiene
aglutinadas más de 100 estructuras de piedra de forma semiovalada; teniendo por objetivo evaluar el grado y la naturaleza de
diferenciación social en el sitio, específicamente los “enredos” entre autoridad religiosa y potenciales desigualdades económicas y
políticas.
Cancho Ruiz, Christian [21] see Gorman, Alicia
Canilao, Michael [188] see Monaghan, John
Cannarozzi, Nicole (University of Florida)
[273]
The Zooarchaeology of the Christiansted National Historic Site St. Croix, USVI
The Christiansted National Historic Site, located in the town of Christiansted on St Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands, was a Danish military
compound that served as a major trading hub dealing in the trade of enslaved Africans. As such, the compound was home to both
Danish soldiers and the enslaved Africans on whom they depended for survival. This research presents preliminary data from the
analysis of faunal remains excavated from areas within the compound targeted to locate the living quarters and activity areas
associated with enslaved Africans to learn more about slave life in this unique context. Preliminarily, this study indicates a heavy
reliance on young, domesticated animals. The representation of all skeletal portions of each of the domestic animals rather than just
the meaty portions of the fore and hindquarters, suggest livestock may have been raised within the compound. Marine resources
such as fishes and shellfish are present in fewer frequencies than expected given the proximity to the coast and compared to other
Danish colonial islands. The presence of nonlocal faunas and imported or translocated animals like hutia, fallow deer, domestic
rabbit, cat, and cod are rare, but may indicate a greater degree of inter-island connectivity than previously thought.
Cannavò, Valentina [196] see Levi, Sara
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       82
Cannon, Joshua [254] see Bradley, Benjamin
Cannon, Molly, Benjamin Johnson (Utah State University), Robert Godard (Utah State University) and Barbara Winter
(Simon Fraser University)
[203]
Value Added by the Use of Comparative Analyses for the Lost and Found in Museum Collections
Establishing context for museum artifacts without provenance is challenging, however it is possible to continue research on these
artifacts by comparative analysis. Our research compares two similar Peruvian textiles from different museums; Utah State
University and Simon Fraser University. The USU textile contains very little associated contextual information. Utilizing color
assessment, portable x-ray fluorescence, thread counts, and microscopic analysis, we were able to establish evidence to place
these artifacts in a shared time and space. Our results provide clues about textile construction and production and demonstrate
similarities between the two pieces. However, we found that the visual comparative analysis allowed us to determine
correspondences but did not determine authenticity of the USU textile. We additionally employed AMS dating to determine if the
USU museum piece is temporally contemporaneous with Chancay culture, resulting in a date of 670 +/- 20 radiocarbon years, which
would give us a calibrated date range of 1300–1394calAD. These dates indicate that the USU textile was constructed during the
Late Intermediate period of Peru. In this presentation, we present these methods, findings, and discuss implications for establish
community processes for textile production in the Late Intermediate peridod.
Canouts, Veletta (Canouts Consultancy LLC)
[168]
The Smithsonian’s Hopi Ceramic Project: A Perspective
Ron Bishop has made significant contributions to the study of ceramic production and exchange using Neutron Activation Analysis.
His research spans both the Old and New Worlds though his emphasis has always been on ceramics from Mesoamerican and
Central America. One of his greatest strengths has been mentoring “predoc” and “postdoc” students just starting to build their own
research expertise. The start of the Smithsonian’s Hopi Ceramic Project grew out of his collaboration with a well-known Hopi
ceramicist. During the course of this project, he and his colleagues had the opportunity to mentor a younger generation of Hopi
youth about their own ceramic tradition. That opportunity remains one of the highlights of the project, and Hopi youth have continued
to experience similar support through programs developed by Northern Arizona University’s Department of Anthropology.
Canterbury, Jacob (Texas A&M University) and Rissa Trachman (Elon University)
[233]
Not by Maize Alone: A Meta-Analysis of Ancient Maya Diets Using a Stable Isotope Mixing Model
Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope analysis has a long history in the study of Ancient Maya diets to assess variability in
consumption of maize, animal protein, etc. Recently, however, there has been increased understanding that stable isotope ratios
are only qualitative proxies for individual consumption, and therefore any comparative analysis using such proxies are by definition
limited in nature (e.g., more/less meat; more/less maize). Bayesian stable isotope mixing models offer a method of translating stable
isotope ratios into quantitative estimations of the proportions of foods consumed by integrating stable isotope data with actual
nutritional information, such as food-source macronutrient composition, digestibility, and diet-to-tissue routing. This study uses
stable isotope data from a number of Ancient Maya sites, contexts, and time periods in conjunction with a stable isotope mixing
model (FRUITS) to examine the degree of temporal, regional and social variability in Ancient Maya consumption of four important
food sources (C3 plants, C4 plants, terrestrial protein, and marine protein). It is our hope that such methods will revitalize interest in
stable isotopic investigations of Ancient Maya diets, and add greater nuance to our understanding beyond restating that the Maya
did, in fact, eat a lot of maize.
Canterbury, Jacob [53] see Trachman, Rissa
Canuto, Marcello (M.A.R.I./Tulane University) and Luke Auld-Thomas (Tulane University)
[102]
Lidar as a Tool to Estimate Late Classic Population in the Central Maya Lowlands
In 2016, the Pacunam Lidar Initiative surveyed over 2,100 km2 of the Maya Biosphere Reserve in the Department of Petén,
Guatemala. This lidar survey provided an unprecedented scale of settlement data that attest to elevated population levels
throughout the southern Maya lowlands, especially for the Late Classic period. Current estimates suggest a population of between 7
and 11 million people for the region during this period. In this paper, we review various methodologies used to develop population
estimates along with the potential problems inherent with each, proposing means of constraining these problems to produce reliable
estimates. We conclude by discussing how ongoing fieldwork in these lidar survey regions is providing data that refine our
estimates, rendering them more robust.
Canuto, Marcello (M.A.R.I./Tulane University)
[209]
Discussant
Canuto, Marcello [130] see Ponce, Jocelyne
Canuto, Marcello [223] see Stuart, David
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    83
Cap, Bernadette (University of Texas, San Antonio) and Rachel Horowitz (Appalachian State University)
[54]
Embedded Ancient Maya Economies
Ancient economies are intertwined with aspects of the daily life of individuals in both market and premarket economies. To more
fully understand these relationships, we must explore the ways in which economic actions are embedded and entangled within
social, political, and religious practices. We briefly discuss the history of the term and how we utilize it despite a history of much
debate within the sphere of economic anthropology. Discussion on the organization of ancient Maya economies has been a subject
of much debate in part due to this history. With more recent finds of market exchange and more complex studies of economies it is a
good time to reassess the ways in which economies are embedded throughout Maya society. We provide an example of this
through a brief discussion of the exchange of bifaces among the Classic period Maya in western Belize.
[54]
Chair
Cap, Bernadette (University of Texas-San Antonio)
[155]
Discussant
Cap, Bernadette [178] see Friedel, Rebecca
Cap, Bernadette [185] see Yaeger, Jason
Capriata, Camila [224] see Marcone, Giancarlo
Capriles, José (Pennsylvania State University), Sergio Calla Maldonado (Universidad Mayor de San Andrés), Hortensia
Nina Vargas (Universidad Mayor de San Andrés) and Alejandra Aramayo (Universidad Mayor de San Andrés)
[4]
Reconstructing the late Holocene Prehistory of the Bolivian Chiquitano Forest
The Chiquitano forest in the Bolivian Eastern tropical lowlands has recently been in the spotlight due to large-scale human induced
fires. In this paper, we provide an overview of human settlement in the region and focus on recent research carried out at the site of
Quimome, Santa Cruz, Bolivia. Our results suggest that communities were mostly low-level food producers that supplemented
horticulture with hunting and gathering. All in all, archaeological evidence suggests human occupation in the Chiquitano forest
region can be traced to at least the late Holocene and it featured sedentary communities distinct from contemporary societies in the
Llanos de Moxos but were part of social interaction networks that reached as far as the eastern Andes.
[4]
Chair
Capriles, José [59] see Bruno, Maria C.
Capriles, José [26] see Freeman, Jacob
Caramanica, Ari
[125]
The Pampa de Mocan: Dynamic Desert, Ancient Farmland
Modern-day approaches to water management and distribution along the extremely arid north coast of Peru assume the natural
environment is largely static. Farming in the region has been dependent on irrigation since prehispanic times. Yet, despite limited
water availability, agro-industry continues to expand, due in part to ongoing support from the Peruvian State in the form of a large-
scale inter-valley irrigation project. However, a recent El Niño event demonstrated that this landscape is geomorphologically,
hydrologically, and biologically dynamic. Archaeological survey and excavation in the ancient farmland known as the Pampa de
Mocan reveal that prehispanic landscape management strategies and irrigation technology accounted for and adapted to this
dynamism. This paper presents these data and proposes a conceptual shift in the consideration of natural resource management
and disaster response in the region today: from one that views the environment as marginal and static, to one that recasts the
environment in longer timescales, bringing its dynamism into full relief.
Carbajal Salazar, Barbara [242] see Corcoran-Tadd, Noa
Carballo, David (Boston University), Daniela Hernández Sariñana (Boston University), Maria Codlin (Boston University),
Alfredo Saucedo (Universidad Veracruzana) and Pablo Correa (Dartmouth College)
[150]
Public Spaces and the Neighborhood Center of Teotihuacan’s Tlajinga District.
The urban populace of Teotihuacan was organized into clusters of neighborhoods that featured public spaces with civic buildings,
temples, plazas, and the residences of intermediate elites. Two of these neighborhood centers adjacent to urban epicenter are well
documented by investigations at La Ventilla and Teopancazco. Recent investigations in the Tlajinga district provide a third example,
but one that is located on the southern periphery of the city, 2 km from its center. They reveal that, in contrast to three previously
excavated apartment compounds, the structures of the southern district center were elaborately made, featuring the construction
techniques and mural painting characteristic of the urban epicenter. Excavations at two large platform structures and associated
cultural deposits demonstrate status variability within Tlajinga and the fact that event Teotihuacan’s peripheral communities were
characterized by elaborate social infrastructure and ample access to non-local resources. Open plazas interspersed within the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    84
district were likely multipurpose, serving for economic, ritual, and other community functions.
Carballo, David [242] see Schofield, Abagail
Carballo, Priscila (University of Texas, Austin) and Denise Axume (Austin Community College)
[176]
Comparison of Dental Pathologies between Males and Females from Two Archaic Texas Mortuary Sites
Dental pathologies may be used as indicators for dietary trends, dental health, nutritional stresses, behavior, and even social status
of past populations. However, very few studies looking at dental pathologies have been conducted on populations from Archaic
Texas mortuary sites, despite the large skeletal assemblages recovered in the twentieth century. This study attempts to expand
upon previous research conducted on the Archaic Western Gulf Coastal Plains of Texas, specifically focusing on the
contemporaneous mortuary sites of Ernest Witte and Morhiss. The skeletal remains of these two sites were examined for the
presence of linear enamel hypoplasia (LEH), abscesses, and caries. The total number of adult individuals sampled include 235
individuals (52 estimated to be male and 49 female) from the Ernest Witte site and 179 (18 estimated to be male and 19 female)
from the Morhiss site. Non-adult remains were excluded. The purpose of this project is to investigate differences in LEH, abscess,
and caries presence and severity between males and females living during the Texas Archaic from these two mortuary groups.
Results indicate there is no difference in presence of pathologies between males versus females suggesting the sexes exploited
natural resources equally.
Carballo Marina, Flavia [67] see Belardi, Juan
Carbaugh, Aimée
[160]
A Work in Progress: Building Collaborative Relationships among Archaeologists, Indigenous Communities, and the General Public
The personal experiences of archaeologists and bioarchaeologists working with ancestral remains and on NAGPRA are rarely
discussed, despite the increasing presence of collaborative practices in these disciplines. This shift toward a more inclusive
archaeology encourages scholars to move beyond the legal requirements of consultation, to decenter academia, and to engage with
stakeholders as equal partners in the research process. Depending on the university, conference, or publication these conversations
may be more or less visible, often leaving students and scholars to seek out resources and support networks if they choose to
undertake community-based methodologies. With little guidance regarding collaborative practices, it can be daunting, especially for
young scholars, to figure out what collaboration looks like. This is particularly true for those of us who work in removal states where
the relationship between descendant communities and archaeologists are not strongly formed. This paper considers the rewards
and challenges of adopting a collaborative approach to the research process. I will discuss my initial steps toward building
relationships with Indigenous descendant communities, non-Indigenous local residents, and with the faculty and students in my own
department, and how this approach, ultimately, enriches archaeological interpretations and helps our field reach a broader
audience.
Carbone, Catherine (Fort Huachuca Cultural Resources)
[214]
The Forgotten Mine: New Synthesis of the Manila Mine Site, Fort Huachuca, Arizona
Although mining is significant to the development of the state of Arizona, little is known about Fort Huachuca’s only mine site. The
mine was owned and operated by Alice McFadin between 1926 and 1928, when land and legal disputes forced its closure and the
consolidation of McFadin’s mining enterprise to the Huachuca Mountains along Fort Huachuca’s southern border. The limited
assemblage of mining-related artifacts and lack of available historical records led to challenges in documenting the regional impact
of Manila Mine during the original recording of Manila Mine in the early 1990s. Access to digitized and public archival records,
utilization of social media avenues to connect with descendants, and extensive site revisits in 2016 and 2019 resulted in an
augmented synthesis of the Manila Mine site. New historical and biographical information is known about local miners, the role of
women in southeast Arizona’s mining industry and mining practices in the Fort Huachuca area.
Card, Anne-Marie (University of Wyoming)
[77]
That’s WY: Do Archaeological Site Locations Identify the Best Places to Live in Wyoming?
Landscape archaeology and predictive models seek to understand the larger patterns of site locations, and there are ever-
increasing amounts of archaeological, environmental, and topographic datasets available. While some smaller-scale studies of site
location examined resource availability, I’ll compare the Wyoming site location data to topographic and environmental information,
such as elevation and slope, watershed data, and new wildlife migration corridor data. I will be looking at about 6,000 archaeological
sites in Wyoming, separated into single and multi-component sites. Since multi-component sites appear to be “landscape magnets” I
use them to try to determine which variables drive people to return to a certain place and identify why magnet locations were
chosen. Finally, correlating these sites with radiocarbon dates will show whether resource preferences or site location within the
state changed over time. Overall, I hope this research can add to the discussion and understanding of human-environment
interactions in the past.
Carden, Megan [271] see Pestle, William
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     85
Cardona, David [104] see Tanasi, Davide
Carleton, Chris [82] see Rondeau, Rob
Carleton, William (Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology) and Rob Rondeau (Simon Fraser University)
[238]
Beringia Underwater: The Search for New Archaeological Sites on the Pacific Northwest Coast
When and how people first arrived in the Americas remains one of Archaeology’s greatest mysteries. The earliest archaeological
evidence suggests that people migrated from Siberia across the Bering Strait, Beringia, and into Alaska around 14,000 years ago.
Where they went from there is still unclear. One hypothesis is that these First Peoples moved down the Pacific Northwest Coast on
the, then, mostly exposed continental shelf. Archaeological sites in Alaska and the Yukon suggest that they were big game hunters
and that they survived by hunting animals like mammoth, mastodon, and caribou. Around 10,000 years ago, when the last Ice Age
ended, sea level rose, flooding what had been a coastal plain to the west of the present coast of Alaska and British Columbia. As a
result, potential early archaeological sites are now underwater. This research aims to (1) locate early sites on the underwater
landscape and (2) to investigate them firsthand. This presentation outlines how the use of a new computer predictive model
developed at Simon Fraser University, combined with the latest underwater surveying techniques and applied technical engineering,
will allow us to investigate marine archaeological sites on the Pacific Northwest Coast in ways not previously possible
Carline, Kristin (Center for Advanced Study of Human Paleobiology, George Washington University), Erik Marsh
(CONICET, Laboratorio de Paleo-Ecología-Humana), Savanna Buehlman-Barbeau (University of Oregon), Silvina Castro
(Laboratorio de Paleo-Ecología-Humana) and Lucía Yebra (Laboratorio de Paleo-Ecología-Humana)
[243]
Semi-Sedentary Foragers in the Uspallata Valley, Argentina
The Uspallata Valley Archaeology Project excavated and surveyed the site Uspallata Norte in the Argentine Andes (32°S, 2000
masl) to study the transition from foraging to pastoralism and agriculture. Lithic analysis from the artifacts collected during the 2016
field school with the Institute for Field Research investigated the raw materials, techniques, and finished lithic products. Macroscopic
observation of fragments, specific technological characteristics, and morphological characteristics were analyzed to identify specific
stages of the reduction sequence and human mobility patterns. There are many expedient lithic tools made from medium-quality raw
materials available at the site, although high-quality raw chert is available in the adjacent mountain range. This suggests groups
living here were less mobile, a possibility reinforced by the large quantities of ground stone implements, probable agricultural hoes,
retouched multipurpose tools such as perforators, low quantities of ceramic sherds, and surface hearths. Overall, the pattern
suggests more intensive occupation, plant processing, and continued duration spent at the site than would be expected for mobile
foragers. The adjacent site, Cerro Tunduqueral, has the province’s largest density of rock art, which may have been made by the
inhabitants of Uspallata Norte.
Carlson, Meredith (University of California, Davis), Christopher Beckham, Caleb Chen (University of California, Davis),
Daniel Goring (University of California, Davis) and Peiqi Zhang (University of California, Davis)
[83]
Modeling Time Investment Trade-offs for Stone and Wooden Mortars
California archaeology and ethnography record instances of mortars made from wood. Differences in raw material availability,
intended uses, and mobility are major factors that could contribute to preferential manufacture of wooden mortars versus similarly
shaped stone mortars. Although previous research finds that wooden mortars take fewer hours to produce than comparably sized
stone mortars, the relative costs and benefits of mortars made from these materials remains understudied. Here, we compare
experimentally obtained return rates for processing acorns (Quercus kelloggii) and Indian ricegrass (Achnatherum hymenoides)
seeds with two types of wood and stone mortars. Wooden mortars were less effective than stone mortars for processing both acorns
and small seeds into flour. This difference was especially pronounced for small seeds. Modeling the costs of manufacture against
these results indicates that wooden mortars should never be preferred over stone for grinding small hard seeds like Indian ricegrass,
but could have been favored under certain conditions for acorn processing.
Carlson, Meredith [83] see Goring, Daniel
Carlucci, Eric (Indiana University, Bloomington)
[241]
Brewing up Archaeology: Understanding the Intersection of Archaeology and Craft Beer
The use of historical and archaeological iconography, and the invocation of ancient cultures, in order to sell a product is a common
marketing strategy. One unique area this intersection of archaeology and capitalism has collided is in craft brewing. As small-scale
brewing has grown around the world, some brewers have turned to historic sources and archaeologists to “re-create” certain
fermented beverages. For the brewery this is an uncommon opportunity to explore fermentation from a different angle, and for the
consumer it provides a hands-on way of experiencing what they perceive as history. However, these beverages have important
limitations, and this act has implications for archaeology and for the perception of archaeology in the general public. Looking at
chemical analyses, yeast, agriculture, and technology, the link between the historic source and the recreation can be examined at
every phase. Understanding the process behind these beverages, their marketing, and how the public experiences them provides
an opportunity for archaeologists to engage with the public in a creative, informative, and transparent manner.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                            86
Carmean, Kelli (Eastern Kentucky University)
[254]
Spark the Heart First: Archaeological Fiction in the Classroom
Who among us does not like a good story? How many of us have stayed awake long into the wee hours turning the pages of a novel
just to see what happens to our protagonist? This paper argues that archaeological fiction is capable of sparking interest in the
hearts and minds of our undergraduate students as well as the general public, in ways that more traditional archaeological
publications cannot. Archaeological fiction is able to do this because it engages at a different, more significant level—at the level of
the human lived experience—than only at the intellectual level. I present two case studies—one from an undergraduate the other
from a member of the general public, from two separate novels—that illustrate this argument. To best succeed in the classroom, I
propose that relevant assessments and discussion questions must be carefully developed to direct archaeological learning further,
beyond the rise of that initial spark of human story.
Carmichael, Patrick
[21]
Origins of Polychrome Pottery in Nasca Gravelots
On the south coast of Peru, Nasca polychrome pottery (ca. AD 100–600) is ubiquitous at habitation sites and cemeteries, where one
to a dozen or more vessels were included in burials as grave goods. Traditionally, Nasca ceramics, seriated into seven style
phases, were used only as chronological markers. But closer examination of the pots found together in a burial reveal clues to their
manufacture and circulation. By comparing the quality of associated vessels (construction, slip preparation, painting, burnishing,
firing) with artist color preferences and design themes, and anticipated markers for differing scales of production (master potter,
family workshop, community of potters) we can ask whether an individual obtained their ceramics from single or multiple sources. A
set of adjacent Nasca graves excavated by Alfred Kroeber in 1926 allow us to determine whether the vessels in each grave
belonged to the occupant, or were contributed by others. Finally, gravelots answer the question of whether the finest quality
polychrome is a marker of high status. In the past, researchers imposed their own interpretations on the ceramic data, while this
study allows the data to speak for itself.
Carmody, Stephen [211] see Davis, Jera
Carmody, Stephen [215] see Fields, Mara
Carmody, Stephen [63] see Tolan, Grace
Carpenter, Elsa [5] see Davis, Mary
Carpenter, John [79] see Krug, Andrew
Carpenter, Lacey (Hamilton College)
[150]
Destruction and Reconstruction: New dates from Area M at El Mogote
The Middle Formative site of El Mogote in Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico was first occupied at least as early as 700 BC and abruptly
abandoned around 300 BC. The site consists of a 2.2 ha civic ceremonial plaza and 52.8 ha of residential occupation. Prior to the
abrupt abandonment, residents of El Mogote may have engaged in raiding or violent conflict with other settlements or polities. In this
poster, I present new radiocarbon dates from the residential sectors at El Mogote to evaluate the likelihood and timing of incidents of
raiding. Excavations in Area M revealed that a residential complex east of the civic ceremonial core of the site was destroyed in a
fire. New radiocarbon dates help establish a sequence of events and indicate the area was immediately rebuilt. These dates
combined with features, artifactual, and architectural evidence indicate the building was destroyed accidentally or during a violent
attack as opposed to a ritual closing. Radiocarbon dates also help establish the relationship between this complex and other
excavated structures on the civic-ceremonial plaza and in other residential areas.
Carpenter, Lacey [35] see Langston, Jada
Carpenter, Michelle (University of Texas, San Antonio), Robert Hard (University of Texas, San Antonio), James Watson
(University of Arizona), Elisa Villalpando (Instituto Nacional de Anthropolgía e Historia) and Raymond Mauldin (University
of Texas, San Antonio)
[240]
Stable Isotope Analysis of the Early Agriculture Period at La Playa (SON:F:10:3) Sonora, Mexico
Stable isotopic analyses of carbon and nitrogen in bone can provide insight into the consumption of plants and animals. Bone collagen
differentially tracks the consumption of proteins, and bone apatite is comprehensive of an individual’s diet through the intake of lipids,
protein, and carbohydrates. Current analyses of 29 individuals from the Early Agricultural period (EAP) site of La Playa (SON:F:10:3),
demonstrates occupants were consuming resources that heavily relied on plants with CAM and C4 photosynthetic pathways throughout
the EAP. Analysis of 11 individuals from the San Pedro (3500–2800 BP) phase shows collagen δ13C values from –7.6‰ to –10.6‰ and
δ13C apatite values from –2.7‰ to –7.1‰. During the subsequent Cienega (2800–1800 BP) phase 18 individuals have collagen δ13C
values ranging from –8.4‰ to –12.05‰ and δ13C apatite values of –3.8‰ to –6.5‰. Several of these differences are statistically
significant. Overall these dietary patterns indicate variability in individual consumption rather than a strong directional shift in diet over
time associated with greater investments in maize agriculture. These isotopic results suggest that the exploitation of local CAM
resources may have masked the transition to agriculture during the Early Agricultural period in the Sonoran Desert.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        87
Carpenter, Michelle [179] see Mauldin, Raymond
Carpenter, Steve [176] see Cody, Mercedes
Carpenter, Steve [194] see Lawrence, Ken
Carpenter, Steve [194] see Miller, Kevin
Carr, Christopher (University of Cincinnati) and Nicholas Dunning (University of Cincinnati)
[20]
A Gypsum Quarry in Alignment with the Ancient Maya Cities of Calakmul and Yaxnohcah, Campeche, Mexico
Two isolated hills are located in an intriguing spatial relationship to the large ancient Maya cities of Calakmul and Yaxnohcah.
Structure II at Calakmul is positioned on a line extending from the south hill in a direction 14° clockwise from west. Similarly, the
principal Alba Group structure at Yaxnohcah is positioned on a line in a direction 14° clockwise from south. The two lines form a
right angle. Further, the axes of structures II and Alba are orientated along their respective lines. These suggestive positions and
orientations prompted visits to the hills in 2018 and 2019. On our approach along the flat lands leading to the hills, we encountered a
string of occupation sites, the largest of which included a peripheral open plaza strewn with numerous gypsum blocks of all sizes,
suggesting the plaza was a gypsum workshop. We explored the south hill which is covered with gypsum quarries: pit quarries dug
into the flatter land at the base and top of the hill, and vertical faces with terrace quarries cut into the side of the hill. We describe
these features and discuss possible ancient Maya uses for the gypsum output from this large quarry zone.
Carr, Christopher [20] see Brewer, Jeffrey
Carr, Christopher [63] see Frashuer, Anya
Carr, Christopher [99] see Smyth, Heather
Carr, Christopher (Arizona State University)
[99]
Scioto Hopewell Souls and Intercommunity Alliance-Making: Three Worldview Metaphors that Scioto Hopewell Peoples Lived
Hopewellian communities in the Scioto-Paint Creek area established alliances among themselves in part by interring their dead
together within single charnel houses in multiple instances; by intermixing the cremation ashes of their dead within a single
depository; and by placing, burning, and fusing together within single depositories on multiple occasions their ceremonial
paraphernalia from jointly performed rituals. These practices, along with close ethnohistorical analogs, point to the operation of three
basic worldview principles—metaphors for the idea of interpersonal cooperation—that were harnessed to build intercommunity
alliances: spatially associating souls; blending souls; and the equation of the domicile with a large ceremonial building, mound, and
ceremonial center as expressions of the extension of family-like ties and ethics of cooperation to the scales of the community,
multiple communities, and the cosmos. Insights are drawn from mortuary and nonmortuary ceremonies of the historic Huron,
Cherokee, and Munsee-Delaware and other Woodland tribes.
[99]
Chair
Carr, Philip (University of South Alabama)
[254]
Introduction to Archaeology and Biological Anthropology: Teaching with Team-Based Learning
Introductory archaeology courses that fulfill General Education requirements include a diversity of students and for most students it
will be there only formal academic exposure to the subject. Traditional “sage on the stage” pedagogy may not always be the best
means of engaging students and deepening their knowledge of archaeology. Team-Based Learning (TBL), a powerful teaching
method, has several essential elements: forming permanent teams; flipping the classroom; a specific sequence of individual work
and teamwork, and immediate feedback. Implementation of TBL is discussed and lessons learned are reviewed. Comparison
between student work from the traditional and TBL class show no significant differences. Data show that TBL created a motivational
framework in which students increasingly held each other accountable for coming to class prepared and contributing, which resulted
in higher class performance as well as fewer withdrawals.
Carr, Sarah and Stephen Silliman (University of Massachusetts, Boston)
[112]
Housing a Reservation: Eastern Pequot Architectural Investment and Use in Nineteenth-Century Connecticut
This paper examines internal variation related to architecture from three nineteenth-century Eastern Pequot domestic structures on
the Eastern Pequot Reservation in North Stonington, Connecticut. Two of these building remnants highlight commonalities between
household architectural styles, while the third shows a significant increase in architectural investment in terms of size and
fenestration. We explore the reasons for this contemporaneous variation, especially in relation to other material investments of the
household. Analysis of household features and associated spaces, window glass, and ceramics from three houses occupied around
the same time will inform to what extent indigenous negotiation of colonial markets and Anglo overseer administration influenced
building construction and use across the reservation. Understanding heterogeneity on the reservation helps move further away from
monolithic characterizations of indigenous communities in studies of colonial impact.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        88
Carrasco, Michael (Florida State University)
[141]
Meaning, Aesthetics, and the Origin of Precolumbian Art in Terence Grieder’s Thought
Terence Grieder often discussed aesthetics, the act of making, and the materiality of images and objects. He developed these
issues through his work on rock art, ceramics, textiles, and architecture over a highly productive career in art history and
archaeology. One of his many contributions was to establish ways of accessing meaning from images and objects that lack
accompanying texts. He worked to show that there was a complex alternation between the continuity and disjunction of meaning
across time, in contradistinction to George Kubler’s insistence on the radical disjunction of meaning. Moreover, his focus on
aesthetics in indigenous artistic systems underscored the fundamental role of expressive culture as central to the human condition,
rather than as simply a collection of iconographic motifs to be read. This paper critically examines and extends these and other key
ideas on representation, the origins of art, and issues of materiality and meaning. It places Grieder’s ideas on these issues in
relation to recent studies in precolumbian art that have dealt with similar theoretical questions, and to the work of Alfred Gell, who
also emphasized process and agency and sought to unravel how meaning resides in images and things.
Carrasco, Michael [191] see Englehardt, Joshua
Carré, Matthieu [67] see Gruver, Steph
Carreón Blaine, Emilie (Instituto de Investigaciones Estéticas UNAM)
[225]
Mesoamerican Ballgame, Human Sacrifice, Ritual Decapitation, and Trophy Taking: Variations in Ways of Displaying
The purpose of this collaboration is to present the results of the analysis of a human skull located at the center of the ball court of
Santa Rosa, Chiapas, and to review the implications it presents for the study of the Mesoamerican ball game and its relationship to
human sacrifice. It is a unique case in which hard archaeological data directly associates a skull with the ball game. It will allow for
the review of the widespread proposal linking the ball court with the tzompantli, and will serve as a basis to present the many
manners in which human body parts, primarily the head, were displayed to explore how Mesoamerican peoples appropriated and
adapted what were Culture Area-wide paradigms in thought and behavior.
Carroll, Jon (Oakland University)
[222]
Exploring the Natchez Paradox through Computer Simulation
The nature of Natchez of sociopolitical organization has been debated by researchers since at least the early twentieth century. The
mechanisms for how precontact people were able to accumulate or lose status within their communities are not fully understood.
This discussion uses Agent Based Modeling to explore competing ideas of sociopolitical rank exogamy proposed for the Natchez
communities of the lower Mississippi Valley. The software package NetLogo is used to generate probabilities for for each competing
scenario.
Carroll, Peyton (University of Cambridge), Miles Martin (Stanford University Heritage and Resource Management), John
Murray (School of Human Evolution and Social Change) and Curtis Marean (African Centre for Coastal Palaeoscience)
[38]
Comparing Piece-Plotted and Sieved Stone Artifacts from the Middle Stone Age Site Pinnacle Point 5–6 and Its Implications for
Interpreting Human Behavior
Archaeological field work is a time consuming and destructive process. Thus, the primary goal of excavation is to meticulously
document as much information about the site and artifacts as possible. In Paleolithic archaeology, it is common for archaeologists to
use a total station to record the spatial location of artifacts (=piece-plotting) and employ a post-excavation sieving protocol for small
finds that were not plotted by the excavator. A significant amount of work is invested in finding, cleaning, and analyzing these small
artifacts. In this research, we investigate whether there are biases in artifact assemblages that were piece-plotted in situ and those
found within the small finds at the Middle Stone Age site, Pinnacle Point 5–6, on the coast of South Africa. We analyzed artifacts
found in the 10mm sieve from units dated to the MIS 5 to MIS 4 transition and compared them to the piece plotted artifacts that
correspond to these units. Our goal is to see if there are differences in assemblage composition between the plotted and screened
data. These results have implications for archaeological excavation and analysis protocols, particularly regarding small finds.
Carroll, Sean (Oregon State University) and Loren Davis (Oregon State University)
[195]
Preliminary Results of a Geometric Morphometric Analysis of Fluted Points within the Far West
While Clovis points are said to represent “the best documented early human settlement in the New World” (see Sholts et al. 2012), there
is considerable controversy over observed variation in Clovis points. While some, such as Collins (1999), claim that there is a
standardized Clovis manufacturing technology, others claim that there is regional morphological variation in Clovis points (Sholts et al.
2012). This presentation presents the preliminary results of an analysis implementing a novel approach in lithic morphometric analysis
to statistically quantify the amount of morphometric variation observed in fluted points of the Far West. While the potential for regional
variation in fluted point morphology has been previously noted, existing research does not sufficiently address the statistical extent of
this variation. In the past, understanding variation in lithic analysis has been restricted to physical artifact measurements using hand
calipers. The result is a series of subjective measurements that often vary between individual researchers. The research presented
aims to provide a systematic approach to lithic analysis that can not only be used to understand the morphometric variation in the fluted
points of the Far West, but which can also be applied to lithic analysis beyond the extent of this project.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  89
Carson, Mike (Micronesian Area Research Center [MARC])
[140]
Paleolandscapes Reveal Potential for Sustainable Living: Examples in Pacific Oceania
Paleolandscape studies in Pacific Oceania reveal how people adapted through a few thousand years of their transforming inhabited
landscapes, living through change in climate, sea level, coastal morphology, slope erosion-deposition patterns, forest composition,
freshwater accessibility, population densities, technological developments, and social structure. In different places and time periods,
the records show how people were variably successful versus unsuccessful in either sustaining their lifeways or else
accommodating new traditions of how to continue inhabiting their landscapes. Selected paleolandscape examples in Pacific
Oceania are reviewed here, toward identifying the factors that may be relevant for coping with current and future issues of changing
climate, resource distributions, and population dynamics at a global scale.
[140]
Chair
Carson, Mike (Micronesian Area Research Center [MARC])
[219]
Discussant
Carter, Benjamin [257] see Vance, Ashley
Carter, Nicholas (Harvard University)
[130]
Lords of the Five Lands: The Ho’kab’ Dynasty in Ancient Maya Political History
The Ho’kab’ dynasty, based at the sites of Ixtutz and Ixtonton near the modern town of Dolores, Guatemala, played an important
role in the ancient political and economic history of the western Maya Mountains. The details of that history are still being worked
out, but newly published inscriptions and imaging techniques applied to previously known objects provide new data. In this
presentation, I explore the epigraphic and archaeological evidence for the kingdom’s trajectory from the Late Preclassic to the
Terminal Classic period, including insights into the hows and whys of the Ho’kab’ kingdom’s foundation, its interactions with other
polities, and its survival late into the period of the lowland Maya collapse.
Carter, Sidney
[255]
A Geoarchaeological Perspective on Ceramics as Records of Archaeological Landscapes
Many approaches to theorizing and analyzing landscapes delineate cultural traces that are ingrained in natural spaces. This
orientation is prominent in landscape archaeology of the American Southwest. In contrast, the geoarchaeological research on
ceramic resource procurement conducted as part of the Upper Basin Archaeological Research Project is predicated on an inversion
of perspective relative to these investigations. Whereas Fairley (2003:108), for example, aims to study “cultural behaviors” in the
Grand Canyon region of northern Arizona by “examining the traces of human activities embedded in the landscape,” we seek to
understand such behaviors by examining the traces of the geological components of the landscape embedded in the products of
human activities. Informed by Alan Sullivan’s approach to the archaeological record as independent source of information about the
cultural past, we combine petrography and isotope geochemistry to evaluate the geological identities of ceramic raw materials in an
effort to reconstruct patterns of ceramic resource procurement in landscapes of the eastern Grand Canyon region. As a counterpoint
to previous reconstructions of territories defined by ceramic distributions, we offer an evaluation of ceramics as records of
landscapes that are embodied through incorporation into archaeological materials.
Cartwright, Rachel (University of Minnesota)
[85]
Settler and Local Dynamics during the Viking Age Diaspora: New Research on Northern Scotland
Migrations are a phenomenon occurring throughout human history with each movement of people bringing different groups into
contact. This paper will be looking at the Viking Diaspora and the interactions between local inhabitants and the arriving
Scandinavian settlers, with a particular focus on Northern Scotland. There has long been a debate as to the nature of relations
between the Scandinavian settlers and the Picts, with two types of interactions being proposed: genocide or assimilation. This paper
seeks to reconcile these two extreme viewpoints. In order to try for a more balanced interpretation this paper explores the
archaeological evidence from Orkney and Caithness, places known to have been inhabited by the Picts and the Vikings
simultaneously. By exploring the settlement and burial evidence from several sites a more unbiased approach to the archaeology is
sought, providing insight into the lived experience of both the settlers and the locals.
Caruso, Annie
[160]
Decolonizing Archaeology through Ethnography: Source Community Responses to Euro-American Archaeological Practices in the
Eastern Caribbean
Archaeological practices were developed through colonial powers and remain intimately affiliated with Euro-American ways of
knowing the world. As such, academic practitioners from the Global North maintain the power to construct authorized heritage
discourses about indigenous and subaltern peoples around the world, which may also include the physical appropriation of cultural
material or human remains from spaces lacking certain heritage protection mechanisms. However, decolonial research rooted in the
voices of historically marginalized indigenous and subaltern stakeholders can illuminate and redress such ongoing power
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     90
asymmetries toward the goal of yielding more equitable and sustainable research practices among source communities. This paper
highlights the ways in which ethnography has been used to critically examine the complex contact zone created by visiting Euro-
American researchers excavating pre-contact indigenous settlements on a small Caribbean island with a majority Afro-Antillean
population. The research presented here platforms subaltern source community responses to such archaeological intervention and
includes a discussion of the overlapping and diverging visions of heritage preservation and collections care for excavated material
between diverse stakeholders. In the end, local recommendations for heritage management reforms are synthesized, which include
actionable remedies that potential visiting archaeologists may implement in response to community input.
Caruso, Annie [160] see Sloan, Anna
Carvajal López, José (University of Leicester)
[196]
All That Glitters Is Not Glaze: The Islamization of Pots in Early Medieval Iberia
Islamic ceramic traditions in pottery are almost unanimously identified with glazes and dazzling decorations. In this paper, however,
I want to explore the beginnings of Islamic ceramics in Iberia by leaving glaze in a second plane, and focus mainly on the changes
in technologies of forming and clay mixing. After all, the arrival of Muslims in Iberia happened in 711, more than 150 years before
the first glazed pots were produced, and there was a process of Islamization since then. In my technological analysis of the pots, I
will explore the period between the eighth and the tenth centuries CE, and I will present some of the ways in which the construction
of common ground and difference were made with material culture in a process of culture change. This is clearly visible when
technological features, the result of particular steps in the chaine operatoire, can be seen to be adopted as popular or discarded as
obsolete in the transmission of knowledge of pots in a region. From the perspective that I propose, Islamic ceramics are those pots
that are product, but also origin and support, of the processes of Islamization in Iberia.
Carvalho, Milena (University of New Mexico, ICArEHB), Grace Ellis (Colorado State University) and Jonathan Haws
(University of Louisville, ICArEHB)
[36]
Subsistence and Site Formation Processes during the Early Upper Paleolithic at Lapa do Picareiro: A Study of Faunal Remains
Recovered at the Sieve
Modern excavation techniques often result in faunal assemblages comprised of individual bones whose provenience has been
recorded using a total station and remains recovered at the sieve (e.g., micro-fragments, small taxa). Typically, faunal remains
recovered during sieving are not prioritized in zooarchaeological study and end up not contributing to the interpretation of deposits.
However, studies show that by analyzing the micro-fragment and sieved portion of faunal assemblages, archaeologists can gain
more information about the formation of palimpsests and identify human activities such as grease rendering, meat and marrow
processing, and the exploitation of smaller prey items. Here, we present the preliminary results of a zooarchaeological, taphonomic
and spatial study of the micro-fragment and sieved portions of faunal assemblages that correspond to Aurignacian and Gravettian
deposits (levels U-DD) from the Paleolithic site Lapa do Picareiro. Picareiro is a cave site in Portugal with deposits spanning the
Middle to Upper Paleolithic transition, well established chronology and large collection of artifacts and ecofacts. The results of this
study will contribute to a greater understanding of the subsistence practices of early Upper Paleolithic hominins in Portuguese
Estremadura and the site formation processes of Picareiro, and more generally, caves.
Carvalho, Milena [11] see Haws, Jonathan
Carvey, Andrea (DrumFire, Visual Communications)
[147]
Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality Applications in Archaeology
Virtual Reality and Augmented are poised to become essential aspects of archaeological investigation. We review past and current
explorations, including the equipment and software available. Future applications for visualizing archaeological data will be explored
in keeping with the SAA Principles of Archaeological Ethics.
Casal, Fernando (University of Texas, Austin), Timothy Beach (University of Texas, Austin) and Colin Doyle (University of
Texas, Austin)
[8]
Soil, Sediments, and Great Waters: The Tabasco Project and Mesoamerican Cultural Origins
Analyzing geomorphology broadly and soils and sediments specifically are integral to understanding water and soil management in
the Middle Preclassic around the site of Aguada Fenix, Tabasco, Mexico. This poster presents the soil and water chemistry of
Aguada Fenix based on samples collected in 2018 in three main excavations. The laboratory analyses include soil and water
elemental, compound, and mineral composition, as well as soil carbon isotopes and typical soil and sediment analyses. This is part
of a broader project based in Anthropology at the University of Arizona that examines the origins of Mesoamerican civilization. The
parallel project presented here uses geoarchaeological and soil analysis to help understand the the Archaic and Preclassic evolution
of water management and agriculture in this key region. This is a key region because of the early evolution of monumental
architecture in this convergence zone of the great rivers of Mesoamerica, including Mexico’s largest river, the Usumacinta.
Casana, Jesse (Dartmouth College) and Madeleine McLeester (University of Notre Dame)
[124]
The State of the Field: Emerging Approaches to the Archaeology of Agricultural Landscapes
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      91
Twenty-five years ago, Naomi Miller and Katheryn Gleason edited the seminal volume, The Archaeology of Garden and Field, an
authoritative guide to the identification and interpretation of archaeological field systems and other evidence of past agricultural
practice inscribed within the landscape. This paper reviews the state of the field today, overviewing a suite of emerging methods that
are revolutionizing how archaeologists find ancient field systems, including recent advances in aerial, satellite, and ground-based
remote sensing, as well as complementary geochemical and archaeobotanical approaches. This paper situates the critical urgency
for archaeological understandings of past agricultural land use practices within contemporary theoretical discourses exploring the
entanglements of humans with their environment as well as the transdisciplinary debate surrounding the establishment and
definition of the Anthropocene as a geologic epoch. Herein, we argue for the importance of archaeological investigations of fields
that prioritize discovery and interpretation of relict fields and their constitution within larger landscapes, both as a means to better
understand people in the past as well as our role as a species in shaping global ecosystems.
[124]
Chair
Casana, Jesse [147] see Hill, Austin
Casana, Jesse [124] see Laugier, Elise Jakoby
Casar, Isabel [225] see Ruiz, Judith
Casar, Isabel [233] see Somerville, Andrew
Cascalheira, João (ICArEHB, University of Algarve), Celia Gonçalves (ICArEHB, University of Algarve), Lino André
(ICArEHB, University of Algarve) and Nuno Bicho (ICArEHB, University of Algarve)
[34]
Functionality and the Spatio-Temporal Variability of a Shell Midden: Insights from Cabeço da Amoreira (Muge, Portugal)
Shell middens are frequently regarded as mono-functional sites resulting from the sequential accumulation of discarded food items.
In Central Portugal, on the contrary, due to their large size, an incredible number of artifacts and human burials, the Muge Mesolithic
shell middens have always been thought as representing extensive residential occupations. However, very little evidence was
available on the set of activities, and correspondent spatial arrangement, occurring at each site. Ongoing excavations at Cabeço da
Amoreira (one of the largest shell middens in Muge) allowed the identification of a very diverse set of shell-rich and shell-free
stratigraphic contexts, possibly indicating the occurrence of functionally diverse areas within the site. This poster presents a first
quantitative assessment and comparison of the archaeological contents of each of these contexts, providing new data on the spatio-
temporal variation and functional organization of Mesolithic shell middens.
Cascalheira, João [250] see Bicho, Nuno
Cascalheira, João [34] see Gonçalves, Célia
Cascalheira, João [11] see Haws, Jonathan
Caseldine, Christopher (Arizona State University)
[99]
Soul Journeys to Afterlives: A Systematic Survey of Postcolonial Woodland and Plains Native American Ideas in Oral Narratives as
a Foundation for Precolonial Mortuary Studies
Symbolically rich mortuary remains from prehistoric Woodlands and Plains societies in North America offer ripe opportunities for
inferring past eschatologies when integrated with analogous native ethnohistorical information. This research approach has been
weakened, however, by the lack of systematic characterization and mapping of historic Woodland-Plains eschatological knowledge.
A survey of 204 narratives about the journey to an afterlife, drawn from 42 Woodland-Plains tribes, documents a huge suite of motifs
(527), their commonness, geographic distributions, and co-occurrences. Twelve distinct journey narratives or narrative segment
models, geographically bounded, are revealed. Although a few individual motifs were widespread across subregions, no
standardized journey model was found.
Casserley, Tane (NOAA) and David Alberg (NOAA)
[231]
America’s Forgotten WWII Battlefield
Beyond Monitor National Marine Sanctuary’s (MNMS) current boundaries off North Carolina lie waters associated with nearly 500
years of western maritime history and includes shipwrecks representing coastal heritage, American Civil War, U.S. naval aviation,
WWI, and most prominently WWII. MNMS is proposing a boundary expansion to protect and honor these additional resources.
MNMS expansion represents an ideal opportunity to celebrate, study, and preserve a nationally significant collection of shipwrecks
and would serve as a uniquely accessible underwater museum and memorial to WWII’s Battle of the Atlantic. MNMS’s expansion
boundaries will contain the most publicly accessible collection of WWII shipwrecks near America’s shore and would constitute the
largest area designated as a WWII battlefield anywhere in the United States. With the 75th anniversary of the close of WWII this is
the time to honor the history and sacrifice of Allied servicemen and the U.S. Merchant Marine.
Casson, Aksel (Slippery Rock University) and James Jablonski
[176]
Preliminary Excavations at Wolf Creek, a Prehistoric Site in Western Pennsylvania
We present here a report of initial archaeological excavations of the Wolf Creek Site (College II, 36BT0507), a hypothesized Late
Archaic site in Butler County, Pennsylvania, during the summer and fall of 2019. Survey and excavation along portions of Wolf
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   92
Creek in Slippery Rock, Pennsylvania, suggest a series of short-term occupations extending from the Late Archaic to historic
periods. This preliminary interpretation is based on the identification of multiple hearth features and moderate quantities of flakes
and debitage of local chert, including concentrations of tertiary flakes that we believe to be consistent with Late Archaic patterns.
This project is a collaboration between Slippery Rock University student volunteers, retired professional archaeologists, and
amateur local archaeologists as part of a larger effort by the university’s anthropology program to develop service learning and
community engagement opportunities in Butler County.
Castañeda, Amanda (Wyoming State Historic Preservation Office) and Mark Willis (Mark D. Willis Consulting)
[79]
Exploring Ground Stone Bedrock Feature Variation on the Mescalero Plain, New Mexico
Recent cultural resource management investigations east of Carlsbad, New Mexico on the Mescalero Plain resulted in the
identification and documentation of almost 300 ground stone bedrock features. The features within this sample have a wide variety
of morphologies, ranging from tiny cupules (~2 cm in diameter) to very large basins (~35 cm in diameter). Given the variation of
documented features, preliminary observations show that approximately 50% of the sample has a distinct and consistent
morphology, resembling “boat mortars” found on the Llano Estacado in Texas. This morphological uniformity suggests a pattern in
food processing and resource procurement activities that may yield information regarding lifeways in the region. The recorded
bedrock features occur at sites varying in age from the Late Prehistoric Ochoa Phase, although other associations may be present.
The regional flora is characterized by mesquite, shinnery oak, and a variety of grasses—all of which may have been processed in
these bedrock features. This poster presents the morphological types of the sampled bedrock features and examines them in
conjunction with macroscopic use-wear analysis, known age associations, hypotheses about functionality, and comparison to
bedrock feature morphologies in the surrounding regions.
Castañeda, Francisco [269] see Acuña, Mary Jane
Castañeda, Quetzil (OSEA Open School of Ethnography & Anthropology)
[57]
Discussant
Castillo, Luis Jaime [242] see Schofield, Abagail
Castillo, Nina and Giancarlo Marcone
[105]
Los Pescadores de Cerro Azul, un Caso de la Costa Centro Sur del Peru
En la década de 1980, la arqueóloga Joyce Marcus realizó una serie de excavaciones en el sitio arqueológico de Cerro Azul,
identificado como El Huarco, ubicado en la parte baja del valle de Cañete. Uno de los objetivos principales fue el definir la
existencia o no de especialización productiva, en específico pesquera, asociada al sitio. Marcus halla una serie de elementos que
evidencian una especialización productiva, que incluye áreas de procesamiento de pescado, herramientas especializadas y,
además, propone un sistema de distribución del mismo, que implicaba caravanas de llamas. Sin cuestionar la especialización
económica del sitio Cerro Azul hacia la producción marítima y en base a la revisión de crónicas, investigaciones pasadas y la
evidencia recuperada en las primeras dos temporadas de excavación en el sitio arqueológico El Huarco, el presente artículo
pretende llamar la atención a los posibles significados adicionales que pueda tener la pesca en un sitio como Cerro Azul y que van
más allá de una funcionalidad económica.
Castillo, Nina [224] see Marcone, Giancarlo
Castleberry, Cala (Northern Arizona University), Nicholas Laluk (Northern Arizona University), Vernelda Grant (San Carlos
Apache Tribe) and Vanessa Nosie (San Carlos Apache Tribe)
[184]
We are the Land: TCP Nominations, Activism, Politics and Spirituality in Protecting Apache Sacred Places
Tribal Nations in the continental U.S. are increasingly attempting to nominate sacred places as Traditional Cultural Properties
(TCPs) onto the National Register of Historic Places. The nomination of a TCP offers an opportunity for a more in-depth
consideration of what constitutes a place to tribal communities, specifically by the recognition of cultural importance which can aid in
Federal decision-making processes. However, the act of nominating a TCP is questioned by some federal employees because it
offers no real protection from desecration or destruction. Given the limitations of overall TCP protective procedures various tribal
entities including the San Carlos and White Mountain Apache tribes have employed alternative protective strategies including the
work of non-profit activist groups such as the Apache-Stronghold. This poster examines how both the White Mountain and San
Carlos Apache Tribal Historic Preservation programs navigate various politics and policies in reference to TCP nominations.
Moreover, discussions of the Apache-Stronghold’s fight to protect and preserve Chí’chil Biłdagoteel (Oak Flat) provide a powerful
window into Apache epistemologies associated to place, identity and overall future well-being.
Castro, Andrey [161] see Kipnis, Renato
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    93
Castro, Silvina [243] see Carline, Kristin
Castro-Priego, Manuel (Alcala University), Lauro Olmo-Enciso (Alcala University) and Marcos Octavio Labrada-Ochoa
(Instituto Nacional de Patrimonio Cultural del Ecuador)
[257]
Perduraciones prehispánicas y conformación del paisaje colonial en la costa Ecuatoriana en los siglos XVI y XVII
El proyecto “Perduraciones, continuidad y ruptura” se desarrolla desde el año 2018 en la provincia de Manabí, Ecuador. La
investigación se centra en la identificación de la cultura material, organización espacial y procesos de perduración prehispánicos
durante el periodo inicial de la colonia (ss. XVI y XVII) a lo largo de un amplio sector de la costa central ecuatoriana. Se presentan
los resultados obtenidos fruto de la comparación de contextos arqueológicos de cronología manteña tardía (ss. XV-XVI),
procedentes del yacimiento de Ligüiki (Cantón Manta) y Cerro de Hojas (Picoazá, Portoviejo), con las primeras fases coloniales de
la ciudad de Portoviejo (ss. XVI y XVII). Se analizan también las características del yacimiento de Ligüiki, y se ofrece una primera
secuencia cronológica, así como una interpretación de los espacios productivos y habitacionales, que debieron conformar su
paisaje social e histórico a comienzos del siglo XVI.
Cates, Kari [129] see Conrad, Cyler
Cathcart, Danielle
[172]
Warehousing the Past: Are We Doing the Right Thing?
The cultural resource management industry, emerging from the passage of landmark national and subsequent state-level
legislation, is arguably one of the largest generators of archaeological collections in North America. Project-specific deadlines,
budgetary constraints, variations in state agency guidelines, and the realities of property ownership, present CRM companies with
an ethical dilemma that has resulted in collections remaining in limbo, or worse, orphaned in warehouses across the country. Often
a collection’s owner is reluctant or unable to shoulder the costs of long-term curation elevating the risk of total collection
abandonment or loss. While the fate of federally-owned collections is never in question, the bulk of many firms’ collections originate
from private, state, or municipal lands. The dearth of private, local or state-run repositories able to accept new collections compels
CRM firms and local historical societies to function as de-facto repositories with little to no mandate or financial support to do so.
Richard Grubb and Associates, Inc., in operation since 1988, is keenly aware of the chronic and immediate nature of these issues.
This paper will share RGA’s strategy, successes, and challenges in navigating these murky waters.
Catlin, Kathryn (Brown University)
[272]
Political Ecology Materialized in a Medieval Icelandic Landscape
Past ecological and political-economic changes are embedded in the materiality of the landscape, and investigating correlations
between such changes can suggest how relationships between ecology and economy were structured and managed within past
societies. Iceland was first settled in the late ninth century by wealthy Norwegian farmers and their households, whose early efforts
rapidly transformed the island from forested wilderness to pastoral landscape. The environmental impact of this settlement is
materially evident, as deforestation and erosion. A regional archaeological survey of medieval settlements shows that as
environmental degradation reached a turning point, people were leaving the very smallest settlements, moving to join larger farming
households. The abandonment of small settlements illustrates a shift in the way social inequality was organized: early social
differences were largest within households, while later status differences were most evident between households, as land ownership
became the dominant source of wealth and power. Correlating material evidence of environmental change with that of changing
settlement patterns suggests that the rise of inter-household inequality, and its accompanying political and economic institutions,
was enabled and encouraged by landscape transformation. Such an observation is possible only when the full materiality of the
landscape is considered.
Cawthra, Hayley [11] see Fisher, Erich
Cegielski, Wendy (Arizona State University)
[17]
Automated, Geometric Morphometrics of Iberian Bronze Age Ceramic Rims
Ceramics often are the most prevalent artifact type on archaeological sites, making them a useful tool for chronology-building.
However, ceramic assemblages often lack obvious chronologically, diagnostic traits necessitating a more nuanced, classification
approach. A long-used method in Archaeology, Geometric Morphometrics classifies shapes using standardized Cartesian landmark
points and statistical analysis. This project presents a case study of a computational, automated approach to Geometric
Morphometrics of already published, 2D ceramic profiles of rim fragments from the Iberian Bronze Age. The computation uses a
curvature function and oscillating circle algorithm, commonly deployed in automated image classification. Results are compared to a
benchmark geometric morphometric analysis conducted in the 1990s of the same dataset using clustering/PCA.
Celestine, Bryant
[113]
Moderator
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    94
Celhar, Martina [85] see Zaro, Gregory
Celis, Ana [137] see de Anda, Guillermo
Cencig, Elsa [50] see Ryan, Karen
Cercone, Ashley (University at Buffalo)
[263]
Potter’s Wheel, Potter’s Mold, and Coil-Made: Examining Potting Technologies Using Morphometrics
Although the study of morphometrics has a long history in the subfield of physical/biological anthropology, archaeologists have just
begun to incorporate morphometrics in their studies of material culture. In recent years, archaeologists have utilized morphometrics
to determine the level of craft specialization at prehistoric, test the symmetry of stone tools, classify ceramic sherds, examine the
level of production standardization, and overall study the change of an artifact type over time and space. This paper discusses how
morphometrics can be applied to archaeological ceramics to examine the morphological variability between potting technologies and
utilized to possibly determine the technology that was used to create the pot.
Cerezo-Román, Jessica (University of Oklahoma)
[79]
Embodiment and Regional Patterns of Hohokam Mortuary Practices
This paper explores notions of embodiment within regional patterns of Hohokam mortuary practices from the Preclassic (AD 700–
1150) to Classic periods (AD 1150–1450/1500). Hohokam mortuary rituals from Tucson and Phoenix basin sites are contrasted and
compared by analyzing osteological profiles of the individuals, posthumous treatments of the body, and in the cases of cremation,
thermal alterations. Preliminary results suggest strong similarities between Tucson and Phoenix area mortuary rituals and ideas
about the body in the Preclassic Period. Cremation was the main funeral custom with an emphasis on secondary deposition.
However, during the Classic Period, practices in the areas diverge significantly. Inhumation became the primary burial custom in the
Phoenix basin while Tucson basin Hohokam continued cremation as the main mortuary custom. Changes in mortuary practices
between the regions could represent changes in perceptions of embodiment, different tempos, and ways of treating the bodies, but
also possibly parallel commemorative rituals.
Cerezo-Román, Jessica [240] see Edington, Stacy
Cerezo-Román, Jessica [38] see Hanson, Annalys
Cesaretti, Rudolf (Arizona State University), Carlos Cordova (Oklahoma State University) and Charles Frederick
[269]
Analysis and Implications of Postdepositional Bias in the Basin of Mexico (BOM) Surveys: A Preliminary Case Study of the Texcoco
Survey Region
The Basin of Mexico (BOM) regional surveys have been a cornerstone of archaeological inferences about Prehispanic demography,
political, and economic organization over the long-term. However, recent geoarchaeological fieldwork in the BOM has indicated
patterned geomorphological biases in the regional surveys, notably the repeated phases of Holocene alluvial deposition obscuring
remnants of Prehispanic landscapes from surface survey. This preliminary study uses geophysical techniques to analyze and
estimate postdepositional biases in the Texcoco survey region data. Survey data, 5m lidar DEMs, and other INEGI geospatial data
clearly detect the geomorphic features documented in fieldwork, enabling us to map the signatures of past geomorphic processes.
Using these process-based geomorphic signatures, machine learning, and non-linear regression, we model the probability and
degree of postdepositional bias. This highlights areas where surface sites would be obscured by deposition and modern land use
(both at the time of the survey and today). Early sixteenth-century ethnohistoric data then facilitate the predictive modeling of Aztec
settlement corrected for the estimated error in survey site recovery. These techniques highlight the potential magnitude and
theoretical implications of systematic biases in the BOM survey data, as well as identify fruitful areas for excavation and subsurface
remote sensing.
Chacaltana-Cortez, Sofia (Universidad Antonio Ruiz de Montoya)
[32]
Discussant
Chadwick, William [213] see Ford, Ben
Challis, Sam (Rock Art Research Institute, South Africa) and Brent Sinclair-Thomson (Rock Art Research Institute)
[60]
The Disconnect: The Impact of Contact and Colonization on the Indigenous Worldview, Rock Art, and History in Southern Africa
The archaeological record undergoes a dramatic shift in appearance whenever indigenous peoples encounter incoming
populations—whether in the form of altered economy, altered politics, or altered identity. Rock art in southern Africa testifies to
successive interactions between hunter-gatherers, incoming African herders, and African farmers from around 2,000 years ago, as
well as later European settlers. New subject matter, however, is not simply incorporated into the existing tradition. Without
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   95
exception, the many rock arts that depict novel motifs are made differently from the “traditional corpus”—usually rougher (in both
paintings and engravings), more dynamic, or with vivid and chalky paints. The drop in pigment quality is likely owing to the
decimation of indigenous groups and the subsequent breakdown in trade communications. The shifts in manner of depiction and the
ways in which motifs are treated owes more, it seems, to the increasingly heterogeneous and creolizing membership of the art-
producing people and the mixing of their cosmologies.
Chamalian, Zaynab (University of South Florida) and Karen Schollmeyer (Archaeology Southwest)
[122]
Floor Features and Room Closure Deposits at Cliff Phase Salado Sites in Southwest New Mexico
Seven field seasons of the Archaeology Southwest and University of Arizona’s Preservation Archaeology Field School have
produced an abundance of archaeological data from Cliff Phase (1300–1450 AD) sites near the upper Gila River. The Cliff phase is
marked by the migration of Kayenta groups, originally from northeastern Arizona, and Salado ideological coalescence associated
with their settlement in this area. This poster uses data from recent excavations and published reports to examine room floor
deposits, floor features, and special deposits associated with room closure activities in adobe rooms and roomblocks. These
deposits include mealing features, concentrations of the remains of birds and fish, and various styles of pottery, including Salado
polychromes. Examining these deposits from an intrasite perspective and the Gila River Farm site and an intersite perspective in the
broader upper Gila area allow new insights into how these distinctive deposits reveal the intersection of Mogollon and Kayenta
influences in Cliff phase archaeological sites.
Chamussy, Vincent (UMR 8096 Archéologie des Amériques [CNRS-Paris 1]), Nicolas Goepfert (CNRS, UMR 8096
Archéologie des Amériques) and Romuald Housse (Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne, UMR 8096)
[174]
Was Huarás (White-on-Red) a New Culture or the Revival of Chavín Culture?
The collapse of Chavin culture is still subject to various speculations and the setting up of the so called White-on Red Culture
(Huarás) on the ruins of the Chavín temple has not been subject of specific studies to date. In contrast, a significant set of data
makes clear that it has predated the collapse of Early Horizon culture (the former coastal Chavín) on the northern coast of Peru. We
propose the following scenario: the invasion by an ethnic group bearing a new culture evidenced by innovative cultural features.
This intrusion would have taken place during an “Overlap Period” (400 BC–AD 0) corresponding to the end of the Early Horizon and
the beginning of the Early Intermediate Period. This group brought about confrontation with the ethnics groups already living on the
highlands and the coast, and progressively acculturated these populations by an ethnogenesis process. This new culture includes
Cajamarca 1 and 2, Layzón, Salinar, Puerto Moorin, Patazca, Huarás, San Blas, Baños de Boza, which gradually replaced the
former Early Horizon traditions. This arrival is concomitant with an important cultural shift, highly visible in new weapons, ceramic
morphology and decoration, iconography, architecture, funerary practices, and metal work.
Chandler, Susan
[31]
Discussant
Chandler, Susan
[58]
The Role of Cultural Resource Management in Archaeological Research: A Case Study from the Western United States
This paper explores the transformation of one CRM firm in the context of the CRM industry in the western United States from the
late 1970s to today. It focuses on how CRM can and should lead the archaeological profession in meaningful and innovative
archaeological research. Since Alpine Archaeological Consultants (Alpine) was founded in 1987 by the husband-wife team of Alan
Reed and Susan Chandler and their business partner, Jonathon Horn, the company has undergone significant growth. This
expansion is evident not only in terms of numbers of employees but also in terms of the geographic extent of projects conducted
and the range of services offered by the company. Alpine’s core mission has been to serve the needs of clients through innovative,
timely, and cost-effective strategies that allow projects to be completed within the client’s timeframe. At the same time and working
in concert with other regional CRM firms, Alpine has prided itself on conducting important archaeological research that has made
significant contributions to knowledge of the archaeological record.
[58]
Chair
Chandler, Susan [58] see Douglass, John
Channell, Rachel [65] see Neff, Matthew
Chapa, Reymundo
[52]
Discussant
Chapdelaine, Claude [12] see Gates St-Pierre, Christian
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      96
Chapman, Ellen and Victoria Ferguson (Monacan Indian Nation)
[251]
Toward a Decolonized CRM: Challenges in Archaeological Stewardship and Interpretation for Virginia Tribes
Virginia’s landscape for tribal rights and recognition experienced a sea change in the last four years with the long-overdue federal
recognition of many of Virginia’s tribal communities. Virginia now has seven federally recognized resident tribes, and an additional
five tribes have state recognition. Virginian erasures of native history have been created not primarily through physical removal but
by state-coordinated demographic erasure, an under-investment in scholarly research for much of the twentieth century, and
ignorance regarding community persistence. While cultural resource management represents a critical opportunity for the recovery
of aspects of tribal histories, some projects exacerbate this erasure due to flaws such as a lack of research into nineteenth- and
twentieth-century tribal history; use of outdated boilerplate language; unqualified contractors receiving work due to low bids or non-
competitive contracts; lack of consideration for sites under National Register Criteria A, B, and C; and a general absence of tribal
outreach. This paper discusses some examples of recent issues facing Virginia tribes as they consult on federal projects.
Charlton, Michael [239] see Martinez Milantchi, Maria Mercedes
Chase, Adrian (Arizona State University)
[29]
Reconstructing and Testing Neighborhoods at Caracol, Belize
Neighborhoods in the past formed in urban contexts from the bottom-up through repeated face-to-face interactions. Through these
shared social experiences, neighborhood groups would possess a high potential for collective action; facilitating local solutions to
issues facing these communities. In addition, these neighborhoods would have possessed higher intra-group cohesion for the above
reasons. While we cannot ask the deceased who they interacted with and for how long, we can reconstruct likely zones of repeated
face-to-face interaction. Previous methods of neighborhood reconstruction have often utilized clustering algorithms focusing on
straight line distance. As such, these methods are not well suited to rugged, hilly landscapes. Instead, this research uses a
combination of least cost path and social network analysis to reconstruct neighborhoods for the last phase of occupation at the
classic period Maya city of Caracol, Belize. In addition, comparison of caches and burials within plazuela housemound groups sheds
additional light on these communities. This excavated material allows for testing of these reconstructed neighborhood boundaries.
Four neighborhood zones at Caracol provide a minimal dataset to distinguish the effects of district markets and neighborhood
identity and ascertain the validity of this neighborhood reconstruction method for Caracol, Belize.
[29]
Chair
Chase, Adrian (Arizona State University)
[155]
Discussant
Chase, Adrian [102] see Chase, Arlen
Chase, Arlen (Pomona College), Diane Chase (Claremont Graduate University) and Adrian Chase (Arizona State University)
[102]
Population Estimation in Ancient Mesoamerica: Retrospective and Prospective
The determination of accurate population numbers for ancient Mesoamerican societies is key for making interpretations about past
levels of complexity. This is not only necessary for understanding how societies changed over time but also for how they were
organized over space. The techniques that Mesoamericanists use vary depending upon area of research. In the highlands,
population numbers are usually determined as a result of surface surveys and estimations of people based on hectares of land that
were occupied. In the lowlands, estimations are often based on numbers of mapped mounds and an extrapolation of occupants per
mound and area occupied, with change over time often based on dated sherd material recovered through a testing program. The
use of different methodologies has led to divergent interpretations about the sizes of ancient Mesoamerican populations and the
density of settlement. The addition of lidar helps in defining the limits of centers and settlement, especially in the lowlands, and this
technology obviates the former need for extrapolations about settlement extent. How population numbers are determined has
implications for interpretations related to urbanism and sociopolitical complexity throughout Mesoamerica. This paper seeks to
codify past approaches and present newly viable options for approaching ancient population histories.
[102]
Chair
Chase, Arlen [54] see Chase, Diane
Chase, Arlen [102] see Chase, Elyse
Chase, Diane (Claremont Graduate University) and Arlen Chase (Pomona College, Claremont)
[54]
Economy and Sociopolitical Change at Classic Period Caracol, Belize
Maya economic systems were neither static nor simplistic. Research at Caracol, Belize has shown that the site’s Late Classic
inhabitants received the bulk of their goods and services from markets that were embedded within the city. Whereas some
researchers have postulated the existence of a dual economic system for the Maya in which quotidian and prestige goods operated
within different realms, the goods that were distributed through Caracol’s Late Classic Period markets do not support the division of
the economic system into two units: tradewares and ritual items had widespread distribution in residential groups at the site. The
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     97
urban landscape of Caracol manifests continuous agricultural terracing dotted with numerous residential groups. The site’s
causeways join the outlying public architecture to the city’s central hub providing ready passage across the site. The large plazas at
these outlying nodes permitted not only easy access to goods and services but the assembly of numerous people. Thus, the Late
Classic Period economic system and markets served to integrate the site’s inhabitants. However, Caracol’s socioeconomic system
was dynamic and changed dramatically in the subsequent Terminal Classic Period, when greater socioeconomic divisions existed
and elite and non-elite members of society accessed largely different material items.
Chase, Diane [102] see Chase, Arlen
Chase, Elyse (Stanford University), Adrian Chase (Arizona State University), Diane Chase (Claremont Graduate University)
and Arlen Chase (Pomona College)
[102]
Population History for Caracol, Belize: Numbers, Complexity, and Urbanism
Caracol, Belize is among the largest known ancient Maya cities. Its urban area spans some 200 km2 and is integrated by a series of
radial causeways that connect outlying public architecture and plazas to the central hub. The entire landscape is covered by
residential settlement and agricultural terracing, making Caracol a truly green city. Excavation and an extensive sampling program
at Caracol have demonstrated that almost all residential groups were occupied during the Late Classic Period. Since the early
1990s, the population at CE 650 for Caracol has been estimated as being some 100,000 people. Lidar imagery has confirmed the
scale of settlement and various calculations corroborate these numbers. Excavation and sampling further permit a reconstruction of
the site’s population history. While lidar is an incredible asset for settlement study, comparing intensively mapped settlement areas
with lidar imagery reveals that approximately one-third of the lowest-lying structures in Caracol’s residential groups are not
immediately visible in lidar hillshades. This has implications for the interpretation of lidar hillshades elsewhere and suggests that
structure density from on-the-ground mapping will actually be higher than estimates based solely on lidar. However calculated,
Caracol’s ancient population operated within a complex urban system.
Chase, Josh [186] see Neeley, Michael
Chastain, Matthew
[94]
Bronze-Casting Molds: A Distinct Ceramic Industry in Shang and Zhou Period China?
The manufacture of bronze ritual and military implements in Shang- and Zhou-period (c. 1600–221 BCE) China has received much
attention from archaeologists, due in part to the extensive labor mobilization and control of mineral resources needed to sustain
production. Scholarly attention has focused largely on two aspects of production: (1) the mining, smelting, and transportation of
metal raw materials and (2) the forming and decoration of ceramic casting molds. However, research indicates that the preparation
of specialized, high-performance ceramic pastes used to make these casting molds was also an essential stage in the production
process. These ceramic pastes were wholly unlike familiar pottery clays in terms of their composition, properties, and methods of
production. What practical requirements did the production and use of such unusual ceramic pastes impose on workers? What does
this in turn suggest about the organization of production and the degree of connection between casting-mold production and the
production of other ceramic items? To address these questions, this talk considers what recent technical studies by the author
reveal about the physical behavior of casting-mold pastes, the activities involved in those pastes’ production, and the role of
technical skill and risk management throughout the production sequence.
Chatelain, David [130] see Ponce, Jocelyne
Chavarria, Sara [160] see Knox, Corey
Chavarria, Sara [184] see Molinares, Stephen
Chavarria, Sara [184] see Viola, Tony, IV
Chavez, Franklin (BIA Special Agent)
[49]
Archaeological Collections and the Problem of Institutional Control
Collections control dominance issues in both NAGPRA and other archaeological activity involving Native American or Tribal
collections. Ethical standards and issues with research involving tribal collections and lack of tribal collaboration and consultation.
Concerns with current NAGPRA Cultural Resource laws, as most laws are inadequate and require change. The session will focus
on both helpful and harmful interactions between institutions and tribal nations which highlights their outcomes and potential
strategies for future navigation of archaeological research and repatriation efforts.
Chavez, Mark (Texas A&M University), Paloma Cuello del Pozo (Texas A&M Universitiy) and Jose Peña (University of South
Florida)
[242]
Explorations from El Campanario Archaeological Project: Body Decorations Recovered from Human Remains Excavated at the
Santo Domingo Cemetery in Huarmey, Peru
Archaeological evidence shows how important body decorations were amongst past civilizations. Humans have employed different
mediums to express identity and ancestral heredity, religious belief, events such as warfare and marriage, and even for therapeutic
reasons. In ancient Peru, body decorations in the form of tattooing, ear piercing, cranial modifications and body painting have been
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                           98
observed. We present three cases of body decorations from the Santo Domingo cemetery, a coastal site in Huarmey, Peru, from the
Late Intermediate Period. During 2018 and 2019 field seasons, El Campanario Archaeological Project recovered a left radius and
two naturally mummified right forearms with articulated ulnae, radiuses and hand bones. All three individuals were at least 19 years
of age at death given fusion of proximal epiphyses in ulnae and radiuses. Modern looting prevents us from acquiring more
information about these three individuals because no associated skeletons were recovered. The two forearms were decorated with
designs in the form of waves and whirlpools located anteriorly and posteriorly as well as in the dorsal side of hands. In addition to
body decorations, ceramic art also displays wave-like patterns suggesting the population’s close relationship with the coast. This
idea is supported by the abundant malacofauna found throughout the cemetery.
Chavez-Chuquimarca, Andrea (PUCE) and Ryan Hechler (Tulane University)
[201]
It Takes a Village? Research Developments in the “Pueblo” Area of Cochasquí
The original Cochasquí archaeological research project established by Udo Oberem in 1964 focused on better understanding
functional uses of different areas of the Cochasquí site. The principal objective of past excavations of this area was to understand
potential residential structures Unfortunately, the Pueblo area never yielded actual residential structures nor has evidence of such
spaces been found in the region yet. In the area originally referred to Oberem as “Pueblo,” we decided to continue excavations from
exposed units in our 2019 operation. One focus was trying to better understand poorly articulated stratigraphy of the area and better
understand an area that was largely left as a footnote in archaeological reports and publications by Oberem. Detailed profiles and
plan drawings have survived, although what was found by Oberem was admittedly peculiar. Through a review of context and
material remains, we will better elucidate on an area of Cochasquí that has long been ignored.
Chaytor, Jason [18] see Jones, Douglas
Chechushkov, Igor (Institute of History and Archaeology, UB RAS)
[64]
The Location of the Late-Inuit Winter Sites of the Quebec Lower North Shore and Heat-Preservation Strategies in the Prehistoric
Societies
The adaptation to the harsh sub-Arctic environment required from the Eastern Thule Inuit utilizing various types of housing, including
subterranean winter houses. The poster presents the results of the field survey of the four late-Inuit winter villages (c. 1500–1700
CE) located along the Quebec Lower North Shore. The survey was conducted to test whether the site locations were chosen
specifically to prevent heat loss. The three-stage methodology consists of (1) the detailed mapping of local landscapes, (2)
collecting the field data on the prevailing wind direction and speed and, (3) the GIS-modeling to predict the best-located areas that
would provide benefits of heat preservation. The modeling revealed the mixed results, suggesting that while some sites were well-
protected, others were more exposed to cold winds. However, the overall results demonstrate that the heat-loss protection strategy
was a part of the consideration while looking for new winter locations. These results are of the anthropological significance because
they have a predictive power to explain settlement patterns in other parts of the world.
Chechushkov, Igor [176] see Almer, Calista
Chechushkov, Igor [50] see Fitzhugh, William
Cheetham, Paul [107] see Ebert, Julia
Cheever, Sylvia (University of Chicago)
[268]
Cranial Modification at the Ocoña-Chorunga River Confluence: Preliminary Insights into the Utility of Modification Data from Looted
Contexts in the Ocoña Valley
Corral Redondo is a ceremonial huaca situated where the Ocoña and Chorunga Rivers intersect in the Arequipa region of southern
Peru. The Corral Redondo Archaeological Project sought to investigate the use of Corral Redondo within the broader context of
human occupation at the Ocoña-Chorunga confluence. The sites surveyed in the polygonal surrounding the confluence exhibit Inka,
Chuquibamba, and occasionally Wari characteristics, but the relationships between sites, as well the ways in which they fit into
broader imperial political systems constructed by the Inka and Wari, are largely unknown. This paper utilizes data on cranial
modification from four looted sites surrounding Corral Redondo to assess the practicality of cranial modification as an investigative
vector for intersite interaction in this particular region. This pilot study will attempt to identify patterns indicative of kinship or group
identity that may have reinforced community relationships and larger political configurations present while Corral Redondo was in
use. Finally, this paper will return to findings reported in 2019, re-evaluating the assertion that seemingly random variation in cranial
shape at the site of Jarana indicates modification was a byproduct of daily care of infants rather than a deliberate cue to delineate
social grouping in this context.
Cheever, Sylvia [268] see Lozada, Maria
Chen, Caleb (University of California, Davis), Meredith Carlson (University of California), Peiqi Zhang (University of
California), Daniel Goring (University of California) and Tammy Buonasera (University of California)
[83]
Using Experimental Archaeology to Compare Energy Expenditures of Mortar and Pestle and Grinding Slab Technologies
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     99
Daily activities such as grinding plant material require energy input. It is ideal to put in the least amount of work to obtain the
greatest yield of product. Energetic expenditures and returns for grinding slab and mortar and pestle use remain largely unstudied.
In this study, resting and grinding heart rate data are recorded and used with grinding efficiency data to determine the best energetic
returns for several types of mortars versus a shallow basin grinding slab. These data are further considered along with return rates
from two resources, acorn (Quercus kelloggii) and Indian ricegrass (Achnatherum hymenoides) seed. It is expected that
technologies with the highest grinding rates will have the best energetic returns. This may be amplified by differences in caloric
values for different resources.
Chen, Caleb [83] see Carlson, Meredith
Chen, Caleb [83] see Zhang, Peiqi
Chen, Jennifer (Pennsylvania State University), Randall Haas (University of California, Davis), BrieAnna Langlie
(Binghamton University) and James Watson (Arizona State Museum)
[180]
A Mixed Diet on the Andean Altiplano, 7000 BP
Important subsistence resources like potatoes, quinoa, and vicuña were domesticated in the Andes of South America; however,
researchers have yet to clarify the timing and mechanisms of domestication largely due to a lack of archaeological evidence. This
research examines the stable light isotope chemistry of human bone alongside paleoethnobotanical and faunal remains from the
site of Soro Mik’aya Patxja—a high-elevation archaeological site located on the Andean Altiplano of Peru and dating between 6,500
and 8,000 years ago. These analyses reveal a mixed diet of both meat and plant resources, including vicuña, wild quinoa, and
foraged tubers. These findings point to hunter-gatherers practicing a mixed subsistence economy with tuber and grain intensification
occurring in the millenia preceding plant and animal domestication.
Chen, Kunlong [42] see Liu, Yaxiong
Chen, Ran (University of Arizona) and Yue Wu (University of Science and Technology of China)
[36]
Beyond Projectiles: Experimental Study of Microblades as Cutting Tools
The miniaturization of lithic artifacts indicates a significant shift in lithic technology and functions since the Upper Paleolithic,
revealing a probable shift in subsistence strategy. Microblades are specific kinds of small stone tools that occur in sites dating back
to the Upper Paleolithic through Neolithic in many parts of the world. Although it is widely recognized that microblades were used as
multi-functional tools, most experimental studies are focused on microblades as part of a composite tool system for use as
projectiles or spears. A non-projectile perspective is applied in this study of chert microblades as cutting tools. Different plant and
animal materials with different levels of hardness were processed experimentally to reveal specific use-wear patterns from cutting
and scraping. A multi-stage sequential analysis using both low-power and high-power observation methods examined the
appearance of different stages of use-wear. The results show that using microblade as knives can produce different diagnostic use-
wear from different tasks in comparison to typical projectile features. This experiment provides new perspectives and generates new
data to understand the function of microblades on plant and animal materials.
Chen, Xinzhou
[77]
Excavation and Archaeological Survey on Ancient Tibet Pastoralism: A Proposal and Pilot Studies
The Tibetan plateau hosts the world’s largest pastoral ecosystem yet the archaeology of pastoralism remained understudied. Most
of the excavations focused in the lowland areas of the river valleys while the highland plateau region was virtually ignored. Based on
pilot archaeological survey and excavation in 2018 and 2019 in the central Tibetan plateau, I argue that the highland sector of
ancient agro-pastoralism is significant in understanding landscape transformation of land through millennia. With a combination of
ethnoarchaeology, GIS technique and geoarchaeology, highland landscape features are recoverable and distinguishable
archaeologically, among which the pastoral corrals are most possible to be discovered in large quantities.
Chenault, Mark
[79]
Stone Palettes and the Founding Lineage of Pueblo Grande
Archaeologists believe that stone palettes had a ritual function in Hohokam society. Most of the palettes from the village site of
Pueblo Grande were recovered from the central precinct. Very few palettes have been recovered from elsewhere at the site,
including from the extensive excavations for the Hohokam Expressway project. This suggests that palettes were strongly associated
with activities in the central precinct, which included a plaza, a ball court, and a large platform mound. In addition, most of the
palettes found with cremation burials came from a single cemetery located directly west of the platform mound. The location of the
cemetery in the main plaza suggests that it served as the burial ground of a corporate group with ties to the central precinct,
possibly representing the founding lineage of Pueblo Grande. Palettes may have been a symbol of that lineage. Although the
cremations predate the final Civano phase platform mound, the founding lineage probably was involved with the earliest stages of
mound construction during the late Sacaton and Soho phases.
Chenault, Mark [71] see Mitchell, Douglas
Chenault, Mark [79] see Ryden, Ronald
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    100
Cheng, Wen Yin (University of Toronto) and Chen Shen (Royal Ontario Museum)
[94]
Traces of the Bronze Casting Artisans at the Royal Ontario Museum: Analyzing the Bronze Casting Molds
Studying the production method of an artifact is similar to being an apprentice, by observing the master’s final work we can
understand their choices in making these artifacts. The detailed analysis of the bronze casting molds at the Royal Ontario Museum
gave me the impression of learning from the ancient bronze casting masters through their work. Although no instructions are given,
we can still see their knowledge and choices made through the marks that these artisans have left behind. By discussing the
artisans who made the bronze casting molds, this research will bridge the detailed analysis of the bronze casting molds by
discussing the results in relation to the artisan’s knowledge and culture.
[94]
Chair
Cheong, Kong [28] see Macrae, Scott
Cherkinsky, Alexander [231] see Napora, Katharine
Chesson, Meredith [35] see Berumen, Sara
Chévez, Estrella [29] see Thompson, Amy
Chiac, Virginia [178] see Longstaffe, Matthew
Chicoine, David (Louisiana State University)
[54]
Discussant
Chicoine, David (Louisiana State University), George Lau (University of East Anglia) and Jacob Bongers (University of East
Anglia)
[174]
Post-Chavín Political Developments in Ancash: Comparative Perspectives from the Nepeña and Pallasca Regions
In this paper, we present preliminary results of our 2019 excavations at the centers of Cerro San Isidro (Nepeña) and Pashash
(Pallasca) in the Moro and Cabana regions of north-central Peru, respectively. Both are multi-component hilltop sites that developed
into major post-Chavín elite centers, and witnessed a series of later occupations. Data on occupational sequences, fortifications,
ceremonial architecture, offering contexts, and material culture are presented to shed comparative light on post-Chavín political
developments in two neighboring regions that witnessed apparently quite different trajectories following the demise of the Chavín
phenomenon. We focus on materialities of post-Chavín developments and their impact on the rise of new forms of political authority,
including the strategic reuse, manipulation and ritual engagement with abandoned places, buildings and things. The comparison
helps frame new understandings of about the proliferation of divine lordships in Ancash and the central Andes more broadly.
Chicoine, David [233] see Fenton, Monica
Chicoine, David [182] see Sutherland, Kenneth
Chiffi, Maria (Techné s.a.s.), Francesco Gabellone (Natioinal Research Council - CNR), Angela Ciancio (MiBAC, Polo
Museale della Puglia) and Luigi La Rocca (MiBAC, Soprintendenza Archeologia, Belle Arti e Pa)
[104]
3D Digital Imaging solutions for Global Enjoinment of Mount Sannace Archaeological Park (Bari, Italy)
Works related to the recovery and enhancement of Mount Sannace’s Archaeological Park in the municipality of Gioia del Colle (Bari)
began in 2016. Digital media products have been created on purpose with a strong communicative and technological connotation in
order to connect cultural contents in a concise and attractive form. The reconstructive work is achieved by the combined studies of
different survey systems that, alongside the classical ones, include remote sensing, photogrammetric survey, 3D analysis of
architectural structures and their contextualization in their historical reference period. In particular, the archaeological documentation
has been reviewed in the light of a re-reading of the information related to the integrated survey and the various possibilities offered
by the 3D environment. The result of all this shows a new and more careful reconstruction of the appearance of the inhabited area,
highlighting the various historical phases. From the technical point of view the results of this work underline the communicative
effectiveness of the virtual restoration, which proposes a re-reading of the original appearance of monumental tombs. The entire
village was reconstructed using historical information and archaeological evidence. Many reconstructions constitute an original
contribution to the knowledge of the indigenous civilizations of southern Italy.
Chiffi, Maria [104] see Gabellone, Francesco
Childress, William [180] see Gingerich, Joseph A. M.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    101
Childs, S. Terry (Retired, Department of the Interior)
[172]
Discussant
Childs, S. Terry [132] see Farmer, Andrea
Chilton, Elizabeth (UMass Amherst)
[13]
Social Networking in New England Archaeology
The basis of a lot of Brian’s work and his conversations and debates with colleagues focused on aspects of social networking. Brian
presented an important paper to CNEA several years ago in which he outlined the possible social mechanisms for the initial human
colonization of the Northeast. Likely, he applied a social networking analysis to try to understand the social and political differences
between Iroquoian and Algonquian-speaking peoples in the Northeast during the Late Woodland Period, and how those differences
affected their respective experiences during European colonization. In this paper I outline both of these case studies and discuss
how Brian’s work and perspectives can inform how we address significant questions in New England archaeology in the future.
[13]
Chair
Chinique de Armas, Yadira [173] see Naegele, Kathrin
Chiodini, Thomas [184] see Wescott, Konnie
Chiou, Katherine (University of Alabama)
[61]
Rich Food, Poor Food / Feast or Famine: Contextualizing Peasant Foodways in the Andean Past
The “low” foods and dishes associated with peasant cookery are the products of generations of creativity and resourcefulness in the
face of—at times—grim realities. In this presentation, I approach the theme of low cuisine from an Andean perspective by visiting an
archaeological case study involving the Moche people of the desert north coast of Peru. The Moche, a highly complex and stratified
political group, experienced societal decline and social unrest in the Late Moche period (AD 600–800) which was punctuated by
several episodes of severe drought that likely impacted local foodways. During these tense times, fortified hillside/hilltop settlements
with an emphasis on security like the site of Cerro Chepén in the Jequetepeque Valley were hastily constructed near prime
agricultural land. Given the evidence for social stress and the existence of neighborhoods grouped across socioeconomic status,
Cerro Chepén provides an opportunity to probe the impact of social, environmental, and political upheaval on daily life. By
combining spatial analyses of commoner living spaces with the study of food remains, I highlight the humble ingredients that Moche
commoners ate and the practices that past people in the region adopted to put food on the table in lean times.
Chiou, Katherine (University of Alabama)
[91]
Discussant
Chiou, Katherine [147] see Hatcher, Lawford
Chiou, Katherine [241] see McKenzie, Emily
Chiriboga, Carlos [269] see Acuña, Mary Jane
Chirinos Ogata, Patricia [106] see Toohey, Jason
Chisholm, Amelia (The Lost Towns Project) and Julie Markin (Washington College)
[184]
Heritage in Crisis: Cultural Resources Vulnerability in the Jug Bay Wetlands, MD
Current changes in the climate are impacting the cultural resources of the Chesapeake Bay region. Along the Jug Bay stretch of
Maryland’s Patuxent River, significant erosion of features and artifact degradation are due to a greater frequency of extreme high
tide episodes in conjunction with a higher water table, increased groundwater salinity, and increased rainfall-induced surface runoff.
Rich in natural resources, the area has seen continuous Native American activity over the past 13,000 years as the environment
changed from riverine to estuarine following the end of the last Ice Age. Documented archaeological sites in Jug Bay range from
base camps to resource procurement camps to ritual areas. Working in partnership, county, non-profit, and academic archaeologists
and institutions are investigating the cultural resources of Jug Bay while they are still accessible. With a shoreline erosion rate of
eight feet per year [1993–2010] along portions of Jug Bay, documenting new archaeological sites and assessing the condition of
known sites is critical. Through survey, excavation, and the creation of a GIS database of sites, this interdisciplinary team is not
merely creating an inventory of threatened cultural resources but is developing a more robust picture of the history of this area.
Chmura, Matthew [124] see Langlie, BrieAnna
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      102
Chovanec, Zuzana (Institute of Archaeology, Slovak Academy of Sciences)
[235]
From Poppies in the Field to Slumbering Dreams: The Ancient History of the Opium Poppy in Central Europe
The paper presents the results of research on the history of the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum L.) in Central Europe from the
Neolithic to Medieval period while serving as a U.S. Fulbright Scholar in Slovakia in 2018. The opium poppy represents one of the
most widely used psychoactive and medicinal substances in human history. The fact that it is a significant agricultural resource, has
a complex botanical history, and its small physical remains complicates the archaeological investigation of its use. Building on
previous research in the eastern Mediterranean, the complex relationship between the opium poppy and humans is reexamined in
light of new evidence from Slovakia and Central Europe.
Christenson, Allen
[138]
Places of Emergence: Water and Cave Ceremonialism in the Tz’utujil Region
Throughout the highlands of Guatemala, Maya traditionalists believe that mountains and their associated cave openings are the
“mouths of the world” giving access to spiritual realms inhabited by sacred beings that have influence over natural phenomena of
importance to the outside world. Each of these caves or watery portals is a world center. Each may be just as powerful as a place of
emergence or the birthplace of clouds, rain, germination of seeds, etc. It is the ritual actions that take place there that make it life-
engendering, not its physical location. Thus each cave is the central axis point of the world because it leads to the place where
revered ancestors, saints and deities live. The Maya perceive time as cyclic, and believe that at regular intervals the world must be
ceremonially re-birthed to continue. Nearly all major highland Maya ceremonies deal with creation and rebirth in one way or another.
It is this periodic renewal that allows life itself to continue. If these rituals are not performed in the proper way and under the proper
circumstances, the Maya believe that they and all creation would simply slip back into primordial darkness, chaos and perpetual
death.
Christie, Jessica (East Carolina University)
[200]
Walled Rock Wak’as on Inka Royal Estates in the Heartland
This paper analyzes integration of local groups at two royal estates. Tipon began as a Killke settlement before 1400. Surrounded by
an enormous defensive wall, it functioned as an outpost in the buffer zone between the Muyna and Pinagua in the Lucre Basin and
the growing Cusco polity. Wiraqocha Inka led the final conquest of the region and turned Tipon into his royal estate. Pisaq was
developed into a royal estate by Pachakuti on land annexed from the Cuyo. Both estates exhibit a walled-in outcrop near Cusco-
style architecture and canal systems. The discussion compares and contrasts the settings of the estates and rock wak’as, framing
the latter as repeated markers of Inka state authority. Andean settlements, llacta, grew from the union of a localized wak’a with its
territory and the people this wak’a favored. The Inka seized local wak’as and often repositioned them as active agents of the state
near architectural spaces where ideological performances occurred to impose a new imperial order. The physical differences
between the outcrops (unmodified versus sculpted) suggest that whereas the new order of the Inka state was taxonomic and
essentialized, it allowed flexibility in how to materialize it in diverse case scenarios.
Chu, Alejandro
[224]
Negotiated Economies: Staple and Wealth Storage Facilities at Incahuasi, Cañete
Research at the Inka site of Incahuasi located in the mid valley of the Cañete River, south central coast of Peru has identified two
large storage complexes (sectors A and E) that reflects staple and wealth finance as defined by Earle and D’Altroy (1985). The
architectonic configuration of the two facilities, its access and the remains recovered from excavations confirm our assumptions.
This is the first time these two types of finance reflected in storage facilities are reported from an Inka site. As the Inkas occupied the
mid valley they transformed its landscape into an important production center of staples (maize, chili peppers) and of the valued
coastal coca (Erythroxylum novogranatense). Other wealth products found at the storage facilities include fine textiles (cumbi) and
pieces of Spondylus. This paper will present the available data and discuss the role local population and their elites had in the
management of the site.
Chu, Wei, Adrian Dobos (Romanian Academy of Sciences), João Marreiros (Archaeological Research Centre and Museum
for Huma), Alex Ciornei (Romanian Academy of Sciences) and Jürgen Richter (University of Cologne)
[162]
A High-Resolution Investigation of the Middle-Upper Paleolithic Transition at Româneşti-Dumbrăviţa I (Banat, Romania)
This paper outlines the results of the 2016–2019 field seasons at Româneşti-Dumbrăviţa I, a key Paleolithic open-air site preserved
in loess-like sediments in Western Romania at the fringes of the Carpathian Arc. The excavation aimed to refine the resolution of
previous excavations by clarifying our understanding of the Middle-Upper Paleolithic transition in a region that is home to some of
the earliest (hybridized) modern human remains and Proto-Aurignacian assemblages in Europe. Here we present the results of fine-
grained spatial analysis, geochemistry, micromorphology, lithic raw material proveniencing and trace wear studies. The results
strengthen our understanding of the site formation processes and site function. This, combined with previous excavations that
focused on lithic typology and chronology, provides us with valuable context of the early modern humans in the region. We also
place this site and its associated artifacts within the contemporary framework of Central Eastern Europe and the larger Middle to
Upper Paleolithic context of Europe.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    103
Chuenwattana, Nattha (University of Toronto)
[228]
Doing Paleoethnobotany in Thailand: Perception of the Thai Archaeologists and the General Public
Palaeoethnobotany is a new data collecting and interpretive discipline for Thai archaeologists. Archaeology is classified as a
arts/humanity in Thailand, without fundamental scientific knowledge. This is due to the lack of teaching archaeological science as a
social science in archaeological institutions. This paper will focus on the development of archaeological science in Thailand, with the
emphasis on palaeoethnobotany, and the current perceptions of the Thai general public in both archaeological science and
palaeoethnobotany.
Chuluun, Sampildonov [62] see Piezonka, Henny
Church, Warren (Columbus State University, GA)
[106]
Wari Expansion into Peru’s Northeastern Andes: New Evidence and New Questions
Unlike most of the northern Peruvian “culture areas” represented in this session, archaeologists of the twentieth century only rarely
interpreted prehispanic cultural development in Peru’s northeastern Andean “Chachapoyas area” in terms of internal dynamics. In the
Chachapoyas region’s dense montane rain forests, dominant narratives cited externally forced migratory processes originating in
surrounding highland or lowland regions to account for the emergence of Chachapoyas cultural traditions after AD 800. By the 1990s,
excavated stratified sequences revealing long-term cultural development in the region could no longer be dismissed. With intensified
regional research, Early Intermediate Period sites are now frequently identified. But by AD 600, radiocarbon-dated remains that might
represent regional Middle Horizon occupations have been rare or absent, and sequences seem to resume ca. AD 1000. Scattered finds
of Cajamarca Cursive-floral style, and Wari imperial-style sherds puzzled scholars until 2017 when a site with diagnostic features of a
Wari provincial enclave was identified in the Uchucmarca valley, strategically located in the center of the Chachapoyas region. My
colleagues and I now explore new questions that speak to 1) Chachapoyas cultural development, and 2) Wari expansion into the
northeastern Andean regions presumed to facilitate or monopolize access to lowland Amazonian societies.
Ciancio, Angela [104] see Chiffi, Maria
Cinquino, Michael [60] see Hayward, Michele
Ciolek-Torello, Richard [247] see Grenda, Robert
Ciornei, Alex [162] see Chu, Wei
Ciugudean, Horia [35] see Langston, Jada
Clark, Alexis [189] see Vidal-Guzmán, Cuauhtémoc
Clark, Amy (Harvard University)
[180]
Quarries, Workshops, or Campsites? How Are We to Understand the Wealth of Raw Material at Open Air Neanderthal Sites in
France
France is replete with open air Middle Paleolithic sites that are characterized by dense accumulations of lithic debris. Some of these
sites are situated on top of raw material sources, while others are a short distance away. Transport costs were therefore minimal,
but not negligible. The percentages of tools within these assemblages are very low and a high number of large flakes were left
unutilized. However, some flakes do exhibit use wear and lithic pieces were moved around the sites in such a way to suggest that
they were made and used on site. Should these sites therefore be considered quarries, workshops, or campsites? Is this type of
categorization even useful? And furthermore, how are we to understand these sites in light of various models regarding stone tool
economy and hunter-gatherer behavior? On this poster I will display Middle Paleolithic data from France alongside comparative
examples from different regions and time periods. I hope that the data presented, and the questions proposed, will generate
discussion with conference attendees and will encourage comparison with other research areas.
[180]
Chair
Clark, Bonnie (University of Denver)
[46]
It’s Not about the Past
If there is one thing that non-archaeologists know about what we do, it is that we are care about old things. That is why random
people on airplanes ask us about dinosaurs. But in actuality, archaeology is just as much about the present as the past. It will
always be shaped by present-day concerns and be pursued by present-day people. Rather than wring our hands about some
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   104
supposed loss of scientific purity, we can embrace this fact to accomplish two important goals. First, admitting our contemporaneity
can translate into addressing questions that count in the here and now. That might involve looking to the past for clues about
sustainability or reactions to changing climate. But it also can mean using the spotlight of archaeology to fight for social justice.
Second, being anchored in the present helps us focus not just on our findings but also on our process: how we get there and with
whom. People care about our research and we need to think about ways to productively include them in our work. That often
involves collaborating in different ways, from input on research design, to working together in the field, to opening up interpretation.
Clark, Bonnie [112] see Corbett, Kathleen
Clark, Bonnie [6] see Gilmore, Kevin
Clark, Caven (National Clark Service)
[92]
Discussant
Clark, Geoffrey [100] see Napolitano, Matthew
Clark, Jeffery (Archaeology Southwest)
[122]
Chair
Clark, Jeffrey [142] see Smith, Jaye
Clark, Jessica (Ohio Valley Archaeology Inc.) and Kirstyn Leque (Ohio Valley Archaeology Inc.)
[213]
A Tale of Two Homesteads: A Comparative Look at Forest Meeker Residential Sites
Forest Meeker was one of the early nineteenth century founders of the mill town of Stratford in central Ohio’s Delaware County.
Prior to serving in the War of 1812, he and his family lived in a cabin, c.1811, until he constructed a formal brick residence nearby in
1823. Excavations at both a cabin site on Meeker’s former property and the c.1823 Forest Meeker homestead have yielded
contextually distinct artifact assemblages. This poster presents side-by-side assemblage comparisons that demonstrate what we
interpret to be temporally distinct but consecutive occupations.
Clark, Julia [62] see Taylor, William
Clark, Kate (University of Suffolk)
[221]
“Playing with the Past”: Using Creative Activities to Teach Skills in Heritage Practice
I received a traditional archaeological education—some theory and a solid grounding in one period (the palaeolithic). Since then my
career has taken me via industrial archaeology into museums and heritage of all types and periods. But no-one taught me the skills I
would actually need—such as project management and evaluation, community engagement, site interpretation, strategic planning,
decision-making, negotiation and mediation. How to work with architects, engineers, planners and educators s- most of whom didn’t
‘get’ archaeology! And the listening skills, empathy and compassion needed to work with people whose culture, values and ideas of
heritage were very different to my own. These were not things you could learn in a lecture room. Inspired by the activities and
games used by actors and teachers, I created “Playing with the Past”—a book of over 80 different activities designed to teach skills
in heritage practice, from community engagement to leadership. Designed to ‘Train the Trainers’ it can be used with communities,
students and professional groups, across any kind of cultural resources—from archaeology to buildings and beyond.
Clark, Terence (University of Saskatchewan)
[239]
Archaeology in an Era of Reconciliation: Insights from the Front Line
In Canada, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission Calls to Action laid out a new framework for settlers to engage with Indigenous
Peoples. These calls do have significant impact on the field of archaeology as they acknowledge a colonial past and seek to reset
the archaeologist/descendant community power balance in the future. The Archaeology of Reconciliation is a nascent field;
however, the first projects are now underway. This paper will define Archaeology of Reconciliation and discuss some examples of
the theory in action. Although focused on the Canadian context, more broadly, this theory can apply to descendant communities
having control over academic research on their past elsewhere.
[239]
Chair
Clarke, Mary (Boston University)
[20]
Producing Stone and the State: The Socioeconomic Organization of Limestone Production at the Ancient Maya Site of Xultun,
Guatemala
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  105
Limestone is a ubiquitous material in Mesoamerica that was used by the ancient Maya for a myriad of purposes, including the
construction of monumental art and architecture. At the site of Xultun, Guatemala, a stone production district was identified wherein
domestic architecture is integrated with quarry workshops. The quarries in this district contain incomplete monuments still attached
to the limestone bedrock as well as exhausted quarry islands and surfaces reused as platforms for residential architecture. The
limestone producers living in this district were specifically producing materials for monumental state expressions, implying a single
consumer, the state. Using this district as a case study, this paper will address the systems of exchange visible in household
consumption patterns and evaluate the extent of state involvement in the production and distribution of local limestone resources.
[20]
Chair
Clarke, Mary [20] see Paling, Jason
Claypatch, Hunter [79] see McGuire, Randall
Clayton, Sarah (University of Wisconsin-Madison)
[133]
Everyday Life at Chicoloapan, Mexico: Tracing the Formation of a Post-collapse Community
The Epiclassic period (550–850 CE) in central Mexico is widely viewed by archaeologists as a time of instability, violent conflict, and
large-scale migration. The collapse of Teotihuacan left a fractious and decentralized sociopolitical landscape in its wake—a situation
that contrasted starkly with the consolidated macroregional system that the state had dominated. However, this time of crisis was
also marked by resilience and innovation as people reconfigured social and economic networks, adopted novel practices and
institutions, created new communities and implemented new approaches to land-use and urban planning. Here, I consider these
changes from the perspective of Chicoloapan, a settlement in the southern Basin of Mexico that prospered as Teotihuacan declined.
By the mid 600s, Chicoloapan had grown from a small village to a sprawling town of several thousand people. Long-term research
at Chicoloapan combines excavation, remote sensing, and paleoenvironmental reconstruction to examine the local process of
community formation under conditions of broader regional instability. Drawing from these diverse lines of evidence, I discuss the
timing of Chicoloapan’s growth, the everyday practices of households, and the ways in which residents modified the built
environment to establish new forms of local leadership and community interaction.
[133]
Chair
Clayton, Sarah [133] see Barba, Luis
Clayton, Sarah [133] see Freiwald, Carolyn
Cleghorn, Naomi [38] see Keller, Hannah
Cleland, Timothy [180] see Gingerich, Joseph A. M.
Cleveland, Mitchell [148] see Patton, Natalie
Clifton, Julia [172] see McBrinn, Maxine
Clindaniel, Jon (University of Chicago)
[200]
Alternative Khipu Codes: Responses to Inka Imperialism through the Production of Khipu Signs
In this talk, I suggest that Inka khipus were sites of imperial negotiation in addition to their role as recording devices for Inka
administrators. Inka khipus exhibited high levels of codified semiotic homogeneity, such that they could be interpreted throughout
the Inka Empire. However, I present evidence that there were also geographic pockets where khipu-makers used standard,
hegemonic Inka khipu codes in conjunction with local, subaltern khipu codes that subverted the meanings of certain standard Inka
khipu signs. Over the course of the presentation, I explore the political geography of khipu signs in more detail and investigate how
and why these local codes may have been used in conjunction with dominant Inka codes as local responses to Inka imperialism.
Clindaniel, Jon [164] see Splitstoser, Jeffrey
Cloud, Andy [40] see Walter, Richard
Cloud, William
[101]
Collaboration along the West Texas-Chihuahua/Coahuila Borderlands: A Memorandum of Understanding between the Center for
Big Bend Studies and Mexico’s Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia
In July 2017, the Center for Big Bend Studies (CBBS) of Sul Ross State University and the Instituto Nacional de Antropología e
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      106
Historia (INAH)—the federal agency that oversees all anthropological and historical sites in Mexico—signed a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) to promote cooperation and collaboration on borderland and other projects of mutual interest. Guided by
similar missions and goals, the two organizations have made progress in their respective studies along the West Texas-
Chihuahua/Coahuila border, but each has been limited by a lack of access to sites and/or to data from the other side of the Rio
Grande/Río Bravo del Norte. Subsequent to the MOU signing, the CBBS and INAH have supported one another at conferences and
events on both sides of the river, exchanged a wide range of data, and are cooperating on mutual avenues of research, such as
obsidian sourcing. This presentation provides an overview of the agreement and delves into a variety of future collaborations under
consideration, including excavations at select sites of significance on each side of the river.
Clymer, Mark [190] see Lothrop, Jonathan
Cobb, Charles [123] see Sorresso, Domenique
Cobb, Peter
[205]
Sometimes at the Crossroads: Preliminary Results from New Fieldwork on the Southeast Ararat Plain of Armenia
The Ararat Plain, part of the upper Araxes River valley system in the South Caucasus Mountains, represents the largest expanse of
arable land in Armenia today. At the southeastern edge of this plain, the Vedi River valley, a tributary to the Araxes, connects the
agricultural zones of the plain with the resource-rich mountains and Lake Sevan to the east. The summer of 2019 saw the initiation
of a new landscape-oriented research project to investigate past life and mobility through this valley, particularly in the Bronze and
Iron Ages. Extensive survey and test excavations identified and characterized multiple new sites. The primary focus of the season
was the start of excavations at a high fortified site with a commanding view of the valley, called the Vedi Fortress. This multi-period
site holds promise to enhance our knowledge of the pre- and proto-historic phases of this part of Armenia. Our project interrogates
the militaristic landscapes of the Late Bronze and Iron ages and compares the deployment of the same spaces during the medieval
period. This born-digital project deploys 3d capture of contexts and objects with the goal of enabling comprehensive digital analysis
of complete excavation datasets.
Cobos, Rafael (Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán)
[126]
The Study of Chichen Itza’s Fine-Orange: Ron Bishop and His Contributions to Northern Maya Lowlands Archaeology
Ronald Bishop’s involvement in Yucatán’s archaeology is evident by his participation in two specific activities developed over the
past four decades. First, his research focused on the analysis of Fine-orange Silho group ceramics, which were a trademark of
Chichen Itza and its coastal ports before and during its apogee. Second, his training of a new generation of scholars at the
University of Yucatán (Merida), and equipping the ceramic laboratory at this university with various special microscopes. Bishop’s
pioneering view where he combines well trained human scholars with microscopic equipment, clearly shows his legacy in a growing
filed where ceramics studies play a crucial role in understanding local versus non-local production, distribution patterns related to
economic factors as well as the consumption habits of a wide-range of individuals who inhabited the northern Maya lowlands.
Cocco, Gabriel [196] see Thompson, Helen
Cochran, Lindsey (University of Georgia), Victor Thompson (University of Georgia) and Bryan Tucker (Georgia Department
of Natural Resources)
[140]
Creating Living Predictive Models of Georgia’s Coastal Paleo-Environmental Landscapes
While we brace ourselves for climate related threats to archaeological sites in Georgia, USA, a priority is to create a triage system to
determine how and which cultural resources to document, preserve, and protect. The breadth of environmental profiles among the Sea
Islands present a unique set of opportunities to generate computerized models of multi-temporal and multi-cultural landscapes revolving
around human occupation and manipulation of barrier islands, back-barrier islands, and estuaries. Predictive modeling of paleo-
landscapes is predicated on the use of quality environmental raster data, however integrating paleo-environmental data with modern
imagery presents new challenges that will be addressed in this discussion. In this paper, we integrate the breadth of Georgia’s coastal
culture history with the complex task of describing how past peoples have interacted with landscape changes over time, thus
simultaneously shaping and being shaped by the world around them, by using geospatial and statistically informed models.
Cochrane, Ethan [100] see Rieth, Timothy
Cockrell, Brett [186] see Franklin, Stephanie
Coco, Emily (New York University), Simon Holdaway (University of Auckland) and Radu Iovita (New York University)
[162]
Technological Evolution Is Unnecessary for the Formation of “Transitional” Industries
Some stone tool kits show a mixture of characteristics from the preceding Middle Paleolithic period and the subsequent Upper
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     107
Paleolithic period. These industries are called “transitional” to describe their status as acculturation phenomena between Middle and
Upper Paleolithic populations, or as resulting from independent evolution of Middle Paleolithic tool kits into Upper Paleolithic tool
kits. These explanations are problematic due to the underlying assumption of superiority of Upper Paleolithic technologies and
because these transitions happen slowly in the archaeological record. This paper seeks alternative explanations for “transitional”
industries, specifically addressing the possibility that these assemblages formed as a result of lithic scavenging behaviors of two
technologically-divergent populations. We demonstrate that sites resembling transitional sites are produced by simple recycling
behaviors without overlap between two populations or technological evolution. Our results challenge the assumptions that the
formation of transitional industries requires interaction and/or technological evolution. Instead, “transitional” sites can occur if Upper
Paleolithic populations recycled Middle Paleolithic artifacts. The results of this study demonstrate the need to reevaluate the way we
interpret assemblages of mixed technological features during the Middle-Upper Paleolithic transition. Specifically, we need to
redefine what constitutes a technological transition and how that can be inferred from the archaeological record.
Codding, Brian (University of Utah), David Zeanah (Sacramento State University), Rebecca Bliege Bird (Penn State) and
Douglas Bird (Penn State)
[15]
Resource Acquisition Risk as a Driver of Subsistence Transitions
Explaining major subsistence transitions in human prehistory requires an evaluation of the costs and benefits that past people
experienced. All too often, these trade-offs are explored solely by analysis of central tendency (i.e., mean returns), without exploring
the distribution of possible outcomes. Here we explore how acquisition risk, or variance in expected returns, is an equally (if not
more) important factor to consider when examining past and present subsistence transitions. We model this using quantitative
ethnographic data and simulated archaeological proxies to evaluate the role of resource acquisition risk as a driver of past
subsistence transitions.
Codding, Brian [236] see James, L. Brock
Codding, Brian [195] see Vernon, Kenneth
Codding, Brian [61] see Wilson, Kurt
Codlin, Maria (Boston University)
[76]
Animal Acquisition at Teotihuacan
Animal husbandry and other forms of animal management were an important part of the economy in ancient urban centers. At the
Mesoamerican metropolis of Teotihuacan, multiple animal acquisition strategies were available to support the city which lacked
large domesticated animals. While turkeys and dogs have a long history of domestic production in Mesoamerica, we lack clear
evidence that dog and turkey husbandry was a major component of the Teotihuacan economy. Recently, researchers have
suggested that the captive management of wild carnivorous animals and rabbits was an important component in supplying animals
for state rituals and domestic consumption. This research presents initial findings from the analysis of faunal remains from Tlajinga
and Tlailotlacan (the Oaxacan barrio), two ethnically distinct neighborhoods in the southern and western sectors of the city. The
overall project aims to examine how animals were acquired by the city’s residents over time, particularly the importance of animal
management compared to hunting and trapping, as well as the importance of terrestrial species compared to lacustrine species.
Codlin, Maria [150] see Carballo, David
Cody, Mercedes (SWCA Environmental Consultants), Christina Nielsen (SWCA Environmental Consultants) and Steve
Carpenter (SWCA Environmental Consultants)
[176]
Archaeological Investigations at the Llano Terrace Site (41MS78)
From February through March 2019, SWCA archaeologists and subcontractors from Hicks & Company and Integrated
Environmental Solutions excavated portions of the Llano Terrace Site (41MS78) exposed in roadcuts along the east and western
sides of the existing Ranch-to-Market (RM) 1871 roadway in Mason County, Texas. The site lies on the western terraces of the
Llano River and consists of a prehistoric campsite with stratified cultural deposits spanning the Early to Late Archaic (8800–2000
BP). In addition, two earlier components may be present at the site and are tentatively identified as Paleoindian based on the
recovery of a lanceolate point. Cultural features at the site include a heavily sheered burned rock midden deposit and nine other
burned rock features; the features represent hearths, ovens, and other cooking features. A light scatter of debitage was consistently
associated with the features but formal tools were uncommon. Although organic preservation at the site is low and the cultural
component assemblages are not diverse, the site appears to have reasonably good stratigraphic integrity and the potential for
isolable components. This poster highlights the variety of cultural features encountered at 41MS78 as well as preliminary results of
ongoing associated analyses and interpretations.
Coe, Marion (Center for the Study of the First Americans, Texas A&M University)
[148]
Cordage and Coiled Basketry as Indicators of Site Function and Social Identity in the Bonneville Basin
Perishable artifacts are well-preserved and long-lived in the Great Basin and are suited for studies of subsistence and social
interaction, including economic and marriage networks, migration, population movement, and identity. This study of cordage and
coiled basketry from 10 late Holocene-aged dry caves and rockshelters in the Bonneville Basin applies a behavioral interpretive
approach with analytical methods focused on reconstructing technological organization and operational sequence to characterize
the nature of variation between sites within this artifact class. A comparison of sites in the Bonneville Basin suggests distinct
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     108
variation in site use reflected in the potential function of finished cordage and basketry at the sites; however, technological stylistic
traits associated with manufacturing process and potentially the social identity of the manufacturer potentially show separate
relationships between sites within this material class. This study demonstrates the potential of this method to illustrate the nature of
previously identified changes in demographics in the Bonneville Basin and more subtle and multiscalar social interactions of gender
and the community, as well as adding further support for the value of reanalyzing curated museum collections.
Coffey, Grant [26] see Robinson, Erick
Coffey, Grant [147] see Schwindt, Dylan
Coffey, Grant [147] see Varien, Mark
Coffman, Sam [82] see Reuther, Joshua
Cojti-Ren, Iyaxel (Vanderbilt University)
[151]
Postwar archaeology in the highlands of Guatemala
What do we know about the social and political context of the populations that live adjacent to archaeological sites? How is the
relationship between a local population and archeological sites? These are some essential questions that we must answer before
planning and conducting an archaeological project. In many cases, what we know is part of a more complex context that possibly we
will better understand during our research fieldwork and new actors come into play. In this presentation, I discuss the need to create
a typology of archaeological sites in the Guatemala highlands. We need to determine which places are safe to coordinate research
projects with local populations and which others have complex contexts. Based on my fieldwork experience in Chichicastenango,
K’iche’, I argue that many individuals and paramilitary groups that served in the army during the 80´s are still active and holding
leadership positions. Today, this leadership is exercised with new identities. These groups continue to reproduce the ideology of
“the internal enemy” to deter any initiative that threatens their interests. Under these circumstances, it is necessary to question the
feasibility of archaeological investigations and think alternative strategies to promote valorization and conservation of our cultural
heritage.
Coleman, Wendi [50] see Turley, Cameron
Collard, Mark [236] see O’Brien, Michael
Collins, Benjamin (University of Manitoba), Ayanda Mdludlu (University of Cape Town), Jayne Wilkins (Griffith University),
April Nowell (University of Victoria) and Christopher Ames (University of Wollongong)
[11]
Evolving Social Networks during the Late Pleistocene: The Perspective from Grassridge Rockshelter, South Africa
Humans are social beings and being able to track social interactions and relationships across space and through time is a major
focus of both anthropological and archaeological research. Within archaeology, the scale and intensity of social interactions has
been related to the pace of cultural and technological innovations, which in turn produces a major influence on mobility, material
culture, and a multitude of other cultural facets in past societies. This paper will present data from the lithic and personal ornament
(marine and ostrich eggshell bead) assemblages recovered from the Late Pleistocene archaeological record (~45,000–11,700 years
ago) at Grassridge Rockshelter, Eastern Cape, to provide an interior grasslands perspective on the archaeology of this region
during these time. Further, the data from Grassridge will be compared with other well-described sites in the broader area to discuss
the extent or absence of social networks at a regional scale.
[11]
Chair
Collins, Ryan (Boston University)
[202]
Applying Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) to Explore Urban Development in the Maya Area
This paper explores comparative early urban development by focusing on the methodological application of ground penetrating
radar (GPR) to augment LiDar data at the Northern Maya Lowland center of Yaxuná. By 900 BCE Yaxuná was characterized by a
civic ceremonial center and a small (likely seasonal) occupation. In contrast to the contemporaneous center of Ceibal, in Guatemala,
Yaxuná’s earliest detected constructions are not the result of building up broad plateaus. Instead, they went down. Extensive
ground-penetrating radar (GPR) survey and excavation revealed that Yaxuná’s 100-meter-long and roughly 60-meter-wide Central
Plaza was set in a cleared expanse of naturally flat bedrock 2 m in depth lower than the surrounding landscape. While excavation
was critical to confirming the depression Yaxuná’s core, its extent could not have been determined without GPR. Furthermore, the
collected GPR data from Yaxuná augment the LiDar of the civic core allowing for a more precise analysis of the site’s early urban
development. Like Ceibal, a plateau appears to have been constructed at Yaxuná but only by 400 BCE. While the construction of
extensive plateaus is found at Ceibal and Yaxuná at different times, their presence may be suggestive of formalizing practices for
civic development.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     109
Coltman, Jeremy (University of California, Riverside), Karl Taube (University of California, Riverside) and Travis Stanton
(University of California, Riverside)
[225]
Blood on the Stones: Heart Sacrifice and Sacrificial Stone Altars in the Northern Maya Lowlands
Heart sacrifice constituted one of the most basic yet fundamental tenets of Mesoamerican ritual practice. At Early Postclassic
Chichen Itza, as with the later Aztec of Tenochtitlan, hearts and blood were offered to the bellicose Solar deity whose daily journey
through the sky not only depended on but also demanded such offerings. Heart sacrifice was also a creative act that invoked
concepts of the world directions, centrality, and cosmic renewal. This paper will explore heart sacrifice and sacrificial altars in the
Northern Maya lowlands including the Puuc region where drum and column altars were often placed at the base of temples.
Architectural and iconographic evidence will be presented for these being altars used for heart sacrifice, both in terms of where they
appear and what is depicted on them. Scenes of similar altars used in heart sacrifice will also be presented.
Coltofean-Arizancu, Laura (University of Barcelona, Spain), Tommaso Mattioli (University of Barcelona, Spain), Gabriel
García Atiénzar (University of Alicante, Spain), Virginia Barciela (University of Alicante, Spain) and Margarita Díaz-Andreu
(ICREA and University of Barcelona, Spain)
[25]
Rock Art and GIS: Bridging the Gap between Audibility, Visibility, and Landscape
This paper discusses the potential of GIS analyses in correlating rock art, landscape, and audibility. It does so by presenting a
methodology that was applied in surveying a selection of rock art sites located in the Alicante Mountains, along the Mediterranean
coast in the northern part of the Alicante Province in Spain. These sites are particularly interesting as they contain paintings created
by the first Neolithic farmers (ca. 5600–5200 cal BC) in the so-called Macroschematic style. The paper begins with an introduction to
Macroschematic art and the previous use of GIS in independently researching the visual and the audible in rock art studies. It then
explains the methodology designed for exploring the importance of audibility and visibility for the perception of rock art landscapes
around concepts such as acoustic effects, adjacent landscape, larger territorial scale, viewshed and soundshed directionality. The
paper continues with describing the investigated rock art sites and the measurements performed at each place. Finally, it provides
an extensive discussion on the obtained results and it concludes with new interpretations on how Macroschematic artists built their
social and symbolic landscapes. The research undertaken for this work has been carried out within the ERC Artsoundscapes
Project.
Coltofean-Arizancu, Laura [25] see Jiménez Pasalodos, Raquel
Coltrain, Joan [61] see Wilson, Kurt
Colvin, Matthew [166] see Heep, Nathan
Combey, Andy (Université Grenoble Alpes), Laurence Audin (ISTerre - IRD [France]), Carlos Benavente Escóbar
(INGEMMET [Peru]), Miguel Rodríguez Pascua (Instituto Geológico y Minero de España) and José Bastante Abuhadba
(Director of the Archaeological Park of Machu Picchu)
[197]
Inka Dry Ashlar Masonry, a Deliberate Seismic-Proof Architecture? Reassessment through an Archaeoseismological Approach in
the Cuzco Area, Peru
For decades now, various scholars have assumed that the Inkas developed seismic-resistant construction techniques. While it is
true that some architectural features are particularly well suited to face the seismic risk, no structural evidence can demonstrate with
confidence the intentionality of the earthquake resistance. As part of our research, we discuss and evaluate the Inka’s risk
perception and management through an archaeoseismological-pioneering approach. Based on a field-tested methodology, our
detailed survey intends to register architectural disorders caused by earthquakes on precolumbian sites of the Cuzco and Sacred
Valley. Crossed by numerous active faults, the Cusco region is subject to a strong seismic hazard. The dense human occupation for
over 3,000 years thus makes archaeological remains valuable markers for paleo-seismicity characterization. Combined with other
evidence of past seismic activity (fault trenching, lake coring and ethnohistorical sources) we aim to date prehistoric earthquakes
and assess their induced social effects. In a similar manner to the 1650 and 1950 earthquakes that devastated the Cuzco city, our
first results suggest the occurrence of an important seismic event during the Late Horizon (1400–1533 AD). By evidencing new
paleo-events, our investigation is shedding a new light on the complex relation between Inkas and earthquakes.
Combs, Reece [104] see Kingsland, Kaitlyn
Comeau, Brad [236] see Brady, Ryan
Comeca Ramirez, Gianina (Université de Rennés / UNMSM / UNT), Gabriel Prieto (Universidad Nacional de Trujillo) and
Pilar Babot (Universidad Nacional de Tucumán)
[174]
Scraping the Pots: Residue Analysis of Salinar Ceramic Vessels Found in Domestic Contexts at Pampa la Cruz, Huanchaco, North
Coast of Peru
In this paper, we present preliminary results of organic residues analysis taken from ceramic vessels found in domestic contexts at
the site of Pampa la Cruz, North Coast of Peru. This study emphasizes the importance of plant consumption among early fishermen
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       110
populations against traditional assumptions that cultivated crops were of minor significant to these communities. More important, it
opens the possibility to explore the social and economic relationships between fishing and farming communities and even distant-
trade during the late early Horizon or after the Chavin sphere of interaction collapse. Our results show that the use of ceramic
vessels was linked to the consumption of several fruits, tubers and even Theobroma spp. “cacao” which is up to date, the earliest
evidence of this species in the entire south Pacific Coast. The identification of damage due to processing modes (grounding, boiling,
roasting, and fermenting) in the starches of these taxa indicates the that stages reported by ethnographic literature for the making of
sophisticated fermented beverages like chicha were carried out at the site. This show the importance of activities associated with
the production and consumption of fermented beverages among ancient fishing communities.
Commendador, Amy [236] see Kumm, Ethan
Commendador, Amy [177] see Tomich, Kassi
Compagno Zoan, Clara [198] see Franco, Nora
Comstock, Aaron (Ohio State University) and Benjamin Cross (Ohio State University)
[78]
Using Micromorphology to Examine Structure Use and Abandonment at an Early Fort Ancient Village in Southwest Ohio
Recent excavations at the Turpin site (33HA19), a multi-component Late Woodland and Fort Ancient settlement located in
southwest Ohio, produced clear evidence of Mississippian connections. Three wall trench structures dated between AD 1030 and
AD 1275, as well as numerous features that produced Mississippian-style shell tempered pottery suggest that Turpin may reflect a
classic site-level intrusion of Mississippian agriculturalists. This project provides initial results of a micromorphological examination
of key contexts from Turpin excavations. The microscopic examination of soil thin sections allows for the determination of natural
and anthropogenic processes of pedogenesis through the identification of soil components. Here, we examine soil thin sections
sampled from profiles in two structural basins associated with wall-trench structures that appear to have had different use histories.
One structure was renovated and filled relatively rapidly while the other appears to have been filled with standing midden or left
open and filled naturally. The results of this project serve to aid in our investigation of the transition to agriculture in the Middle Ohio
Valley and our understanding of household use, reuse, and decommissioning at an early Fort Ancient village.
Comstock, Aaron [264] see Kooiman, Susan
Conard, Nicholas [11] see Matos, Daniela
Conard, Nicholas [36] see Oechsner, Amy
Conard, Nicholas [11] see Will, Manuel
Conard, Nicholas [162] see Wong, Gillian
Condon, Peter [68] see Holliday, Vance
Conger, Megan (University of Georgia)
[267]
Beads, Brass, and Jesuits: Quantitative and Qualitative Evidence for World-System Expansion in Northern Iroquoia
European-manufactured trade good data and ethnohistoric data are drawn together under a world-systems framework to explore
how world-system expansion occurred in concert with localized processes of settlement relocation, conflict, and political
consolidation in southern Ontario and southern Québec, Canada, ca. AD 1550–1650. Despite broad conceptualization as an
interregional phenomenon, world-system expansion is heterogenous and dependent upon localized historical contingency and
sociopolitical dispositions. I analyze the composition and distribution of European-manufactured trade good assemblages from 90+
Iroquoian sites (12,000+ artifacts) in Southern Ontario and Southern Québec dating to ca. AD 1550–1650. Using measures of
assemblage diversity and equitability, I compare the variation present among assemblages at contemporaneous sites, and briefly
consider the impact of new, absolute chronologies in determining contemporaneity among sites. Using the Jesuit Relations and
other primary ethnohistoric literature as interpretive tools, I consider the range of interactions, including resistance, ambivalence,
and negotiation, which Indigenous peoples in the study area were documented to have enacted during the earliest years of direct
and indirect Indigenous-European contact. I conclude that European trade good assemblages varied among contemporaneous
Iroquoian sites, and I suggest that this variation reflects different choices intentionally made by separate communities navigating and
directing the process of world-system expansion.
Conger, Megan [12] see Birch, Jennifer
Conkey, Margaret (UC-Berkeley)
[56]
Discussant
Conkey, Margaret (UC-Berkeley)
[103]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    111
Conlee, Christina (Texas State University), Corina Kellner (Northern Arizona University), Chet Walker (Archaeo-
Geophysical Associates LLC) and Aldo Noriega (Proyecto Huaca del Loro)
[21]
Huaca del Loro: A Wari Colony in Coastal Nasca
Excavations at the site of Huaca del Loro in the Las Trancas Valley of the Nasca drainage have uncovered a Wari settlement, a
cemetery primarily for local individuals, and a large habitation area possibly for local support personnel. In the Wari sector, Ground
Penetrating Radar (GPR) previously identified subsurface rectilinear architecture similar to that found at other Wari sites. Additional
GPR survey revealed part of a large round structure. Excavations were focused in this sector to expose the architecture and it was
determined that the rectilinear architecture is a Wari style compound, and that the round structure is a D-shaped temple (one of the
first identified in coastal Peru). Material culture associated with the Wari architecture consists of local Loro ceramics, Wari style
offerings, and limited amounts of Wari imperial ceramics. In the cemetery, a Nasca style “trophy” head individual was excavated
from a looted multiple-individual tomb, suggesting local control over important cultural behavior. In the large habitation area,
excavations uncovered quincha (cane) architecture in the local style along with Loro ceramics, suggesting this area was occupied
by local people although future excavations are necessary to assess the nature of this sector.
Conlee, Christina [243] see Berry, Nora
Conley, Daniel [53] see Trachman, Rissa
Conlin, David [273] see Lubkemann, Stephen
Conrad, Cyler (Los Alamos National Laboratory), Sandi Copeland (Los Alamos National Laboratory), Kari Cates
(Independent Researcher), Mary Faith Flores (University of Oklahoma) and Brian Kemp (University of Oklahoma)
[129]
A Cultural Landscape of Birds: Archaeological, Ethnographic and Iconographic Insights into Long-Term, Human-Bird Interaction on
the Pajarito Plateau
The name “Pajarito” Plateau, meaning “little bird” in Spanish, is symbolic not only because of the large diversity of birds present in
this region of northern New Mexico but because of the archaeological evidence for long-term human-bird interaction in this cultural
landscape. Significance of birds for the descendant communities of the Ancestral Pueblo peoples who live on the Plateau is clearly
identified through oral histories and traditions, recovery of birds from archaeological excavations, and iconographic depictions of
birds in numerous examples of petroglyphs and ceramic designs. In this talk, our focus is to holistically examine long-term human-
bird interaction on the Pajarito Plateau by using archaeological, ethnographic and iconographic evidence. While previous and on-
going studies from this area suggest a complex relationship between humans and a specific bird, the turkey (Meleagris gallopavo
ssp.), our talk highlights the broader role that birds played in indigenous lifeways throughout the past 1,000 years.
Conrad, Cyler [129] see Kirk, Scott
Consortium, ERC PEGASUS [173] see Orlando, Ludovic
Contreras, Daniel (University of Florida), Benjamin Vining (University of Arkansas) and Aubrey Hillman (University of
Louisiana, Lafayette)
[59]
Regional Climates, Local Consequences: Downscaling Climate Data in the Chicama Valley, Peru
The scarcity of long-term and high-resolution climatic records—even where paleoclimatic data are relatively abundant —poses a
significant challenge to reconstructing socio-climatic dynamics at the scales associated with human experience. In order for
archaeology to realize its potential to contribute to scientific and policy arenas, particularly in the Global South where data are less
abundant, this challenge must be addressed. Here, using a case study from the Chicama Valley on Peru’s North Coast, we explore
this problem through the integration of spatially and temporally uneven instrumental data (publicly available from the Peruvian
Servicio Nacional de Meteorología e Hidrología, or SENAMHI), global modeled climate data for the twentieth–twenty-first century
(CRU TS, covering the period 1901–2018 at 0.5° resolution), and recent remote sensing measures of localized El Niño-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) effects on vegetation. Higher resolution downscaled reconstructions of local hydroclimates that can account for
both “normal” and El Niño regimes make it possible to use published archaeological survey data to assess the potential impacts of
human-scale climate variability on past settlement patterns. This is a vital step toward assessing the archaeological implications of
both new and existing paleoclimate records.
Contreras, Daniel [125] see Vining, Benjamin
Conway, Meagan (Logan Simpson)
[134]
Migration, Change, and Choice: A Case Study from Early Twentieth-Century Inishark, Co. Galway
This investigation focuses on the ramifications of substantial emigration in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries on the
dynamics of social life in coastal Irish communities and reformed, identity-based groups of migrants in the United States. Using
historical records, oral histories, and archaeological data, this research examines the movements and lifeways of members from a
single family from Inishark, Co. Galway to the United States and explores the formation of transatlantic relationships between people
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    112
and places, based on places and experiences both remembered and re-created. I consider the material and psychological
ramifications of the movements of migrants through the lens of domestic structures and other built architecture in the multi-faceted
environments which migrants experience over time. This helps gain an understanding of the changing identity of immigrants and the
broader, often complex and complicated, dynamics driving the Irish diaspora. While migrants often left their homes for opportunity
and possibility, the driving factors substantially influenced the trajectory of their own lives and the wider communities individuals built
together with other migrants.
Cook, Jacob (Texas State University), Nicholas Herrmann (Texas State University) and Krysten Cruz (Texas State
University)
[35]
The Applicability of 3D Long Bone Reconstructions and Analyses of Sexual Dimorphism using Stature in Bronze Age Samples
Stature can be used to analyze population health, and investigate patterns of human variation and secular change. We investigate
the efficacy of using measures from 3D bone reconstructions, and compare levels of sexual dimorphism in a reconstructed sample
to other Greek Bronze Age sites. 3Dl scans of long bone fragments from Tragana Agia Triada, a Late Bronze Age cemetery in
central Greece, are uploaded to the application Fragmento. This produces whole bone models from which maximum bone lengths
are recorded. Bone lengths from Lerna, an Early to Late Bronze Age site in the Peloponnese, were gathered from Angel’s (1970)
study. For both samples, stature is estimated using Trotter and Gleser’s (1958) male and female formulae for American Whites
using the femur and humerus. Mean stature for the Tragana Agia Triada sample appears to be taller than other Greek Bronze Age
sites. An assigned resampling method (Lee, 2001) parses the Tragana Agia Triada individuals into male and female groups, which
is used to establish the level of sexual dimorphism in this population for comparison to other sites. Secular change in stature and
sexual dimorphism is investigated using the measures from Lerna. Preliminary results show 3D reconstruction may overestimate
stature.
Cook, Robert (Ohio State University)
[255]
Small Regions, Big Problems: The Importance of Long-Term Research in Specific and “Marginal” Locales
The most important lesson I learned in graduate school from Alan Sullivan was the importance of developing long-term research
projects focused on big human problems but in relatively small geographic settings, often those overlooked in grand normative
narratives. During my master’s research, I aided Alan’s quest to better understand marginal Puebloan subsistence patterns in
northern Arizona by challenging the “all Puebloans relied on corn” narrative. We found instead a rich tradition of wild-resource
processing focused on earth-ovens and their associated fire-cracked rock spoil piles. Subsequently, in my own research program
that started some twenty years ago during my doctoral research and continuing to this day, I have sought to more fully understand
the origins and dietary variation of the Fort Ancient culture of the Middle Ohio Valley. The general narrative at the onset of my
research was that the Fort Ancient were solely local groups that slowly adopted maize agriculture. My research program focuses on
a specific region long suspected to deviate from this model. Indeed, I have found key information that overturns this narrative,
specifically that there were a large number of nonlocal Mississippian migrants and that the diet was dominated by maize agriculture
at the very onset.
Cook, Robert [221] see Hinkelman, Sarah
Cook, Robert [264] see Mollerud, Katy
Cook Hale, Jessica (University of Georgia)
[238]
“A tale told . . . signifying nothing”
Submerged prehistoric archaeology by its nature depends intensively on natural science methods, particularly where topics such as
submerged site formation processes are concerned. As such, it offers potential to advance the state of the art in both methodology
and interpretation but must be applied with due care. I present here a case study that demonstrates this concern. In the search for a
nondestructive, cost-effective method to “fingerprint” geochemical signatures in lithic corrosion created by submerged contexts,
limitations in the methods were encountered. Results show promise for lithic studies in this discipline but underscore the need for
critical interpretive methods. In addition to critiquing the method, I will offer suggestions for future approaches that may better
accomplish study goals.
Cook-Hale, Jessica [30] see Dunbar, James
Cook Hale, Jessica [18] see Hale, Nathan
Cooley, Delaney [97] see Newton, Kathryn
Coolidge, Frederick (University of Colorado, Colorado Springs) and Victoria Rowe (University of Colorado, Colorado
Springs)
[36]
A New Interpretation of Symbolic Thinking in Archaeological Artifacts
A symbol is the use of an arbitrary sign to represent an idea, object, or relationship, occurring in a social context. Anthropologists
often invoke Peirce’s semiotic concept of symbols to analyze parietal art, figurines, and other artifacts. This paper argues that
Peirce’s symbol semiotics is no longer adequate for the task of differentiating among obvious and varying cognitive levels of
symbolization in artifacts, particularly for archaeological discoveries since his death 105 years ago. In the present paper, we proffer
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    113
a three-level interpretation of symbolism: at the first level, determine if the phenomenon can be explained by minimally symbolic
cognition (MSC; like Pavlovian conditioning). If so, then higher levels of cognition should not be assumed. Some MSC examples
may be sharp flakes and Oldowan stone tools. At the highest level, establish which artifacts undoubtedly represent Fully Immersed
Symbolic Cognition (FISC), such as the Hohlenstein-Stadel figurine and the Venus of Willendorf. However, artifacts such as the
Makapansgat pebble, the Berekhat Ram figurine, the Blombos Cave engraved ochre, and the Gibraltar Neandertal Tic-Tac-Toe
engraving do not undoubtedly represent fully immersed symbolic cognition, but we propose that they may represent an Intermediate
level of Symbolic Cognition (ISC; beyond MSC but less than FSC).
Coon, Anna [177] see Noll, Christopher
Coon, Sarah (Purdue University), Jacob Harris (Arizona State University), Zeresenay Alamseged (University of Chicago),
Curtis Marean (Arizona State University) and Erik Otárola-Castillo (Purdue University)
[55]
Morphometric Comparison of Early Hominin Butchery Evidence to Carnivore Modifications within a Bayesian Framework
The emergence of stone tools used for butchery by early hominins is a contested topic due to a scarcity of early stone tool evidence. In
the absence of tools, the primary trace evidence for their use as butchery implements is bone surface modifications (BSM). However,
current BSM recognition protocols are subjective and can lead to conflicting identifications—for example, between cut marks and BSM
from carnivores. Canidae species such as Eucyon wokari are present in the African Pliocene fossil record at a time when early tool-
wielding hominins begin to appear. As canids are known to gnaw on bones, and create BSM that can be incorrectly identified as the
result of human butchery behavior, Pliocene canids are candidates for having created BSM currently identified as cut marks. To
alleviate this problem, 3D technology coupled with modern geometric morphometrics and Bayesian inference have emerged to
differentiate between cut marks and other BSM. Here, we use carnivore modifications on bone, made by wolves (Canis lupus) under
controlled conditions to compare against experimentally-produced butchery BSM. While canid BSM can appear visually similar to
butchery marks, Bayesian inference used in this study can differentiate them and provide a level of probability to their distinction.
Cooper, Jago [239] see Martinez Milantchi, Maria Mercedes
Cooper, Zachary (University of Colorado, Boulder) and Scott Ortman (University of Colorado, Boulder)
[26]
Artifact Density and Population Density in Northern China
Settlement scaling theory (SST) proposes that there should be specific, average, quantitative relationships between extensive
measures of population, area, and socio-economic rates in the archaeological sites of a given time and place. Thus far, most
applications of these ideas have used measures derived from the built environment. Here, we use data collected by Drennan,
Peterson and others in the Chifeng Region of northern China to show that pottery consumption rates, reflected in measured
densities of potsherds, increase with overall site areas in a way that is consistent with SST. This result suggests the square root of
the artifact density is on average proportional to the population density, leading to new ways of estimating population at sites for
which surface architectural remains are no longer present.
Copeland, Sandi [129] see Conrad, Cyler
Corbett, Kathleen and Bonnie Clark (University of Denver)
[112]
Families, Buildings, and Borders: The Architecture of Cultural Interaction along the Santa Fe Trail
For much of the 1800s, the Santa Fe Trail served as a critical trade route connecting Indigenous, U.S., and Mexican markets
between the Mississippi River and Mexico City. Artifacts from sites associated with the trail embody cultural innovations that drew
from these three traditions. Architecture provides some of the most durable and visible evidence of this hybridity. A prime example
are the buildings of Boggsville, Colorado, located along the Mountain Branch of the Santa Fe Trail which ran along what was then
the U.S./Mexico border. These standing structures represent a blending of Anglo, Hispano, and Indigenous traditions all in the same
settlement. In these respects, the architecture reflects the heritage of the multi-ethnic families who lived at the site. Drawing from
archaeology, historic research, and architectural analysis, this talk highlights both the nature of these colonial buildings and also
their significance. In a time of ever-hardening borders and identity politics, they serve as critical reminders of the deep history of
interconnection and fluidity across nations.
Corcoran-Tadd, Noa (Princeton University), Arturo Rivera Infante (Centro Peruano de Arqueologi´a Mari´tima y Subacua),
Barbara Carbajal Salazar and Sarah Baitzel (Washington University, St Louis)
[242]
Todas Las Cremas: Shifting Landscapes of Mobility on the Far Southern Coast of Peru (AD 1000–1920)
Recent field work in Tacna (far southern Peru) by a joint team from Leiden and Washington University in St Louis has investigated
the long-term landscape history of the Sama Valley and its desert margins. Located between the research hotspots of Moquegua
and Arica, the valley has long been overlooked by archaeologists. At the same time, it is well positioned to offer new insights into
classic debates about ecology and mobility, ethnicity, and the transforming political economies of the late prehispanic and historic
periods. Here we present an initial analysis of recent data on the long-term patterns of connectivity that articulate Sama with wider
networks of mobility and exchange. Using a combination of remote sensing and intensive pedestrian survey, the Proyecto
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   114
Arqueologico del Valle de Sama 2019 field season recorded evidence for multiple routes through the intervalley desert pampas that
border the lower Sama drainage. The results highlight the utility of intensive coverage in apparently marginal intervalley landscapes
and reveal a complex palimpsest of routes and ephemeral sites relating to Cabuza, Gentilar, Inca, and historical periods of use.
Cordell, Ann (Florida Museum of Natural History) and Maureen Meyers (University of Mississippi)
[123]
Petrographic Analysis of Sherds from a Fourteenth-Century Mississippian Frontier Chiefdom in Southwestern Virginia
The Carter Robinson site is a fourteenth-century Mississippian frontier located in southwestern Virginia. Previous attribute analyses
of ceramics from the site have identified change over time that suggests increased affiliation with neighboring groups. This affiliation
coincided with mound-building and an increase in craft specialization at the site. A petrographic analysis of 47 sherds taken from
four houses and stratigraphic mound excavations was done to more precisely understand the relationship between groups and if
this relationship varied by household and mound and non-mound contexts. This poster will describe the results of this analysis and
re-evaluate earlier analyses based on these results to better understand ceramic production at frontier areas.
Cordell, Ann [123] see Duke, C. Trevor
Cordero, Robin (Office of Contract Archeology, Univ. of New Mexico) and Jamie Stevens (Office of Contract Archeology,
Univ. of New Mexico)
[129]
Winter Garden Hunting along the Rio Grande Flyway: A Case Study in the Procurement of Migratory Birds by Puebloans along the
Rio Grande
Garden hunting is a topic that has received substantial attention in archaeofaunal research over the past 30 years. However, these
studies have tended to focus on hunting in active gardens during the growing season, or in fallow fields. Consequently, these past
studies have often focused on the procurement of small game (rodents, leporids, and birds) who frequent active and abandoned
fields. The goal of this research is to present evidence for a form of garden hunting that has not received as much attention in the
literature—garden hunting of fields in the winter. The influx of Pueblo farmers and expansion of farmland along the Rio Grande
floodplain during the late AD 1200’s caused a significant northward shift in the overwintering grounds of migratory birds, namely
cranes, geese, and ducks. Previous researchers argued that Puebloan groups hunted these birds for use in ceremonies and for the
construction of ritual paraphernalia, and were not consumed. This presentation will first present evidence to evaluate if these winter
migratory birds could have been procured for subsistence. This will be followed by a discussion of the broader ramifications of birds
and issues of territoriality and identity in the Eastern Pueblo region.
Cordova, Carlos and William Johnson (University of Kansas)
[19]
The Pollen and Phytolith Record from Hall’s Cave, South-Central Texas: Vegetation Change and Paleoclimatic Trends
Pollen and phytoliths from the sediments of Hall’s Cave (south-central Texas) indicate that between about 18,000 and 16,500 cal yr
BP the cave area was dominated by an open plant community consisting of herbaceous vegetation, dominated by C3 grasses, and
scattered trees, primarily Quercus and Pinus species. After about 16,500 cal yr BP, the arboreal component fluctuated, attaining a
peak between 14,000 and 13,000 cal yr BP with relatively equal proportions of C3 and C4 grasses, including a sizable proportion of
Panicoideae grasses. The Younger Dryas is marked by a conspicuous decrease in arboreal pollen with an apparent increase of C4
grasses toward its termination. Early Holocene recovery of arboreal vegetation is followed by a drying trend marked by the
increasing dominance of C4 drought-tolerant Chloridoideae grasses. Increasing human use of the cave in middle-to-late Holocene
times creates noise in the pollen and phytolith record for a proper climatic reconstruction. The next stage in the investigation aims at
modeling climatic trends using phytolith data, applying morphometric data on grass silica short-cell (GSSC) phytoliths to obtain
precise grassland composition.
Cordova, Carlos
[219]
Moderator
[219]
Discussant
Cordova, Carlos [269] see Cesaretti, Rudolf
Cordova, Carlos [75] see Raskevitz, Thornton
Córdova Tello, Guillermo and Estela Martínez Mora (DEA-INAH)
[144]
Entorno espacio-temporal del Grupo F y estructura F7 de Tamtoc
Uno de los principales objetivos del Proyecto arqueológico “Origen y desarrollo del paisaje urbano de Tamtoc, SLP” es el de
aproximarnos al conocimiento de los procesos de cambio experimentados por la sociedad que protagonizó su devenir urbano
desde fechas cercanas a 200 a.C. hasta la llegada de los ibéricos a la región. Anotaremos algunas ideas respecto a la evolución
social y al ritmo de los cambios transcendentes vistos desde el registro arqueológico estudiado desde 2008 en diferentes conjuntos
arquitectónicos, tanto al interior como fuera del núcleo urbano de Tamtoc, con el propósito de establecer el contexto espacio-
temporal del llamado Grupo F y Estructura F7, motivo principal de discusión de nuestra mesa.
Córdova Tello, Guillermo [144] see Martínez Mora, Estela
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     115
Córdova Tello, Mario [150] see Jurado, Erik
Corkum, Alex [107] see Gaffney, Chris
Corl, Kristin (University of Texas, San Antonio) and William Walker (New Mexico State University)
[136]
Constructing Community: Intersite Variability of Communal Architecture at Cottonwood Spring Pueblo
Recent and ongoing excavations in Southern New Mexico on either side of the San Andres Mountains are revealing a story of
massive population movement and social reorganization. Construction of communal spaces in the Mogollon for social and ritual
purposes was culturally important, but during the late pueblo period, communal space was vital in helping to integrate people into a
core community. Cottonwood Spring Pueblo, an El Paso Phase (AD 1300–1450) community, comprised linear and plazas pueblos
as well as rock art and shrine features offers an ideal case study. The communal spaces identified across the site are a window into
the larger story of aggregation, reorganization and movement of people across the greater southwest. Excavations at Cottonwood
Spring Pueblo have identified significant variation in structure types and use of communal spaces across the shared landscape,
providing insight into where these people were coming from, and why they chose to come together on the western edge of the
Jornada-Mogollon.
Corl, Kristin [136] see Arakawa, Fumi
Corl, Kristin [179] see Munoz, Cynthia
Corneli, Katharine [258] see Riley, Tim
Coronado, Anabella (Universidad del Valle de Guatemala)
[209]
Discussant
Correa, Letícia (University of São Paulo) and Astolfo Araujo (University of São Paulo)
[232]
Lithic Variability in an Ecotone Area: The Case of São Paulo State
The São Paulo State (SE Brazil) is located in a transition area between rainforest and savanna. Preliminary archaeological data
suggests that this area shows a larger cultural variability when compared to other regions toward north and south (Minas Gerais and
Paraná states). Considering these two conditions, in order to understand the spatial dispersion of hunter-gatherer groups during the
Holocene, this project aims to test two hypothesis: if the cultural variability can be associated to different biomes or if could be better
explained considering cultural transmission processes. However, São Paulo archaeology is not very well known. In spite of the large
number of CRM projects carried out, most information is available in “gray literature” such as reports and websites. Trying to
overcome this situation our project is performing an intense research about lithic sites, both in academic literature and CMR reports.
The most representative lithic collections found in the reports were analyzed considering technological and morphological aspects.
The preliminary results suggest a very rich lithic scenario for state since early times.
[232]
Chair
Correa, Pablo [150] see Carballo, David
Cortes-Rincon, Marisol (Humboldt State University), Cady Rutherford (University of Texas, San Antonio), Jeremy
McFarland (Humboldt State University), Michael McDermott (Humboldt State University) and Spencer Mitchell (University
of California, Santa Barbara)
[230]
Lidar: Guided Archaeological Surveys in the Hinterlands of Northwestern Belize
In the last decade airborne mapping lidar has become an extremely valuable tool for archaeologists studying ancient settlement
patterns. It has proven especially useful in regions covered by dense forests on which prospection with other remote sensing
techniques is not possible. This paper contributes to the growing international dialogue regarding the use of lidar for archaeological
studies by providing examples of features that have been discovered in this region, how these features can be interpreted, and how
these interpretations can contribute to theoretical anthropological perspectives regarding how humans divide and utilize the
landscape. Our remote and field analysis has positively identified numerous archaeological sites that were not been previously
recorded. The authors report on results from the last three seasons of the multidisciplinary Dos Hombres to Gran Cacao
Archaeology Project (DH2GC). Among its main objectives, this project investigates the sociopolitical nature of the study area
through architectural, material cultural remains, and geospatial analyses integrated into a regional lidar dataset. Using key markers
to define areas of specialized activity within each excavation and occupational layers across the study area, we have begun
reconstructing the dynamic history of the study area.
[230]
Chair
Cortes-Rincon, Marisol [7] see McDermott, Michael
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     116
Cortes-Rincon, Marisol [206] see McFarland, Jeremy
Cortes-Rincon, Marisol [53] see Mitchell, Spencer
Cortes-Rincon, Marisol [178] see Rutherford, Cady
Cortes-Rincon, Marisol [230] see Smith, Byron
Cory, Mackenzie (Indiana University) and Edward Herrmann (Indiana University)
[198]
A Phenomenologically Reflective Approach to Understanding Early Paleoindian Landscapes
Though the phenomenological interplay of physical locations simultaneously existing as a space and a cultural construct is widely
examined and critiqued in the field of landscape archaeology, a locus exists in the application of this body of theory to Early
Paleoindian sites. The process through which archaeologists generate Early Paleoindian landscapes by creating, populating, and
interpreting an imagined past remains an unanswered question when only archaeological theory is considered. We seek to correct
this by casting a broader net into contemporary works from the fields of informatics and philosophy of science. We then turn the
analysis toward ourselves and our tools by examining how the PaleoIndiana project generated a statewide GIS model of Early
Paleoindian lithic transport pathways and subsequently interpreted these data. Ultimately, the research process mirrors how we
imagine the creation of other, non-academic, social landscapes and the result is a Paleoindian landscape with meanings wholly
assigned by researchers in the present as a representation of (imagined) inhabitants of the past. It was only after we came to
appreciate how our research processes generated an archaeological landscape that we questioned those same processes and
gained a more holistic understanding of our research area.
Costa, August (Coastal Environments Inc.)
[198]
Stewardship of Submerged Prehistoric Cultural Resources and Beach Nourishment at McFaddin Beach (41JF50), Jefferson County,
Texas
Since 2017, Coastal Environments Inc. (CEI) has facilitated new archaeological investigations related to submerged cultural
resources at McFaddin Beach in Jefferson County, Texas. McFaddin Beach (41JF50) lies along ~35 miles of shoreline stretching
from High Island in the west to Sea Rim State Park in the east. The site has produced items that are thought to have washed ashore
from an unidentified location in the Gulf of Mexico. Documented finds from McFaddin include prehistoric lithic artifacts as well as
Pleistocene faunal remains. The site is best known for yielding a large volume of Clovis points collected by beachcombers over
many decades. This paper will review what is known about the McFaddin Beach site and present preliminary results of ongoing
investigations related to beach-replenishment activities, including archeological monitoring of dredge spoil and a geoarchaeological
assessment of offshore borrow pit core samples.
Costa, Philippe (University Paris 1 and CEMCA), Priscilla Molina Muñoz (Museums of the Costa Rican Central Bank), Martin
Künne (Bonn University), Eric Gelliot (University Paris 1, CEMCA and INRAP) and Simon Mercier (University Paris 1 and
CEMCA)
[189]
The Excavation in the Yegüitas Rock Shelter in Costa Rica, a Clue for a Chronological Link
The Mountain Range Guanacaste Archaeological Project investigates rupestrian art in Guanacaste, a province located in Costa
Rica (northwest). This project results from international collaboration of the French, German and Costa Rican institutions: CEMCA,
Bonn University and the Museums of the Costa Rican Central Bank. The first stage is centered in the Pedregal site, a large savanna
with more than 200 engraved boulders located in the west slope of the Orosi volcano. The project at Pedregal encountered
difficulties in dating the engravings located at the site; therefore, we set the goal to start with one rock shelter called Las Yegüitas,
discovered by the project in 2018, which has uncarved drawings in a panel at the entrance. Las Yegüitas is located 2 kms south of
the Pedregal site, approximately 20 kms south of the Nicaraguan border. We conducted an excavation of 2x1 mts, given the small
dimensions of the cave; and we found materials which we claim belong to the Tempisque Period, circa 500 a.C.-300 d.C. In this
study we present the motivations, methodology, and preliminary results of the excavation at Las Yegüitas.
Costello, Julia
[58]
Foothill Resources
Foothill Resources Ltd. (Foothill) was established as a limited partnership in 1983 by Julia G. Costello, historical archaeologist, and
Judith Marvin, historian and architectural historian. The firm was incorporated in 1992 and certified as a 100% DBE soon after.
Foothill specializes in addressing management needs for historic period sites in California, particularly those related to Spanish
colonization, Euro-Asian immigrations, urbanization, mining, and the development of agriculture and industries. Established early in
the growth of CRM, Foothill often served as a sub-consultant on large state and federal projects researching, evaluating, and
providing mitigation for historic period sites.
Couey, Lauren (University of Denver)
[134]
Building Place: Analysis of the Built Environment in a Chicago Immigrant Community
This discussion investigates the built environment, specifically in terms of architectural style, structural modification, and structure
spatial arrangement, assessing changes to these features over time in a historic immigrant community in Chicago, Illinois. This
examination of the built environment is used to understand how shifts in the cultural fabric of the community are reflected in the
physical characteristics of its structures and their spatial arrangement, as well as how immigrant communities engage in
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     117
placemaking to alter the existing structures around them and rebuild a sense of home and identity after the trauma of migration. Also
considered is the temporality of the built environment, and what aspects of the immigrant experience may be untraceable as city
communities are subject to development efforts and political intervention.
Coughenour, Chance, Stanley Walling (Community College of Philadelphia), Shawna Veach (Google) and Bryan Allen
(Google)
[230]
Lidar and Ancient Maya Commoners: Landscape, Settlement, and Ceremonialism on a Regional Scale
Lidar provides archaeologists with unprecedented imagery of ancient architecture that has been obscured by forest for centuries or
more. In the Maya lowlands, much attention has been paid to lidar’s revelation of previously unknown cities, reservoirs, intersite
causeways, and other substantial vestiges of this ancient culture. This paper focuses on the use of lidar to reveal the much less
substantial remains of commoner life. Although lidar provides Mesoamerican archaeology with what is perhaps the most effective
recent tool for defining commoner cultural remains on a regional scale, this technology has its limitations. This discussion will
consider these limitations, as well as the benefits and potential of lidar in the investigation of Maya commoner life.
Coughlin, Sean [192] see Silverstein, Jay
Countryman, James (University of Chicago)
[124]
Feral Fields of the Eastern Adriatic Coast: Queering Boundaries of Cultivation and Wildness
On Mediterranean islands and coastal areas of southern Europe, drystone field walls, terraces, and clearance cairns are common
landscape features; extensive field systems are often readily observable through aerial reconnaissance. While tracing the precise
chronologies of these fields is perennially challenging, they surely attest to generations of landscape modification for cultivation. But
what does field architecture in itself mean for the particular labor practices and agroecologies that such fields might contain?
Drawing on contemporary in-situ observations of abandoned and semi-managed olive groves on a Croatian island (Ugljan, Zadar
archipelago), and thinking with queer-feminist theories of the feral, I argue that architecturally well-defined fields do not necessarily
represent clear-cut boundaries between wild/unmanaged space and spaces of cultivation/domestication/control. On Adriatic islands,
olive gardens provide habitat for a diverse assemblage of plant life, intentionally cultivated and otherwise. I bring these observations
to bear on new archaeobotanical evidence for a florescence of olive cultivation in the eastern Adriatic in the first to second centuries,
associated with Roman colonization. What can the macrobotanical record illuminate about the ecological ramifications of a pivot
from cereal agriculture to arboriculture, or the different forms of labor associated with these modes of cultivation?
Countryman, Linda [175] see Franklin, Jay
Covert, Alexandra (Flagstaff Area National Monuments)
[148]
From Water to Land: Analysis of Prehistoric Shell at Wupatki Pueblo
Wupatki Pueblo has a high concentration of prehistoric shell artifacts. Through a literature review, analysis, and spatial analysis, this
research project examined the prehistoric shell artifacts from Wupatki Pueblo. This research project determined trade routes of shell
to Wupatki Pueblo from the coast of California, Gulf of California, and Gulf of Mexico. Additionally, shell artifacts housed at the
Museum of Northern Arizona were analyzed by species and artifact type. Spatial analysis was conducted on the artifact types by
placing the artifact types into the North Unit and South Unit of Wupatki Pueblo to determine discernable user patterns. Ultimately
this research project gives insight into prehistoric trade networks and the significance of shell objects to the people of Wupatki
Pueblo.
Covey, R. Alan (University of Texas, Austin), Robert Selden Jr. (Stephen F. Austin State University), Nicole Payntar
(University of Texas, Austin), Astrid Runggaldier (University of Texas, Austin) and Charles Spencer (American Museum of
Natural History)
[17]
Geometric Morphometric Analysis of Inca Jars from Two Public Collections
Found from highland Ecuador to northwest Argentina, the Inca narrow-mouth jar, or aríbalo, is the most widely distributed marker of
the period of imperial expansion across the Andes (c. 1400–1530s). Hiram Bingham made the first formal description of the aribalo
more than a century ago, as part of the first formal classification of Inca pottery. In the past century, other researchers have noted
variations in shape and surface decoration seen in excavated aríbalos and jars from museum collections. These differences might
be attributed to differences in workshop practices or provincial identity across the empire, but no quantitative analysis of vessel
shape has yet been published. In this paper, we present the preliminary results of an ongoing project that has produced high-
resolution 3D scans of Inca jars from the University of Texas Art and Art History Collection and the Bandelier Collection at the
American Museum of Natural History. We present the results of geometric morphometric analysis to assess the consistency of
shape seen in 29 Inca aríbalos that were produced in different parts of the Inca Empire. This research provides significant insights
into Inca potting practices, which can be compared with the production technologies and vessel shapes of earlier Andean societies.
Covey, R. Alan [175] see Payntar, Nicole
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 118
Cowie, Sarah (University of Nevada, Reno), Diane Teeman (Culture & Heritage Department of the Burns Paiute), Ashley
Long (BLM Shoshone, ID Field Office) and Patrick “De?ileligi” Burtt (Washoe Tribe of Nevada and California and Arizona)
[97]
Two Case Studies in Indigenous Archaeology by, with, and for American Indian Communities in the Great Basin
Two case studies in collaborative archaeology demonstrate the challenges and benefits of conducting research “by, with, and for”
Native communities, from the projects’ inception to publication. Related heritage teams first conducted work at Nevada’s historic
Stewart Indian School that was used in federal efforts to assimilate Native children from throughout the western U.S. Building on
lessons from that project and expanding our networks, we are now engaged in the “Our Ancestors’ Walk of Sorrow” project to
illuminate the removal of many Paiute, Shoshone, and Bannock people from their homelands. Both case studies demonstrate that
processes of governmentality, disciplinary power, and legislative processes entangled with biopolitics and knowledge production
have similarly acted upon landscapes, human bodies, and material culture. In the employment of collaborative and indigenous
archaeologies, living community members with blood and other ties to these landscapes are contributing tribal knowledge and oral
history as research partners. Through such partnerships, our work groups have developed a more complete picture of our shared
history. Holistic approaches to understanding the past also may assist mitigation of inter-generational trauma and historical grief
accompanying many such landscapes of conflict, and can give guidance for improving the management of Indigenous heritage on
public lands.
Cox, Kim
[16]
Paint Rock: The Ethnography and History of the Rock Art
In his book Comanche Land, J. Emmor Harston discusses his interactions with the Comanche Indians of Central Texas. Oral
histories of the Comanches from the time of Coronado up until the late nineteenth century were documented in the rock art of Paint
Rock, Texas. This fact lends a great amount of credibility to the writings of Harston and the oral histories of the Comanches that he
recorded.
Cox, Whitney (Rowan University)
[16]
Paint Rock: The Religious Foundations of the Rock Art
The sacredness of time was a fundamental concept to the prehistoric peoples of Mesoamerica and the American Southwest. Uto-
Aztecan speaking groups saw time as cyclical and incorporated that concept in their artwork. One of the best examples of this
concept is found at Paint Rock, Texas where the idea of cyclical time, or creation and recreation, was embedded in the landscape.
Crable, Barbara [68] see Hofman, Jack
Crable, Barbara [236] see Rapes, John
Crabtree, Pam (New York University) and Taylor Zaneri (University of Amsterdam)
[22]
Using Zooarchaeology to Explore the Origins of Medieval Urbanism: Evidence from Badia Pozzeveri near Lucca, Antwerp, and
Ipswich
The origin of urbanism is one of the most significant transitions in human history. Archaeologists and historians have been
interested in the origins and development of early medieval urbanism since the days of V. Gordon Childe and Henri Pirenne in the
early twentieth century. While most of the early studies of medieval towns were based on historical sources, archaeological research
carried out in the late twentieth and twenty-first centuries have provided new data on the process of urbanization in medieval
Europe. In this paper, we use zooarchaeological data from Badia Pozzeveri near Lucca in Italy (ca. 900–1300 CE), Antwerp in
Belgium (eighth through eleventh centuries CE), and Ipswich in the United Kingdom (seventh through twelfth centuries CE) to
address two related questions: 1. How did early urban populations obtain food and other animal products from the surrounding
countryside, and 2. To what extent were people living in the countryside participating in urban markets?
Crabtree, Stefani (Santa Fe Institute & Utah State University) and Jennifer Dunne (Santa Fe Institute)
[26]
The ArchaeoEcology Project: Examining Common Modalities of Human-Ecosystem Interaction Worldwide
There is increasing awareness that our understanding of the dynamics and stability of human systems cannot be uncoupled from
their environmental and ecological context. Most of the work on what are called “socio-ecological systems” or “coupled natural-
human systems” focuses on modern systems. However, there is an enormous amount of anthropological and archaeological
knowledge that can deeply inform, enhance and transform our understanding of socio-ecological dynamics and sustainability. Work
on past systems where we know the system’s trajectory can provide a powerful framework for addressing socio-ecological
resilience, stability and robustness in response to natural and human perturbations and change. In this paper we examine “How do
human interactions with biodiversity shape socio-ecological dynamics and sustainability?” Our work in collating data from six well-
studied systems that range in scale from aboriginal foragers in Australia, to growing polities in the American southwest, to chiefdoms
in the South Pacific and warring Norse states enables us to examine the modalities of human-environment interaction from deep
time until today. By examining the many ways that people in these societies interact with and within their ecosystems we can
understand commonalities of sustainability, resilience, and vulnerability to external environmental shocks.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     119
Crabtree, Stefani (The Santa Fe Institute & Utah State University)
[115]
Discussant
Crabtree, Stefani [171] see Bocinsky, Kyle
Crabtree, Stefani [165] see Ellyson, Laura
Craib, Alexander [103] see Ballenger, Jesse
Craig, Jessica (Central New Mexico Community College), Eleanor Harrison-Buck (University of New Hampshire) and Astrid
Runggaldier (University of Texas at Austin)
[14]
Terminal Classic Ancestors and the Eastern Shrine of Chikin Chi’Ha, Belize
Investigations of an eastern shrine building in a residential group at Chikin Chi’Ha exposed a complex burial of an adult male and
three children under the age of two who were placed near his head and feet. While there is abundant evidence for the construction
and use of Classic period eastern shrines in the Maya Lowlands, ceramic analysis from Chikin Chi’Ha suggests this building was
modified multiple times and dates primarily to the Terminal Classic-Early Postclassic transition (ca. AD 830–1200). The primary
burial interment was in a supine position with legs folded up at the knee—a highly unusual configuration. Both the burial and the
eastern shrine dating to the Terminal Classic are somewhat of an anomaly for the Belize River Valley. Evidence for transition,
upheaval, and migration have been documented at many Lowland Maya Terminal Classic sites. Here we cross-examine the
possibility that this atypical burial and shrine building at Chikin Chi’Ha are the result of an influx of newcomers into this region who
introduced new traditions, while also perpetuating “old” Classic Maya narratives concerning an eastern association with ancestor
rituals and human sacrifice during this tumultuous time.
Craig, Oliver [229] see Gaffney, Isabella
Cramb, Justin (University of Georgia)
[252]
The Mystery Dogs of Remote Oceania: An Archaeological and Ethnohistorical View of Domestic Dog Introduction and Loss in the
South Pacific
Domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) comprise one part of the suite of plants and animals transported by voyagers to the islands of Remote
Oceania. The distribution of these, and other domesticates, is inconsistent from island to island and from archipelago to archipelago.
New archaeological fieldwork, zooarchaeological analysis, and AMS dating demonstrate that settlers introduced dogs to the atolls of
Manihiki and Rakahanga in East Polynesia at the time of the first human arrivals ca. AD 1290–1390 and maintained them until after
European contact in AD 1606. Dogs died out on the atolls prior to missionization in AD 1849. Archaeological reports and ethnohistoric
text analyzed for thirty-five islands/ island groups in Remote Oceania reveal regional patterns of introduction and loss. The findings
indicate that voyaging peoples introduced dogs to the majority of island groups in Remote Oceania before European contact, and that
rates of pre-European localized extinction were high. The highest rates of loss occur on low coral islands suggesting that low island
vulnerabilities and spatial constraints on population size may affect dog survivorship. This analysis suggests that the dogs of Remote
Oceania have a complex history in which introduction to new islands was common, but long-term survival was difficult.
[252]
Chair
Crass, Barbara (Museum of the North, University of Alaska, Fairbanks), Jeffrey Behm (University of Wisconsin, Oshkosh)
and Charles Holmes (University of Alaska, Fairbanks)
[82]
Experimental Reproduction of Swan Point Bone-Fueled Hearth Remains
Bone-fueled hearth remains were discovered in the lowest level (ca. 14,000 years ago) of Swan Point, central interior Alaska, in
2003. The hearths are associated with ivory and lithic workshop areas. Laboratory experiments began in 2004 and the first outdoor
bone only fueled fire was in 2006. Multiple outdoor fires have been burned since and remains observed for more than a decade. The
taphonomic effects of weather and animals have broken down large piles of bone into remains which closely resemble what is found
archaeologically. Laboratory experiments using the residue found in the substrate beneath the fire provide further insights into the
effects of numerous freeze/thaw cycles and water percolation. Many of the observed features of the archaeological bone-fueled
hearths can be reproduced experimentally.
Crass, Barbara [82] see Krasinski, Kathryn
Crass, Barbara [82] see Wygal, Brian
Crawford, Dawn (Southern Methodist University), Michael Callaghan (University of Central Florida), Daniel Pierce
(Universite Bordeaux-Montaigne, France), William Gilstrap (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) and Brigitte
Kovacevich (University of Central Florida)
[39]
Ceramic Production During the Terminal Classic at Holtun, Guatemala
The use of provenance studies to answer anthropological questions related to the production and access of ceramics is well
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         120
documented for the Maya region. Mineralogical and chemical compositional analyses are often used to identify the material origins,
or provenance, of ceramics. In this paper, the authors report on Neutron Activation Analysis (NAA) and ceramic petrography of
serving and utilitarian vessels recovered from Terminal Classic-period elite and non-elite domestic contexts at the Maya site of
Holtun, Guatemala. The research is part of Crawford’s dissertation research, which examines economic resilience expressed
through non-elite choices related to production during the Terminal Classic period at Holtun. Preliminary NAA results show that
Terminal Classic potters were using chemically distinct clays exhibiting different paste fabrics than previously studied Preclassic
pottery at Holtun. In addition, chemical composition during the Terminal Classic period does not appear to match other sites in the
Maya lowlands. However, petrographic data show that Terminal Classic period potters continued to use local carbonate materials
for pottery production. This is part of a long-lasting local tradition of potter manufacture that can be traced back to the Middle
Preclassic period. The authors will present preliminary data and discuss its implications in light of resilience theory.
[39]
Chair
Creager, Brooke
[211]
Migration and Ritual Adaptation
After a migration, there is a period of adaptation in reaction to the new landscape and interaction with native groups. The adaptations
occur, to a degree, in every aspect of life including ritual practices. Examining ritual expressions of religion in a migration context reveals
how cultures adapt in the first phases of contact and how the ephemeral aspects of society are impacted. When practical materials, like
pottery or elite trade goods, are integrated into a society’s practice, it can be explained through practicality and the value of new
materials. When religions change, it reflects a shift in worldview. Religion may only be represented archaeologically through
iconography and ritual practices, but changes in these materials suggests a change in the belief system. This paper uses the Anglo-
Saxon migration as a case study to examine how the ritual practices of both native and migrant groups adapt.
[211]
Chair
Creamer, Emma [119] see Geiger, Elspeth
Creel, Darrell (University of Texas, Austin)
[136]
The Enduring Importance of Mimbres Great Kivas
In Swarts and other Mimbres villages, the location of great kivas and associated pithouses marked important ritual loci during the
Late Pithouse period. The same loci continued to be used for very large, probably communal rooms as well as special habitation
rooms through the Classic period. There is mortuary evidence indicating that specific families were responsible for great kiva
construction, maintenance, and rituals and that this responsibility also continued through the Classic period. With population growth
during the Classic, membership in a group responsible for kiva ritual may have expanded, thus serving to integrate the village.
Creese, John (North Dakota State University)
[12]
Assertive Egalitarianism and Its Contradictions: Inter-household Spatial Relations and Emergent Social Assemblages in Fifteenth–
Seventeenth-Century Northern Iroquoian Villages
Ancestral Wendat societies of the lower Great Lakes have often been considered quintessential exemplars of “tribal egalitarianism”
in neoevolutionary terms. But, as a number of commentators have noted, egalitarianism isn’t the default human condition any more
than inequality or hierarchy—it must be worked at, as against various countervailing forces and interests that might lead to its
erasure. In this paper, I explore the tensions and contradictions inherent in the assertive egalitarianism of the fifteenth–seventeenth
century Wendat from the standpoint of inter-house spatial relations. Assemblage theory provides an alternative framework for
understanding the role of materiality and space in the sociopolitical dynamics of small-scale societies.
Crespo, Fabián [143] see Scheinsohn, Vivian
Cressler, Alan [60] see Simek, Jan
Crevecoeur, Isabella [171] see Brandt, Steven
Criado-Boado, Felipe
[207]
Discussant
Criado-Boado, Felipe
[263]
Exploratory Eye Movements to Archaeological Objects Illustrate the Coupling of the Material World and Social Complexity through
History
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    121
The eye-tracking of prehistoric pottery from very distinct archaeological societies has revealed that the way of visually appraising
objects is directly connected, through the visual saliency, to their design, what pinpoints a continual loop and correlation between
visual behavior and physical shapes that may also be linked to social complexity. This correlation between the physical structure of
the objects and the resulting visual behavior suggests that the engagement between material styles and socio-cultural domains,
often postulated by Archaeological, Cultural and Visual studies, is mediated (or even constructed) by visual behavior. These results
therefore suggest that visual behavior would be the underlying driver that explains why changes in material styles echo socio-
cultural changes, an issue that has so far remained unexplained in cultural studies.
Crider, Destiny (Luther College), Daniel Pierce (University of Missouri Archaeometry Laboratory), J. Heath Anderson
(Minnesota State University Mankato) and Michael Glascock (University of Missouri Archaeometry Laboratory)
[150]
Revisiting Tula, Hidalgo Epiclassic Ceramics: Progress and Recent NAA Results
Significant progress has been made in the description and definition of typological and compositional assemblages of Tula, Hidalgo
regional ceramics during the Epiclassic period of the Central Highlands. Neutron Activation Analysis conducted at the Archaeometry
Laboratory and the Research Reactor Center ant the University of Missouri (MURR) now includes contributions from multiple
researchers. We report the findings from the 119 Epiclassic ceramic samples submitted to MURR from Anderson’s Proyecto Cerro
Magoni, a large Epiclassic settlement, and a ceremonial center located on a hilltop within the viewshed of Tula Chico. The ceramic
types selected reflect a diversity of well-known styles found throughout the Central Highlands and a handful of types not common to
the Basin of Mexico, but are increasingly recognized for relationships northwest toward the Bajio. Emergent composition groups
from this dataset will be discussed in relation to previous composition sampling of the Tula and Basin of Mexico studies by Crider
and others. We will provide a discussion on how these results provide new evidence and inform our interpretive frameworks on
questions on ceramic production and exchange in the region, and highlight key domains for further study both within Hidalgo and in
relation to neighboring areas in the highlands.
Crist, Walter (Maastricht University) and Cameron Browne (Maastricht University)
[175]
Reconstructing Ancient Board Games Using AI Techniques: The Digital Ludeme Project
Advances in Artificial Intelligence allow us to revisit the question of finding the rules for ancient games. With our game software
Ludii, the Digital Ludeme Project aims to use archaeological and historical data for the most important 1,000 games in human
history to calculate likely rulesets for ancient games and construct a platform for people to play them. The concept of a ludeme,
which describes a conceptual unit of a game’s rules, is useful for reconstructing lost games. In our project, we are collecting
archaeological, textual, art historirical, and ethnographic data on ancient games, determining which ludemes they provide evidence
for, and then will use AI to fill in the gaps of our knowledge with ludemes from related games. The AI will test the playability of these
ludeme combinations and provide probability scores for the reconstructions based on our confidence in the evidence and the AI’s
calculations of playability. Our research will be made public in an Open Access platform where people can play against either an AI
or human opponent. This project seeks to preserve this kind of intangible cultural heritage that over the past 100 years has been lost
as people stop playing these games.
Cromwell, RP (University of Nevada, Reno), Makayla O’Rourke (Oregon State University) and Tara Tran
[77]
A Comparison of Projectile Points from the Lake Abert Basin, Lake County, Oregon.
The authors employ a morphological analysis of projectile points associated with landforms located on the east and west shores of
the Lake Abert Basin, Oregon. Utilizing established projectile point typologies for the Northern Great Basin (Thomas 1981; Oetting
1989; Largaespada 2006), the abundance and density of projectile points are compared. The projectile point assemblages serve as
a proxy for the intensity of use for each landform. We expect that a comparison of frequency and distribution of projectile points on
each landform will allow for interpretations about land-use and settlement decisions inhabitants made throughout the Holocene.
Cron, Lindsey (New Mexico State University), Jorden Scott (New Mexico State University), Ashlyn Wagoner (New Mexico
State University), Dustin Wagner (New Mexico State University) and Fumi Arakawa (New Mexico State University)
[122]
The 2019 New Mexico State University Field School at South Diamond Creek Pueblo
The 2019 New Mexico State University Field School in the Gila National Forest continued excavations from a 2017 field school at
the South Diamond Creek Pueblo (SDCP) site. This project aimed to excavate significant portions of a communal structure initially
started in the 2017 field school. The goal of this field school was to recover as much information as possible in relation to the kiva
and the site in its entirety to better explain the use of the area by prehistoric peoples. Findings from the excavation include details on
the overall structure of the kiva, new artifact assemblages—two cloudblower pipes, a broken shell pendant, and a possible animal
figurine— as well as new potentially datable charcoal and macrobotanical samples. Data from this excavation is still being
processed but is likely to date to the Georgetown phase (AD 550–650) occupation. Because the SDCP kiva shows similar
architectural configurations and features to the great kiva excavated at the Galaz site in the Mimbres River Valley (approximately 40
miles away), the results of the SDCP kiva can provide crucial information about broader communities of practice by the pithouse
community in the northern Mimbres region and the Mimbres River Valley.
Cron, Lindsey [136] see Arakawa, Fumi
Cross, Benjamin [78] see Comstock, Aaron
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    122
Cross, Benjamin [221] see Hinkelman, Sarah
Crowley, Brooke [76] see Hixon, Sean
Crowley-Champoux, Erin (University of Minnesota)
[22]
Reconstructing Animal Economies of Early Ireland in Transition
In Ireland, one of the defining features of the transition from the Iron Age to the Early Medieval Period, during the first centuries AD,
is the development of a dairying economy. The concern for dairy as a commodity had social and political consequences for Early
Medieval society; with status reflected in quantities of dairy cattle and social obligations of hospitality expressed in butter and
cheese. The development of this system, however, is not well understood. This paper presents the initial findings from
zooarchaeological analysis of the animal remains from Laytown, Co. Meath. Excavation at this site demonstrated a long sequence
of occupation from the Late Iron Age through the Early Medieval Period, examining the transition from the prehistoric to the
medieval. At times the site was primarily a settlement and, at others, a site inflected by ritual expression and burial. This
demonstrates not only change over time but also the use of animals in various social contexts. By examining this period of social
and political transformation, I question narratives of continuity and change as well as the staid interpretations of resource
exploitation and economic development during this period.
Crown, Patricia (University of New Mexico)
[88]
Discussant
Crown, Patricia (University of New Mexico) and Patrick Lyons (Arizona State Museum, University of Arizona)
[129]
Cultural Diversity and the Macaws and Parrots of the Arizona Mountains
One of the highest concentrations of macaws and parrots in the U.S. Southwest was recovered from four sites in the mountains of
east-central Arizona: Grasshopper, Kinishba, Point of Pines, and Turkey Creek Pueblos. This study re-examines the evidence for
acquisition, care, and discard of the birds between about AD 1250 and 1400. Given the strong evidence for diverse cultural groups
living within these villages, these assemblages offer an unusual opportunity to examine how varied beliefs regarding appropriate
disposal practices created intrasite and intersite patterns.
Cruger, Holly (University at Albany)
[5]
Using PXRF to Distinguish American and English Redware
Past PXRF studies on ceramics have determined that local chemical signatures of pottery can be determined and used to
distinguish locally made wares from imported ones from other locations, even if the clay source or site of production was within a 50-
mile radius. My study, in conjunction with the New York State Museum, would determine whether American-made redware from the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries could be distinguished from English and Dutch redware from the same time period. At the time
of submitting this abstract, no PXRF has been completed for the project, save for various literary readings on the subject. However,
based on those readings, it may be possible to use PXRF on redware from colonial sites in Northeastern America to provide a basis
for determination between American and European made ware. Redware was a very common item being used at the time and was
made locally and imported en masse. The results of this study could potentially be used in the field and in a museum collections
context to further catalogue and study artifacts that otherwise would go undetermined, as the country of origin of many redware
sherds, such as in the NYSM, is undetermined.
Cruz, Heather (University of Connecticut, Hartford)
[13]
Cult-ure during the Terminal Archaic? An Homage to Brian Jones
Broadspear cultures of the Terminal Archaic in southern New England are largely identified by the stylistic qualities and lithic
choices of their projectiles. These diagnostics are likely variants of the Savannah River point of the southern U.S. region, which
traveled north along the Atlantic Slope via the migrations of people and their technologies or the diffusion of technological industries
through socioeconomic systems. Jones argued that the cultural and technological similarities witnessed along the coast were a
deliberate display of peoples’/families’ participation within a larger cult system. This system was headed by higher ranking
groups/families who either controlled the locations where commodities could be collected or the central places where commodities
were exchanged. In theory, a tiered system developed where local trade became nodes within larger regional networks, which in
turn fed an interaction sphere covering most of the Atlantic Slope. Cults have been known to grow in conjunction with political
systems because they promote ‘sameness’ and bind members through cooperation, morals and identities. Climatic changes and
increased sedentism may have created a social atmosphere where membership within a socio-economic cult provided people
physical protection, necessary dietary resources, and an opportunity to increase their own prestige.
Cruz, Krysten [35] see Cook, Jacob
Cruz, Ricardo [133] see Barba, Luis
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    123
Cruz Jiménez, Ricardo Leonel
[133]
Aspectos de aprovisionamiento y uso de la obsidiana en Chicoloapan Viejo, un asentamiento del periodo Epiclásico
A partir del estudio morfo-tecnológico de la obsidiana, se discuten aspectos de vida comunitaria en el sitio de Chicoloapan Viejo
durante su ocupación epiclasica. De esta manera se busca incrementar los conocimientos, con los que contamos, respecto a
subsistencia domestica y corporativa del asentamiento. Así mismo se exponen planteamientos preliminares respecto al
aprovisionamiento y acopio de este material, tanto en el sitio, como en la Cuenca de México, partiendo de análisis de procedencia
mediante la técnica de Fluorescencia de rayos X. Se propone un panorama general referente a las rutas de comercio y acopio de la
obsidiana, desde los inicios del período Epiclásico.
Cruzado Carranza, Elizabeth (Louisiana State University)
[184]
Education and Cultural Heritage Preservation in Rural Peru: Lessons from Nivín, Casma
This paper explores the past, present and future challenges of educational archaeology in Peru using as a case study my
involvement with the Maria Parado de Bellido School in Nivín, Casma. Since 2011, collaborative efforts of teachers and students at
the school and its own museum have led to the creation of a safe space to engage with the local past by establishing connections
between archaeologists, both Peruvian nationals and foreigners, and local educators and community members. Teachers and
archaeologists have created a series of lesson plans that use the ancient cultural materials and practices in multidisciplinary
learning activities. In a co-creative effort, we have developed educational activities, in which all students can learn about diverse
topics, including art, social studies, and sciences. Students particularly enjoy the creative and visual arts activities because these
are hands-on lessons about ancient forms of artistic manifestations. Because these activities occur in the school and museum that
share the same building complex, the community also has the opportunity to engage and learn about their cultural heritage. This
paper presents the complex and rich entanglements between those various audiences and social actors in the Nivín community.
Cuello del Pozo, Paloma (Texas A&M University), Jose Peña (University of South Florida) and J. Eduardo Eche Vega
(Universidad Nacional de Trujillo)
[105]
Preliminary Analyses of Archaeological Pollen from the Casma Site of El Campanario, Huarmey, Peru: A Cautionary Tale for
Archaeologists
Our exploration focuses on issues regarding archaeological palynology and present a case study using a preliminary set of pollen
samples from El Campanario Archaeological Project in Huarmey, Peru. The majority of the samples used in this analysis were
obtained from an architectural platform, which has been C14 dated to 1150–1280 AD. The prevailing hypothesis suggests the site
was occupied by the Casma people. This project has revisited Bryant and Hall (1993), who published a set of protocols showing the
potentials and problems of palynological analyses in archaeology. We use our preliminary set of samples to discuss issues and
advantages when applying this method; in archaeological layers, the preservation of paleobotanical micro-remains is often poor,
which poses an obstacle during taxonomic identification. Hence, we have limited our discussion to presence/absence data of pollen
families recovered to date at the site. Some of the most common identifiable grains in El Campanario include maize and some
members of the legume family. The findings of these cultivars within occupational layers of this platform provide some hints to
archaeologists as we try to understand the cultural activities that could have been performed during the occupation of the site.
Cuello del Pozo, Paloma [242] see Chavez, Mark
Cuello del Pozo, Paloma [242] see Ritter, Alexandra
Cuevas, Mauricio [227] see Budar, Lourdes
Culleton, Brendan [237] see George, Richard
Curet, L. Antonio (National Museum of the American Indian, Smithsonian Institution)
[169]
Life and Death at the Ceremonial Center of Tibes, Ponce, Puerto Rico
For a long time, the ceremonial center of Tibes has been considered by many archaeologists as evidence of incipient social
stratification and monopolization of power in the Caribbean. However, a long-term project at this site has failed to find clear evidence
of strong social differentiation and has forced us to begin explaining either the presence of social stratification without archaeological
correlates or the development of a monumental, ceremonial center without social stratification. This paper takes a closer look at the
premises and evidence (or lack of evidence) recovered by the project and propose a new perspective that may explain the
contradictions presented above.
Cureton, Travis [79] see Phillips, Bruce
Curliss, Lydia (Brown University Libraries)
[41]
Collaborations between Academic Libraries and Archives for the Support of Indigenous Archaeology and Cultural Resource
Management
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    124
Academic libraries and archives currently partner with researchers and communities on scholarship and research centered on
indigenous people and topics, including but not limited to digital storytelling, reclamation of language and archival projects. In the
context of indigenous archaeology and cultural resource management, libraries and archives have the potential to be key partners in
sustaining and building scholarship and research efforts.This presentation will address the ways in which librarians and archivists
are uniquely positioned to be integral resources, and the areas in which their expertise directly relates, such as knowledge of GIS,
digital scholarship and collections management. Additionally, it will consider some of the challenges libraries and archives face in
successfully supporting research and scholarship, and the ways in which these partnerships are beneficial to increased advocacy
and support in the work of indigenous archaeologists and the communities they collaborate with.
Curti, Giorgio Hadi [127] see Dongoske, Kurt
Cusicanqui, Solsiré (Harvard University)
[106]
Identity through Movement: Domestic Political Units and Pan-Andean Relations in Prehispanic Cajamarca
The purpose of this project is to investigate the relationship between environmental factors and cultural dynamics as manifested in
the development of specialized pottery production as a symbol of ethnic identity in the valley of Cajamarca, Peru, during the Early
and Middle Cajamarca Periods (cal 100 BC–850 AD). To that end, this work will examine the idea of ethnicity and communities of
practice in the Andes. First, we propose how ethnicity is generated and maintained, emphasizing certain cultural features (e.g.,
pottery, architectural patterns, goods, mobility, funerary practices). Second, we will evaluate how this ethnic identity is a product of
belonging to a community that is built through the participation of its members in the practices and activities of this society. We will
cover the internal and external dynamics of this sociocultural group, focusing on cultural remains and their distribution in different
functional spaces registered to date. Our work is based on the excavations of two archaeological sites of the Cajamarca period:
Iscoconga and Carambayoc. We will present the results of three field seasons in both archeological sites that present pottery
production areas, houses, ceremonial and, possibly, administrative spaces.
[106]
Chair
Cyphers, Ann (IIA-UNAM)
[191]
Palace Sculpture of the San Lorenzo Olmec
Palaces never fail to fascinate us. Religious and political meanings embedded in these paradigms of luxury, wealth, and power built
on a majestic scale support the rulers’ ascent to power and right to a privileged life. The earliest known Olmec palace and its
complex at San Lorenzo, Veracruz, shows the incorporation, use, and display of sculpture as architectural, commemorative and
symbolic elements that proclaim legitimacy through ancestral and divine associations, as is evident in later palaces.
Cyr, Howard [222] see Nelson, Erin
Dacus, Chelsea (Museum of Fine Arts, Houston)
[141]
Rayed Gods and Llamas in Tiwanaku Metalwork: An Exploration of Two Common Motifs in Middle Horizon Visual Culture
The Tiwanaku, a culture that helped define the Middle Horizon Period of the ancient central Andes, has been well-studied for its
monumental stone sculpture and architecture. Other aspects of its visual culture, however, have experienced a dearth of research,
most especially its metalwork. Two common motifs in Tiwanaku art, the rayed deity face and llamas, are particularly prominent in
Tiwanaku works of gold and silver. The importance of these motifs has been recognized in the mediums of stone and fabric, but
their meaning and relationship has yet to be satisfactorily explored. Terrence Grieder believed that interpretation of symbols in the
art of ancient cultures could be accomplished through a careful balance of configurational analysis and ethnological analogy
tempered by an awareness of the disjunction of meaning over time. Grieder’s methodology has been refined in recent scholarship
into a more comprehensive examination of visual culture, encompassing multiple disciplines and aspects of cultural production as
communication. Utilizing this expanded method of research, this paper will investigate the meaning of the motifs of rayed deity and
llama in Tiwanaku metalwork.
Dagtas, Nihan [244] see Singleton, Robin
Dakovic, Gligor (University of Pittsburgh)
[35]
Long-term Social Processes and Demographic Dynamics of the Early Bronze Age (2800–1700 BC) in the Northern Banat Region of
Serbia
This program of research examines long term social and economic transitions and associated developments in settlement
patterning, regional demographic processes, and centralized control of natural and cultural resources. Archaeological field research
will be undertaken in the Banat region of Northern Serbia, located in the Carpathian Basin of Europe, where it appears that
egalitarian communities gave way to completely new forms of hierarchical social organization by the early second millennium BC.
This field research takes aim at these current gaps in knowledge in order to generate an important new multi-scalar dataset to better
interpret diachronic changes in these late prehistoric communities and to examine the organization of populations across the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     125
landscape in relation to increased economic and political centralization and control of resources.
Dale, Jedidiah (Department of Geography and the Environment, The University of Texas at Austin), Timothy Beach
(Department of Geography and the Environment, U), Sheryl Luzzadder-Beach (Department of Geography and the
Environment, U) and Colin Doyle (Department of Geography and the Environment, U)
[206]
Integrating Lidar with Hydrographic and Hydraulic Data to Better Understand Long-Term Human Interaction with the Rio Bravo
Watershed
Lidar has provided revolutionary data for studying geomorphic processes in tropical forests such as those of northwest Belize. This
includes an expanded understanding of anthropogenic interactions, both past and present, with fluvial systems. However, lidar alone
is limited in its ability to study fluvial dynamics, especially in regions with sparse hydrologic data. Spatially variable parameters, well
studied in geomorphology, such as discharge, channel morphodynamics, and woody debris, are important for investigating ancient
Maya interaction with watersheds. Diverse research interests including water availability, flood resiliency, and river network
navigability, could all benefit from improved hydrologic data. Here, we present new data collected along the archaeologically rich Rio
Bravo. We collected bathymetry and channel geometry with down-nadir sonar, and woody debris concentrations with side-scan
sonar. Additionally, we used an Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler to collect velocity profiles and discharge, from which which we
make the first estimate of dry season base-flow on the Rio Bravo of 6–7m3s-1. This work complements, and will be combined with,
ongoing lidar and multiproxy investigations of ancient Maya agriculture and water management. Integrating these diverse datasets
allows us to expand our quantitative study of the dynamic hydrologic interactions of Maya land use with fluvial systems.
Dale, Jedidiah [4] see Erickson, Clark
Dale, Jedidiah [206] see Luzzadder-Beach, Sheryl
Dalmas, Daniel [236] see Rapes, John
Dalmas, Daniel [233] see Somerville, Andrew
d’Alpoim Guedes , Jade [267] see Garvin, Arianna
d’Alpoim Guedes, Jade [205] see James, Nathaniel
Dalton, Jordan, Colleen O’Shea (Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco), Juliana Gomez Mejia (Universidad de Caldas,
Colombia) and Noemi Oncebay Pizarro (Universidad San Luis Gonzaga de Ica)
[21]
Death after Inka Expansion: Analyses of a Secondary Communal Burial at Las Huacas, Chincha Valley
This paper presents new research from the site of Las Huacas in the Chincha Valley of Perú. The Proyecto de Investigación
Arqueológica Las Huacas (PIALH) has been conducting research on Complex N1 at the site of Las Huacas since 2016. Complex
N1 contains Inka architectural features and was modified during the Late Horizon (AD1470–1532) and likely the early Colonial
Period (1532–1570). Within a room in Sector A of Complex N1, PIALH found a large mortuary feature known as Feature 17. Feature
17 contains at least 38 individuals that show features of secondary mortuary rituals, including crania painted with red pigment. This
paper shares details from analyses of textiles, ceramics, human remains, and other artifacts included in the mortuary feature. These
analyses shed light on both the individuals whose remains were deposited in Feature 17, as well as the rituals that surrounded their
reinternment at Complex N1. The paper concludes by discussing what Feature 17 tells us about the terminal Late Horizon and/or
early colonial period mortuary practices, as well as the larger sociopolitical contexts that surrounded the reinternment of these
individuals.
Dalton, Jordan [21] see Larios, Jennifer
Dalton, Kevin [188] see DeGeorgey, Alex
Dalton, Sara
[163]
At the Gates of Xibalba: The Chultunes of El Mirador
Subterranean chambers known as chultunes exist in great numbers in sites throughout the Maya world, the Mirador Basin of
northern Guatemala being no exception. However, the function of these structures has yet to be fully understood, with a variety of
uses having been proposed over the last 130 years. In an attempt to ascertain the function and purpose of the chultunes of El
Mirador, a number of these structures have been excavated, with an assortment being selected from both elite and residential
areas. This paper presents the latest findings in the ongoing excavation and analysis of these chambers, with an additional focus on
multiple burials found in one elite Preclassic chultun, and discusses possible alternative uses for these chultunes.
Damick, Alison (University of Texas, Austin) and Arlene Rosen (University of Texas, Austin)
[171]
What Is at Risk? Arid-Land Management Strategies by Hunter-Gatherers to Increase Plant Resource Potential in the Archaic Period,
Northern Rio Grande
The Middle to Late Holocene (ca. 7000–1000 BP) in northern New Mexico is characterized by a transition from a dry, arid climate to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 126
a significantly cooler, wetter one. This transition is sometimes considered one impetus for the beginning stages of cultivation and
eventually early farming by the Archaic hunter-gatherer populations in this area. Given the drive to understand the origins of farming
and adoption of popular staple cultigens (particularly maize), there has been much less research on how the landscape of that time
looked, water resources, and the range of wild plants that were available. This paper presents new geoarchaeological and
microbotanical data from alluvial sections along the northern Rio Grande, northeastern New Mexico, that suggest that Archaic
occupants engaged in complex management of wild plant and water resources to increase food resource potential in the landscape,
and mitigate the risks of living in an arid environment. This occurred long before the advent of early farming. The delay in the
adoption of maize agriculture in this area suggests that these risk minimization strategies might have outweighed the risks incurred
by maize farming until other social factors came into play.
[171]
Discussant
[171]
Chair
Damour, Melanie (Bureau of Ocean Energy Management), Douglas Jones (Bureau of Ocean Energy Management), Warren
Wood (U.S. Naval Research Laboratory) and Leila Hamdan (University of Southern Mississippi)
[18]
Exploring Deepwater Shipwreck Microbiomes in the Northern Gulf of Mexico: The Microbial Stowaways Project
Shipwrecks have long been known to serve an important role as artificial reefs for macrofauna such as corals, crustaceans, and fish.
However, recent research in the Gulf of Mexico is revealing that historic shipwrecks also influence marine microbial dispersal and
seafloor biogeography. Microorganisms play a key but poorly understood role in biofilm formation, wood degradation, and metal
corrosion in the deepwater environment, which influences artificial reef formation and, ultimately, archaeological site preservation.
The 2019 Microbial Stowaways Project, an interdisciplinary scientific collaboration between BOEM, USM, and the NRL and funded
by NOAA’s Office of Ocean Exploration and Research, is exploring how wooden-hulled shipwrecks shape the dispersal of
microorganisms in the deepwater Gulf. Two previously unexplored nineteenth-century shipwrecks (at 525 m and 1,800 m water
depth, respectively) were investigated in 2019 to develop baseline archaeological characterizations, deploy arrays of in situ biofilm
recruitment experiments, and collect sediment samples at varying distances from the shipwrecks to identify a microbiome signature
(e.g., microbial taxa associated with shipwrecks, elevated diversity). In addition, a machine learning component is developing a
computational tool that may be used to detect where shipwrecks are present by examining microbiome data from areas lacking
archaeological data.
[18]
Chair
Damour, Melanie [18] see Horrell, Christopher
Damp, Jonathan
[257]
A Simple Solution to the Problem of the Origins of Settled Life and Ceramic Production: A View from Coastal Ecuador
Initial attempts to explain the origins of pottery on the coast of Ecuador and in the rest of the Americas focused on trans-Pacific
contact. During the last few decades this debate quieted as the Vegas and Valdivia phases of southwest Ecuador became better
known. Nevertheless, there remains a chronological hiatus between the two phases. Demographic and settlement data is combined
with geoarchaeological interpretations of the mid-Holocene record to demonstrate how simple demographic growth combined with
geomorphological changes of the coastal landscape yielded modifications in settlement patterns, growth of settlements, and a
transition in social organization that led to the production of pottery and the creation of early villages.
[257]
Chair
Daniels, James (University of California, San Diego and ASM Affiliates Inc.), Heather Thakar (Texas A&M University) and
Hector Neff (California State University, Long Beach)
[237]
Reaping the Rewards of Incipient Agriculture from the Land to the Sea and the Mangroves In-Between
During the Archaic-to-Early Formative transition in the Soconusco, populations began adopting more sedentary subsistence
strategies and investing more in their local environments. Evidence from sediment cores demonstrate that during the Archaic period,
populations were burning inland landscapes and starting to grow maize. The environmental effects of incipient agriculture along the
coastal margins of the Soconusco are addressed in this study by examining pollen from sediment cores, changes in diet, and the
evolution of the barrier beach. These lines of evidence point to a rather sudden change in the coastal environment during the
transition from the Archaic to Early Formative. Environmental changes caused by incipient agriculture included the expansion of the
mangroves along the eastern Soconusco coast allowing Early Formative occupants to diversify their subsistence strategies through
the exploitation of the biodiversity offered by an expanded mangrove estuary along with continued interior cultivation. The
abundance of resources provided by the mangrove-estuary zone supplemented by maize agriculture were primary factors in the
establishment of sedentary village life in the Soconusco as local environmental investments and technologies allowed initial Early
Formative inhabitants to maximize their energy returns.
Dansie, Amy [198] see Jerrems, William
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   127
Darby, Melissa
[56]
Zelia Nuttall and Drake’s Dream
In 1886 Zelia Nuttall began work at the Peabody Museum for Ethnology and Archaeology under the tutelage of Frederic Putnam.
Nuttall became a specialist in precolumbian Mesoamerican cultures and conducted archaeological fieldwork in Mexico for the
Peabody, where she was “Honorary Assistant in Mexican Archaeology,” an unpaid post which she held for 47 years. She lectured at
major conferences and universities in the Americas and Europe and wrote articles for prestigious journals. She traveled throughout
the world to collect archaeological and ethnological specimens for museum collections, as well as for a select group of wealthy
patrons including Phoebe Hearst. With Hearst’s assistance, she was one of the founding members of the Department of
Anthropology at UC Berkeley, where in the early years of the department she was a field director of archaeological research in
Mexico. Her major contributions to the field of anthropology are classics: The Nuttall Codex, The Island of Sacrificios, and the
Fundamental Principles of Old and New World Civilizations. Her findings on the location of Francis Drake’s fair bay on the west
coast were eclipsed by Drake’s Plate of Brass land claim, a hoax which was likely created by a famous history professor, her
nemesis.
Dashzeveg, Bukhchuluun (Yale University), Lisa Janz (Trent University) and Odsuren Davaakhuu (Mongolian Academy of
Sciences)
[62]
Use and Reuse of Burial Space during the Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age in Mongolia: A Case Study from Zaraa Uul
During the late second millennium BC, communities in the Gobi-steppe of Mongolia began to build unique burial structures made of
stone. The Late Bronze Age builders of these mortuary features employed new forms of surface demarcation and for the first time in
this region, individuals were interred in a prone position. At the turn of the millennium, this prone tradition was replaced by
subsequent ‘Slab Burial’ mortuary culture. In recent years, Archaeologists working in Mongolia have increasingly focused on this
transition to the Early Iron Age because this period is crucial in the development of social and political complexity, horseback riding,
and long-distance trade and exchange. This paper presents the results of recent excavations at Zara Uul in eastern Mongolia. The
data generated from this project sheds new light on the transition the two periods through the documentation of the use and reuse of
burial space during the Early Iron Age.
Dashzeveg, Bukhchuluun [62] see Cameron, Asa
Davaakhuu, Odsuren [62] see Dashzeveg, Bukhchuluun
Davidson, Jaron
[267]
Long-Distance Interaction in Viejo Period Casas Grandes
This research attempts to answer how interregional interaction changed between the Viejo and Medio time periods in northwest
Chihuahua, Mexico. Using geospatial analysis, I compile all known information about non-locally produced artifacts, architecture,
and iconography from Viejo period contexts. This includes evidence such as foreign pottery, turquoise, and marine shell. The data
are then compared to similar evidence from the Medio period in order to better understand what transitions may have occurred in
the interaction networks, and how these transitions may have contributed to the social changes that coincided with the rise of
Paquimé. This geospatial data reveals evidence of continuity and change during a time of increased social and political complexity.
Davis, Caitlin (Yale University)
[150]
Within the Mangrove Swamp: Formative Obsidian Exchange at Salinas La Blanca, Guatemala
Salinas La Blanca was an early sedentary community located within a mangrove swamp of the fertile Soconusco region of
Guatemala. Obsidian sourcing indicates that Salinas La Blanca was involved in an extensive trading network by 1200 BC, receiving
obsidian from multiple sources hundreds of kilometers away. The access to some sources present at Salinas La Blanca, such as El
Chayal, is thought to have been mediated by elite communities, thus placing Salinas La Blanca within a network of economic and
social relations. The participation of this newly sedentary hunting and gathering community within this international system, as well
as the appearance of blades in the lithic assemblage, parallels evidence of emerging social complexity at larger regional centers like
La Blanca and Ujuxte. Considered in broader context, the Formative obsidian assemblage of Salinas La Blanca speaks to the
widespread nature of regional trends in Pacific Coastal Guatemala.
Davis, Christopher (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[127]
Whispers of a World That Was: South American Animism of the Amazon-Orinoco Basins
Several South American cultures appear to have established world views based on associative observations of natural cycles,
whereas connections are remembered through various mnemonic and recall devices like song, dance, rock art, architecture, myths,
ritual, and festival. While modern science focuses on an essentialist truths (identifying the psychoactive chemical as the essence of
a drug, for example), South American animism among many groups focused on associations—identifying the conditions
accompanying desired outcomes. The result was to see things through relationships, making them observant of the natural world
interacting with each other, not just with humans. I present three ways in which the whispers of a world that was envisioned this way
had endured the ravages of time in South America. The first is through the form of rock art pictographs in the Lower Amazon used to
label caves by its chief animal resident personified in paintings. The second is through the form of myths from the Orinoco River that
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  128
recount the procession of animal fire bearers passing the firebrand torch in the Watunna folktale. And the third is through
ethnoastronomy portraying the zodiac constellations as the animals that match the paramount sounds of the nightime seasons.
Davis, Jera (New South Association Inc.), Stephen Carmody (Troy University) and Jon Russ (Rhodes College)
[211]
Pipes, Plants, and Practitioners: Change and Continuity in Religious Ritual at Moundville
Religion likely played an important role in the establishment of the Mississippian Moundville polity in the Black Warrior River valley,
and it remained a primary driver of social and political change over the ensuing centuries. Smoking pipes hold considerable potential
for understanding the role of religious ritual in Moundville society but have only just begun to receive more than passing attention.
Recent gas chromatographic/mass spectrometric (GC/MS) analyses of residues scraped from Late Woodland and Mississippian
pipes found in the Black Warrior Valley have detected a variety of compounds, implying that ritual practitioners took advantage of an
extensive inventory of plant medicines. Using this evidence, this paper explores the shifting character and structure of Moundville’s
religious orders over several centuries of historical change.
Davis, Jera [63] see Tolan, Grace
Davis, Joshua [25] see Bement, Leland
Davis, Kaitlyn (University of Colorado, Boulder)
[239]
Pueblo Agricultural Adaptations to Socioeconomic Changes in New Mexico
This presentation illustrates the results of the survey work of the agricultural areas around two pre-contact villages (Poshuouinge
and Pueblo Blanco) and two contact-era villages (Cuyamungue and San Marcos). One-hundred-fifty-six (156) agricultural features
were documented on the survey. These features ranged from Pueblo irrigation ditches in and slightly above the floodplains to raised
gravel mulch fields on upland ridges above the villages. Analyzing the changes in the location, type, size, and density of these
features before and following contact enable a better understanding of Pueblo agricultural adaptations over time and the extent to
which Spanish plants, animals, and agricultural methods were incorporated into Pueblo agriculture. This survey work is part of a
larger project investigating how (and to what extent) Pueblo people in the Rio Grande region of New Mexico adjusted their
agricultural practices when confronted with Spanish colonization. The project consists of 1) developing agricultural potential models
to identify where the optimal growing areas likely were, 2) surveying the areas around multiple pre-contact and contact-era Pueblos
to document agricultural features and any changes in those features or technologies with colonization, and 3) analyzing sediment
samples to determine the types and density of plants grown in the fields.
Davis, Loren (Oregon State University)
[170]
Late Pleistocene Occupation at the Cooper’s Ferry Site, Idaho: Questions and Answers
Radiocarbon dating at the Cooper’s Ferry site in western Idaho indicates that people repeatedly occupied the Columbia River basin,
starting between 16,560 and 15,280 cal yr BP and continuing to ~13,000 cal yr BP. The site’s occupants employed unfluted
stemmed projectile point technologies before the appearance of the Clovis Paleoindian tradition. Technological patterns seen in the
Western Stemmed Tradition here support early cultural connections with northeastern Asian Upper Paleolithic archaeological
traditions. The Cooper’s Ferry site was initially occupied during a time that predates the opening of an ice-free corridor (≤14,800 cal
yr BP), which supports the hypothesis that initial human migration into the Americas occurred via a Pacific coastal route. We review
the record and address several misconceptions about the site.
Davis, Loren [195] see Carroll, Sean
Davis, Loren [170] see Des Lauriers, Matthew
Davis, Loren [238] see Dixon, E. James
Davis, Mary, Lucas Martindale Johnson (Far Western Anthropological Research Group), Daron Duke (Far Western
Anthropological Research Group), Elsa Carpenter (Far Western Anthropological Research Group) and Lee Drake (Decision
Tree LLC)
[5]
Very Small Rocks: Exploring Specimen Size Limits in Trace-Element Analysis of Obsidian Flaked Stone with Portable X-Ray
Fluorescence
Archaeologists continue to push the limits of non-destructive X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis in efforts to geochemically source
small obsidian artifacts. Building on numerous prior investigations, this study examines a statistically large sample of unmodified
obsidian flakes to better define the size threshold for acceptable precision and accuracy, and to test the use of a source library that
includes small samples. Using traditional flintknapping methods, 1,200 flakes were made from three geochemical obsidian sources:
Casa Diablo, Bodie Hills, and Buffalo Hills. Specimens ranged from very small pressure flakes to large interior flakes and were
intended to replicate the size and morphological variation typical of an archaeological assemblage. The specimens were analyzed
on two Bruker handheld pXRF units, the Tracer III-SD and the 5g. Statistical analyses and computing algorithms were used in an
effort to quantify the size limits of non-destructive analysis and to create source confidence regions that include small samples.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    129
Davis, S. R.
[192]
A Brief Introduction to the North American Gunflint Database Project: A New Tool for Historic Period Archeologists
A comprehensive, open-access, cloud-based database for collecting, filtering and analyzing gunflint attribute information is being
developed with the objective of promoting higher quality, more enlightening research into the use, manufacturing technology,
morphology, and distribution of gunflints in the New World. Currently in beta-testing in a digital spreadsheet format, the database will
eventually be converted into a sophisticated, searchable Sequel database housed in the cloud and freely accessible supporting all
researchers wishing to perform comparative analysis or adding their gunflint collections. Currently the database is collecting 40 bits
of site information and up to 55 bits of attribute data for each artifact. When the database “goes live” in late 2020 or early 2021, the
database will potentially contain data from 2,000 or 3,000 gunflints recorded during the beta-test phase; itself a valuable dataset for
the researcher. The database is designed to grow “organically” through the continuing input from researchers, museums, and
historic sites collections throughout the targeted region and potentially the entire Western Hemisphere. Collaboration is welcome
and encouraged.
Davis-King, Shelly (Davis-King & Associates)
[58]
Who Wudda Thunk CRM Could Be Profitable? One Woman’s Desire to Put Culture into Cultural Resource Management
The 1970s saw the rise of public or salvage archaeology that had little, but required formal structure. By the mid-1970s, Cultural
Resource studies were so-named and developing, followed soon by established businesses providing CRM investigations. This
paper will discuss a holistic approach to CRM in those early days, and one which embraced all of the cultural history of an area,
including Native American partnerships, description of the built environment, and historical native and nonnative archaeology. It will
also discuss the challenges of being a one-person shop, being a female in the business, and being largely an
anthropologist/ethnographer rather than an archaeologist. It will provide some perspective on 50 years of business.
Dawson, Emily (University of Texas, Austin)
[125]
Discussant
[125]
Chair
Dawson, Emily (University of Texas, Austin)
[171]
Risk and Resilience on the Colonial Frontier in New Mexico
The seventeenth century in New Mexico was marked by series of droughts, making an already semiarid environment even more
risky for agricultural activities. Newly arrived Spanish colonists had to contend with these periodic droughts, while also adapting their
agricultural practices to the New Mexican landscape. Early accounts by Spanish colonists in New Mexico indicate that they brought
a range of Old World cultivars with them, including wheat, barley, lentils, melons, and garlic. While these accounts suggest the
colonists were growing the cultivars, archaeological work has produced only limited evidence for the growth and use of Old World
plants throughout the region. Instead of depending on Old World cultivars, the colonists are thought to have relied heavily on
indigenous communities for the production of foods, including wild foods. This paper examines phytolith evidence from a
seventeenth-century rancho in New Mexico in order to understand risk management strategies by Spanish colonists. I present
preliminary data for the use of native New World plants, especially wetland species, as well as agricultural activity during the
turbulent seventeenth century.
Day, Peter, Richard Jones (University of Glasgow, UK), Maria Rosaria Manunza (Selargius Exacavtions, Sardinia),
Alessandro Usai (Soprintendenza Archeologia, Belle Arti e Paesaggio) and Lucia Vagnetti (CNR, Rome)
[196]
Reverberations of the Aegean? Italo-Mycenaean Pottery and Nuragic Sardinia
Mycenaean ceramic imports on Sardinia, along with copper ingots, form the epicenter of a heated debate over ‘minimalist’ and
‘maximalist’ models of the Aegean presence on the island, somewhat of a colonialist distraction as to what is really going on in the
island at this time. Outside of key coastal centers, these imports are few in number and certainly not as indicative as the movement
of Nuragic pottery within the island that is being documented. Their ceramic cousins, a range of pottery which feature Aegean
shapes and decorative painted motifs occur in rather large numbers in two major sites, on the Bay of Cagliari: Nuraghe Antigori and
the recently excavated site of Selargius. This stylistically ‘intrusive’ pottery has been studied in a major programme of analyses,
along with all other pottery types in a total-assemblage approach which details the fabrics, probable production centers and
production technologies of these very characteristic wares, comparing them with the well-known Nuragic dark-burnished range of
vessels. The results show a blurring of the borders between long established ceramics categories, where Aegean-style pottery is
locally produced, with intrusive, wheel-based forming techniques, yet often subjected to open firing and sharing clay sources with
ceramics characterised as Nuragic.
[196]
Discussant
[196]
Chair
Day, Peter [196] see Kilikoglou, Vassilis
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   130
de Anda, Guillermo (Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia), Ana Celis and Karla Ortega
[137]
Ritual Termination of Balamkú at Chichen Itza
Balamkú was reported to INAH in 1966 but the cave entrance was buried without further investigation. Fifty years later, the Gran
Aquífero Maya rediscovered Balamkú in 2018 and initiated an archaeological study of the site whose assemblage closely resembles
that of Balankanche. Like Balankanche, Balamkú is surrounded by structures and connected to Chichen Itza by a sacbe, confirming
its status as a politically important complex. Work during the 2019 season confirms that the cave was ritually terminated in antiquity
by filling the first two chambers with stone. It is believed that this event may date the fall of Chichen Itza.
De Andreis, Sonia
[246]
Étude technologique des assemblages céramiques de Ciudad Perdida: Quels apports?
Cette présentation se propose de questionner les apports de l’étude technologique et plus particulièrement de l’étude des chaînes
opératoires céramiques dans la caractérisation des groupes sociaux de la Zone Tairona dans la synchronie et la diachronie. En se
basant sur un exemple précis, l’étude de plusieurs unités fouillées par Santiago Giraldo (2010) sur le site Buritaca 200—Ciudad
Perdida, il s’agira d’interroger les contributions de cette méthode, jusqu’ici non appliquée dans la région, à la compréhension de la
composition sociale du site à l’époque Tairona, ainsi que de l’origine de ses habitants. Quelles sont les chaînes opératoires
observables à Ciudad Perdida aux périodes Tairona et Neguanje ? Que peuvent-elles nous apprendre sur les habitants du site aux
deux périodes? Dans quelle mesure l’étude des techniques peut-elle permettre une relecture de la culture matérielle de la zone
Tairona? Ces questions sont autant de pistes de réflexion que nous essayerons de développer.
De Caro, Alex [18] see Delgado, James
De Dufour, Karyn
[217]
Discussant
de Gruchy, Michelle (Durham University)
[33]
Mobility Patterns across Mesopotamia from the Fourth to First Millennia BC
More than 12,000 segments of preserved hollow ways/routes have been documented across both northern and southern
Mesopotamia. When combined with the many documented water channels in southern Mesopotamia and the rivers across
Mesopotamia known to have been part of the transportation network of the region, Mesopotamia becomes one of the best
preserved and documented archaeological landscapes of past mobility. This presentation will (1) introduce the new hollow ways
from southern Mesopotamia and (2) pull apart the palimpsest of route features across the wider Mesopotamian landscape in order
to present a current, diachronic picture of the traffic patterns across ancient Mesopotamia from the fourth to first millennia BC, as
they are preserved in the archaeological record.
de Guzman, Margarita, Amanda Wong (Circle CRM Group Inc.) and Kristin McKay (Circle CRM Group Inc.)
[183]
Managing Spatial Data for Large-Scale Forestry Management Areas in Alberta
In April 2014, the Historic Resources Management Branch (HRMB) of Alberta Culture (now renamed a longer and more complicated
ministry) issued Survey and Excavation Spatial Data Standards, which meant that consulting archaeologists in Alberta now had to
submit shapefiles representing their project footprint, ground survey, and any subsurface work (shovel tests, excavation units, etc.)
associated with Historic Resource Impact Assessments (HRIAs). For large-scale projects such as HRIAs associated with Forestry
Management Areas, the additional post-field work required to complete and manage this task equated to additional weeks of man
hours. Five years later, managing spatial data is a simple and standard task, with the help of a GIS Specialist and improved
processes. This short demonstration will highlight the steps for efficient management of this data, from collection in the field to
submission to the HRMB.
de la Peña, Paloma [11] see Val, Aurore
de la Rosa, Yuri (Centro INAH Coahuila), José Concepción Jiménez (Dirección de Antropología Fisica del INAH), María
Rodriguez Ceja (Laboratorio de Espectrografo de Masas de la UNAM), Miguel Martínez Carrillo (Laboratorio de
Espectrografo de Masas de la UNAM) and Eva Salas Bautista (Dirección de Antropología Fisica del INAH)
[101]
La Cueva de las Cornamentas: Cuatro Ciénegas, Coahuila
The Cuatro Ciénegas Valley in Coahuila is exceptional in many ways, mainly known for its pools in the middle of the desert and its
endemisms, but its archaeological remains are as surprising as its biodiversity. The Cave of the Antlers is a mortuary cave where a
large amount of archaeological material was found, which is found in the House of Culture of Cuatro Ciénegas. Thanks to various
situations such as the collaboration with the Project of the Early Man in México, the theft of pieces from the archeology room and a
remodeling of the aforementioned site, we have made new studies and dates of the cave and the material in question with very
interesting results with temporalities close to 4000 years BP.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    131
de la Rosa-Díaz, Jesús (University of Zacatecas, México.)
[67]
Valle de Bonanza (Zacatecas, México): A limestone lithic assemblage
The valley of Bonanza, located in the northeast of the Mexican state of Zacatecas, is a surface-only archaeological site placed in the
outskirts of the Chihuahua’s desert in a landscape heavily affected by erosion. In the site, a considerable number of lithic artifacts
have been discovered sitting in punctual concentrations brought to light by deflation and altered by the formation of a thick cap of
desert varnish. In the assemblage, the major part of the artifacts are made of limestone and other large-grained sedimentary rocks,
in which we have identified a technology of informal stone tools based principally on transversal flakes and bladelets. In this poster,
we discuss the probable reasons for the choice of a raw material that is so uncommonly used for lithic manufacture, and about the
taxonomic types within the assemblage and their probable uses.
de Leon, Monica [130] see Vepretskii, Sergei
de los Ríos, Gabriela [106] see Matsumoto, Go
De Lucia, Kristin (Colgate University) and Enrique Rodríguez-Alegría
[239]
The New Water-Mountain: Archaeology of a Colonial Church in Xaltocan, Mexico
Archaeology in colonial churches in large cities, such as Cholula and Mexico-Tenochtitlan may give the impression that the Spanish
aggressively built churches over temples and politico-religious architecture as a symbolic form of domination; however, recent
research at Xaltocan, Mexico, shows that they may have used different tactics in this rural, hinterland community. In Xaltocan, the
colonial church was built in a space that was not occupied during the Late Postclassic (AD 1350–1520) period. Yet, is it possible
that this space may have held ritual significance to Xaltocan’s native inhabitants? Recent excavations in the atrium of the sixteenth-
century church in Xaltocan have revealed new insights into religion and ritual during the early colonial period.
de Lucio, Oscar [20] see Alonso, Alejandra
de Marigny, Elizabeth (University of Texas, Austin)
[108]
Copyright CAMAL: The Use of Pot Marks as Trademarks on Late Iron Age Storage Vessels in the Littoral Northwest Region of
Iberia
Various methods of ceramic analyses have been used by archaeologists to better understand past human behavior. Among such
methods is the study of pot marks. As such, within Castro Culture scholarship pot marks have often been studied in relation to
imported Roman materials like terra sigillata. However, such attention has yet to be paid to pot marks found on locally produced
pottery. While Castro Culture scholarship has generated varying interpretations of pot marks associated with imported pottery, this
paper will introduce the use of pot marks as trademarks for local potters. More specific, this paper will focus on locally produced
storage vessels in attempts to better understand the effects of Roman conquest on local economies. Through an in depth analysis
of one case study, this paper argues that some pot marks are communication devices employed to imply standardized and
specialized production. This paper discusses the use of one pot mark found on storage vessels produced in workshops operated by
the CAMALUS, a local and elite family. Such an examination will address the use of trademarks as an economic device used by
potters in the littoral northwest region of Iberia during the Late Iron Age.
De Peña, Felicia [199] see Barket, Theresa
de Pozo, Paloma Cuello [240] see Kaul, Urvi
de Smet, Timothy and Morgan Smith (University of Tennessee, Chattanooga)
[238]
On the Use of Acoustics to Identify Submerged Anthropogenic Lithic Material
Recent research has demonstrated that it may be possible to identify submerged anthropogenic lithic material remotely. The
underlying principle of this method is that low-frequency sound waves resonate within lithic materials of an ideal shape. This
resonance disrupts sound waves in a manner that can be consistently observed in SONAR profiles. These signals appear as
“haystacks,” which are wavy anomalies in the water column on SBP data. This paper builds off previous lab-based research on the
topic with new data from acoustic modeling, geophysical data collection in the winter of 2018/2019, and initial field tests of the
method conducted during the summer of 2019. First, three sites with known precontact lithic assemblages were scanned with an
SB-424 instrument. All three sites exhibited the haystack features lithic artifacts are believed to produce. A subsequent survey of an
area where no archaeological site was documented also produced haystacks. When this locality was investigated by divers, a small
debitage scatter was identified, resulting in the discovery of a previously unrecorded archaeological site. These initial results are
promising, but much more testing and refinement is necessary before this technique can be implemented on a broad scale.
Deacon, Janette [111] see McClintock, Thomas
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   132
Dean, Jake and Beth Scaffidi (Arizona State University)
[243]
Water Scarcity and Wari Imperial Expansion: Using Remotely Sensed (Planet) Data to Examine the Impact of Freshwater
Availability on Imperial Settlement Strategies
Freshwater availability is critical to human civilizations. Drought and flood events can lead to changes in settlement strategies, or
require innovative water management techniques, particularly in the arid Andean coast. Some have suggested that the Wari
Empire’s prowess in hydrological management allowed them to colonize sites in distant lands (Glowacki and Malpass 2003;
Williams 2002). Here we explore whether Wari imperial expansion around 500–600 CE was a response to drought and flood events
of the Early Intermediate Period (200–750 CE). We compare water security at coastal Wari-administered sites (n = 5) to
contemporaneous non-Wari sites (n = 2) to understand whether water assistance could have motivated Wari presence during the
Middle Horizon (500–1100 CE). We predict Wari-administered sites experienced highly variable access to freshwater, quantified as
river volume. We use change detection of river extent (a proxy for volume) to calculate seasonal and annual freshwater availability.
We use monthly mosaic basemaps from the Planet Database from January 2016 to October 2019 (N = 299). Future research linking
human archaeological isotope values to populations from places of low freshwater availability in the Wari domain can further clarify
whether expansion was influenced by water scarcity and/or fluctuation.
DeAntoni, GeorgeAnn [214] see Panich, Lee
deBeaubien, Domonique [192] see Mahoney, Maureen
Decaix, Alexia [205] see James, Nathaniel
Decker, Michael [104] see Gabellone, Francesco
Dedrick, Maia (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) and Adolfo Batún Alpuche (Universidad de Oriente)
[57]
Celebrating Local Knowledge in Tahcabo, Yucatán
Over the past several years, the Proyecto Arqueológico Colaborativo del Oriente de Yucatán has been working with residents of
Tahcabo, Yucatán, to highlight local knowledge and narratives. Components of the project have included participatory research
(e.g., photovoice), the development of a museum and heritage trail, the documentation of oral histories and local landscape
knowledge, and heritage events and activities that promote the indigenous (Yucatec Maya) language. For example, our community
events, at which we describe archaeological research and results, have also included local dance as well as song and rap in
Yucatec Maya. The cenotes project engaged students in learning from elders about their landscape, in a process that led to the
development of curricula for schools in Yucatán. The Tahcabo Museum, developed with community members in 2015, features
artifacts and items donated by elders who wished to contribute to the stories featured within exhibits (presented in Maya and
Spanish). In preparation for a new exhibit detailing the initial results of archaeological excavation in Tahcabo, we will hold
discussions with the community’s heritage committee to discuss research results as well as specific artifacts and determine
appropriate narratives to highlight, with the goal of presenting archaeological findings together with local knowledge.
[57]
Chair
Deere, Bobi (University of Tulsa) and Jesse Nowak (University of Oklahoma)
[47]
Heavens on Earth: Cave Imagery and the Legacies of Mississippian Ceremonialism
Cave art is amongst the earliest evidence of Art in the North American Southeast, and was instrumental in establishing Early
Mississippian period Iconographic styles. Exploring the imagery found in caves across different cultural regions provides alternative
contexts to understand distinct belief systems and ritual practices. This paper looks at the imagery found in caves in the Dhegihan
ancestral territory compared to examples of cave art from the traditional ancestral territories of the Cherokee. Through exploring
comparative examples, we consider how art with underworld related themes and symbolically charged depictions of games were
made significant in cave settings.
deFrance, Susan (University of Florida)
[61]
Discussant
deFrance, Susan [76] see Guiry, Eric
deFrance, Susan [260] see Muñoz, Lizette
Dega, Mike [100] see Dixon, Boyd
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  133
DeGeorgey, Alex (Alta Archaeological Consulting), Kevin Dalton (Alta Archaeological Consulting) and Carly Whelan (Chico
State University)
[188]
Shared Heritage: WWII American Military Loss Sites in Europe
Historic archaeological sites associated with WWII American military losses on foreign lands represent the physical remains of a
shared cultural heritage. Such sites are irreplaceable phenomena of significance to the past of both nations and for the knowledge
and understanding of our shared cultural heritage. Recent recovery efforts at a B-17G (Flying Fortress) crash site in southwestern
Poland provide an example of how archaeological investigations can meet both the DPAA mission objectives for accounting of
missing U.S. servicemen and address host nation historic preservation requirements. Here we tell the story of the loss incident,
describe working with the host nation, explain the methods used in the archaeological excavation, and show how artifacts recovered
from the site, even those with no evidentiary value, have local interpretative value for public outreach and education. We examine
one case study that includes a collaborative museum exhibition.
DeGeorgey, Alex [221] see Newland, Michael
DeGraffenried, Jennifer [66] see Hart, Isaac
DeLeonardis, Lisa (Johns Hopkins University), Dawn Kriss (Brooklyn Museum), Ellen Howe (Metropolitan Museum of Art)
and Judith Levinson (American Museum of Natural History)
[258]
Blue on Clay: Indigo as a Colorant in Andean Post-fired Ceramic Paints
Indigo (Indigofera) is a recognized plant exudate employed in cloth dyes to produce the color blue. In Andean South America, it has
been identified in textile dyes as early as the Late Formative (300 BCE–200 CE). While in other parts of the Americas the plant is
utilized as a ceramic pigment (e.g., “Maya Blue”), in the ancient Andes its use as a paint colorant is virtually unknown. In this paper,
we discuss the results of our recent study that demonstrate the presence of the exudate in Paracas (ca. 900–100 BCE) post-fired
ceramic paints. Also identified in the paint are uric compounds consistent with reptile excrement. Use of the mixture occurs during a
transition period with the Nasca (100 BCE) in which innovations in architecture, iconography, and craft technology are evident. Our
discussion centers on how the plant figures within the broader context of these social, iconographic, and technological changes.
Delgado, James (SEARCH Inc.), Kyle Lent (SEARCH Inc.), Deborah Marx (SEARCH Inc.), Joseph Grinnan (SEARCH Inc.)
and Alex DeCaro (SEARCH Inc.)
[18]
The Case for Clotilda
A systematic survey of a ship’s graveyard outside of Mobile, Alabama disclosed the remains of a wooden vessel. Following a
detailed analysis, the wreck has been identified as the likely 1855-built schooner Clotilda, the last vessel known to bring people to
the United States to be enslaved when it concluded an illegal slave trading voyage in July 1860. The vessel was burned and sunk to
avoid prosecution. The historical and archaeological context of Clotilda and likely next steps will be discussed.
[18]
Discussant
Delgado Espinoza, Florencio
[57]
The Converted Looters and the Community Advocacy on the Development of Archaeological Research in Coastal Ecuador
Clay figurines from north coast of Ecuador are world renowned for its remarkable technology and design and thus, ones of the
preferred collector’s pieces. Treasure hunters and looters have wondered in the area periodically specially searching Jama-Coaque
figurines. In the area looting activities became a quotidian enterprise. During periods of economic crisis, looting increased
exponentially. Recently local looters began to question selling looted pottery and began efforts to build a local museum to house the
material. Forming into a cultural group, the approached the government control agency and contacted local archaeologists for that
effort. While interacting with members of the community archaeology program of a local university, suffered a transformation. Now,
they engaged into archeological protection and participatory research, becoming key community members advocating protection
and research, and making efforts to convince their old peers about supporting sites’ protection and academic research. Here, the
history and testimonies of some of these converted looters are presented in order to illustrate how horizontal relationships and clear
communication are essential to build up successful partnerships for archaeological research and protection.
Delsol, Nicolas (University of Florida)
[22]
Mesoamerican Cowboys: Exploring the History of Cattle Ranching in Colonial Mexico and Guatemala through Zooarchaeology
The introduction of cattle soon after the Spanish invasion had numerous and dramatic consequences over the society in New Spain.
The historical scholarship on this topic emphasizes the prominent role of cattle ranching, which found its most iconic development in
the great central Mexican haciendas that emerged over the sixteenth century and that contributed to shape the Mesoamerican
colonial landscape. The development of ranching practices corresponds to what some authors have coined a “frontier economy” that
often emerged in European colonial contexts. Open-range ranching, which can be defined as the free placement of ruminants on
large areas of land with the intent to sell the animals as commodities on the market certainly had consequences not only over the
management of the land but also on the organization of labor. Despite these historical accounts, what remains unclear is how
widespread were these husbandry practices and what were the biological consequences on the animals themselves. To explore this
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   134
little-known dimension of Spanish colonialism in Mesoamerica, I propose here to model this mode of husbandry following a set of
tests based on traditional zooarchaeological tools such as osteometrics, cull profiles and pathological markers applied to faunal
assemblages from Mexico and Guatemala.
DeLuca, Anthony (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[202]
Mountains, Mountains, Everywhere, nor Any Peak to Praise? Further Exploring the Relationship between Guachimontones and the
Landscape in Jalisco, Mexico
The Tequila Valleys region of Jalisco, Mexico is home to unique circular, ceremonial monumental architecture. This public
architecture, colloquially referred to as circles, embodies the Mesoamerican cosmos with the central altar representing the sacred
mountain. My previous research explored whether another architectural feature, the platforms that ring the altar, was oriented
toward a common mountain using viewshed analyses in a GIS for multiple sites in the Valley, specifically determining if each circle
had one platform oriented toward Tequila Volcano. While my initial hypothesis was not supported, other relationships between the
circles and landscape were not fully explored in my previous analysis. I build upon my previous work by first examining the site of
Los Guachimontones in which multiple examples of the architecture have known construction dates. I continue by evaluating
whether other circles from different sites shared a common directionality toward their own respective landscape features, whether
circles between sites were oriented toward one another as part of a social network, whether circles were oriented to ensure that
landscape features were best viewed between platforms, and whether orientations toward landscape features complemented or
contradicted astronomical data. The aim of this study assesses cosmological beliefs expressed through sacred architecture.
Delvigne, Vincent [30] see Fernandes, Paul
Dempsey Alves, Anna (University of Nebraska-Lincoln)
[142]
The Daily Grind: An Analysis of Ground Stone from the Basketmaker Communities Project in Southwest Colorado
Ground stone tools have been under-investigated by archaeologists since the beginning of research in the American Southwest.
However, ground stone analysis is an excellent way to study many important aspects of life in the Pueblo past, including food
production and gender, and therefore should not be overlooked. This paper uses methodology adapted from Jenny L. Adams’s
Ground Stone Analysis: A Technological Approach to analyze ground stone tools, including manos and metates, from Crow Canyon
Archaeological Center’s Basketmaker Communities Project. These analyses were used to examine diachronic change, as well as
inter- and intrasite ground stone variance at seven Basketmaker III sites within a settlement cluster. This includes six neighboring
hamlet settlements, as well as the Dillard site: a large, multi-habitation site with a Great Kiva. The results not only deepen our
understandings of ground stone technology during the transition to full-time, sedentary agricultural lifestyles, but provide an avenue
for examining community dynamics during this period.
Denham, Tim [235] see Barron, Aleese
Dennehy, Timothy [26] see Smith, Michael
Dennett, Carrie (National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution) and Lorelei Platz
[157]
When the Walls Fall Down: Resilience and Cultural Transformation in Late Classic Pacific Nicaragua
Geohazards impacted the development of precolumbian societies in various ways, and particularly so for those located along the
western Central American Volcanic Arc (CAVA). Nicaragua has a compact chain of more than 20 volcanoes that collectively
demonstrate a complex eruptive, seismic, and climate-related history. And while explosions, earthquakes, and torrential floods
certainly brought about episodic social response to such disasters, in this paper we focus on human resilience and cultural
transformation following a ca. AD 300 volcanic flank collapse known as “Las Isletas” in the Granada City area in Pacific Nicaragua.
We begin by examining the massive collapse event, how it refashioned the physical landscape, and what was left in its wake. More
importantly, we discuss how survivors with strong support networks would not only come to transform local ceremonial and ritual
practice but also shape the sociopolitical and economic trajectory of the entire region for the next eight centuries. Of the many
event-related outcomes, we focus here on the development of Potosi Applique effigy censers as a form of social response to
volcanism and uncertainty in the local Late Classic period. Further, we explore Potosi’s integral connection to the contemporaneous
Mesoamerican “Spiked Censer” tradition that traversed the volcanic arc.
Dennett, Carrie [168] see Steinbrenner, Larry
DeOrbegozo, Mary Emma (University of Arkansas) and Bradley Chase Jones (University of Akransas)
[242]
From a Bird’s-Eye View to Satellites over Peru
Geospatial technology is a valuable tool for analyzing archaeological landscapes prior to or as a complement with surveys. Our
project uses historical imagery, optical remote sensing and GIS to identify and record diachronic changes to likely archaeological
features in the Chicama Valley (Peru) over a period spanning approximately 70 years. Post-war land-use changes, especially the
introduction of industrialized agriculture greatly affected archaeological sites by disturbing cultural context. We record previously
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   135
undocumented features and recent impacts using Peruvian Servicio Aerofotographico Nacional panchromatic photographs from
1943 and recent high-resolution imagery from the IKONOS and WorldView 2 satellites. To identify sites, we developed a systematic
approach based on a decision-tree that promotes consistent identification of features due to morphology, connection to ground
survey data and proximity to verified sites. Subsequent change detection analysis clearly shows mounds shrinking, disappearing,
and transforming into vegetation anomalies determined by surface area measurements. These results help document relationships
between archaeological landscapes and industrialized agriculture. It reveals how preservation bias due to recent agriculture affects
archaeological patterns and conversely reveals how archaeological sites impact modern agricultural use. This research can facilitate
partnerships between agriculturalists and archeologists to better manage the productivity of agriculture and site preservation.
Derr, Kelly (Historical Research Associates Inc.)
[117]
Discussant
Derry, Linda [193] see Gordon, Falicia
Dersam, Sari (University of Wyoming), Scott Dersam (University of Montana) and Molly Herron (University of Wyoming)
[65]
High-Elevation Ceramic Workshop in the Beartooth Mountains: Interpreting a Possible Expedient Ceramic Technology
In 2018 ceramic sherds differing in form and appearance to Shoshone intermountain ware were found eroding out of a hearth
feature at 3,333 masl in Montana’s Beartooth Mountains (Dersam 2019). Over the 2019 field season, a thorough examination of the
surrounding site and excavation of the hearth feature revealed a mutli-event prehistoric ceramic manufacture area. The implications
for locally made high-elevation ceramics could be far reaching for interpretations of the local prehistory. To better understand the
cost and effort needed to rely on a broad-spectrum dietary strategy in the high-elevation regions of the GYE landscapes, an
experiment was conducted. To test our in-field hypothesis of, “locally made ceramics”, we prepared an experimental test of ceramic
manufacture with the local materials observed within the site. The successful results of this experiment immediately raised another
question, could ceramics in the correct context be considered an expedient technology?
Dersam, Scott (University of Montana)
[66]
Paleoindian Occupations and Broad-Spectrum Subsistence Behaviors in the High Elevations of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem
In the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem (GYE) of Northwestern Wyoming and Southwestern Montana, several archaeological sites
have been found hosting datable occupation surfaces attributed to the Angostura and Cody, Late-Paleoindian complexes (Davis et
al. 1989; Frison 1999). The Angostura cultural complex has been consistently linked to evidence relating to a broad-spectrum
subsistence strategy (Davis et al. 1989; Frison 1983,1999), hypothesized to be taking advantage of the abutting eco-tone
boundaries of mountain foothills and plains, where the Cody complex has been linked to big-game (primarily bison) hunting activities
in the same eco-tones (Frison and Todd 1987; Shortt 2003). Recent discoveries of two separate Angostura and Cody linked
localities at over 3,333 masl in Montana’s Beartooth Wilderness raise questions about Paleoindian behavior and landscape use in
the High Plains. 1.) Is there evidence of patterned high-elevation landscape use in the Paleoindian period? 2.) Could a “marginal”
ecosystem (like the alpine) be effectively used by two different subsistence adapted Paleo-cultural groups? 3.) Should mountain
ecosystems be considered “marginal”? These discoveries aid in renegotiating long-held notions concerning Paleoindian use of high-
elevation ecosystems and broad-spectrum subsistence behaviors in the GYE, while additionally questioning current paradigms
surrounding mountains as marginal ecosystems.
Dersam, Scott [65] see Dersam, Sari
Des Lauriers, Matthew (California State University, Northridge), David Madsen (University of Texas, Austin), Loren Davis
(Oregon State University), Antonio Porcayo Michelini (Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia) and David Rhode
(Desert Research Institute, UNR)
[170]
Deep Water Maritime Adaptations along the Pacific Coast of Northwest Mexico during and before Clovis Times
We are engaged in multiyear project investigating stratified shell midden sites on Isla Cedros, Baja California. Faunal remains
include shallow water and pelagic fishes, an array of shellfish, sea turtle, sea mammal, sea bird, and trace amounts of terrestrial
fauna. Of particular note is the presence of a well-developed technological system that emphasizes the exploitation of marine
habitats. The fishing technology is characterized by the use of shell fish hooks (37 at a single site) and a distinctive steeply beveled
scraper we hypothesize was used to produce Agave fiber line and netting. Over 30 associated radiocarbon dates spanning a range
of ~8.5 to 13.5 cal BP have been recovered from intact stratigraphically excavated contexts. Associated small stemmed projectile
points suggest a modest focus on hunting, though these may also have been deployed against marine turtles and sea mammals. A
change in shellfish species through time may reflect a shift in ocean currents and a gradual warming in sea surface temperatures.
Taken together, these patterns indicate a human ecological system adapted to a richly diverse marine environment. The antiquity of
this system has implications for the timing, and especially the nature of the early human occupation of Pacific North America.
Des Lauriers, Matthew [66] see Thompsett, Neil
Deskaj, Sylvia [263] see Baci, Erina
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      136
Desrosiers, Dianne
[44]
Discussant
Desrosiers, Dianne [127] see Maki, David
Dewan, Eve (Brown University)
[184]
Schooling and Sovereignty in the Grand Ronde Tribal Community
When dozens of Western Oregon tribes and bands were relocated to the Grand Ronde Reservation in 1856, one of the rights
guaranteed by the federal government in their ratified treaties was a formal education. The story of education at Grand Ronde—both
formal and informal—is intimately connected to stories of self-determination, community, and the transmission of many types of
knowledge through several generations. This poster introduces several schools that children at Grand Ronde have attended from
the establishment of the reservation through today, and shares the results of geophysical, archival, and oral historical research, as
well as several seasons of excavation. It also highlights how the Field Methods in Indigenous Archaeology field school, through its
low-impact methodology, has contributed to the study of several of these locations in partnership with the Confederated Tribes of
Grand Ronde’s Historic Preservation Office.
Dewar, Genevieve [76] see Feak, Angela
Dewar, Genevieve [77] see Waters, Albert
Di Giusto, Marina (University of São Paulo, Brazil) and Veronica Wesolowski (University of São Paulo, Brazil)
[240]
The Final Period of the Shell Mound Occupation: Life on the Southern Coast of Brazil from the Case Study of the Içara-01
Conchiferous Site
The archaeological site Içara-01 (1630–1390 ys cal BP), located on the southern coast of the state of Santa Catarina (Brazil), has
been interpreted as a cemetery and temporary camp used by horticultural groups from the plateau. However, the results from a
bioarchaeological study of human remains (n=35), when interpreted alongside data from shell mounds in the region (e.g.,
Jabuticabeira II), lead us to reinterpret the lifestyle of this group. The data for the individuals buried in Içara differ from the data
observed for groups of coastal camps and are more similar to the pattern found for shell mounds, in the same period. Through this
case study, by comparing the Içara-01 results with those from the fishmound layer of Jabuticabeira II (1864–1534 years cal AP), we
reinforce the idea that there was social reorganization during a period of the contact intensification between the southern plateau
and coastal groups. Rather than suggest population replacement, pathological and weaning data for these individuals suggest a
degree of accommodation between the two groups and allow us to reflect upon people’s lifestyles on the southern Brazilian coast
during the last period of shellmound occupation.
Diaz, Alice
[246]
Featherwork in the Tairona Area: Making an Intangible Object Traceable?
The techniques of featherwork have been under scientific scrutiny in the Americas in Mesoamerica, the Adean, and the Amazonian
region through the study of written sources and artifacts. But how would it be to think archaeological investigation of said techniques
in the Tairona area, a context in which the objects referenced by ethnohistorical sources have never been found, and said sources
are not describing techniques of featherwork? How can archaeologists link an element whose existence is only known through an
intangible piece of data to a material trace (the only language they speak)? The question is relevant for other crafts (leather, cotton,
salt, etc.) and other notions (empathy, ethnicity, affection, etc.), and the method used to obtain a list of potential material traces of
featherwork in the Tairona area could have potentially useful ramifications for other processes of investigation.
Diaz, Lucia (Washington University, St. Louis), Sarah Baitzel (Washington University, St. Louis) and Xinyi Liu (Washington
University, St. Louis)
[61]
Paleodiet Reconstruction and Migration at Los Batanes, Sama Valley (Peru): Agropastoralism on the Eve of the Tiwanaku State
(Eleventh Century AD)
Agropastoralists facilitated the vertical exchange systems of complex societies in the south-central Andes by producing and
mobilizing animals and goods across diverse ecological floors. One such group, the Cabuza, occupied the site of Los Batanes (500
masl), Sama Valley, Peru, in the Northern Atacama Desert during the later period of the Tiwanaku diaspora (tenth–twelfth centuries
AD). This study reconstructs Cabuza diet through stable isotope analysis of human remains from Los Batanes, lending insight into
the foodways and lifestyle of a previously little-known population of Tiwanaku affiliation. Similar to Tiwanaku communities in the
altiplano and lowland valleys, we expect the residents of the site to show reliance on maize as a staple crop. However, we anticipate
results to show enriched nitrogen isotopic values due to a subsistence focus on camelid herding and proximity to the coast.
Archaeological and modern plant and animal tissue provide a baseline for the Sama valley ecology, while skeletal, dental, and hair
tissues of individuals from Los Batanes reflect diet at different stages of the life course. The results of our study highlight the
importance of agropastoralism for diversifying a maize-based diet through access to animals and mobility into diverse ecological
niches.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   137
Diaz, Luis (Asociado)
[260]
Yaracachi, un sitio arqueológico multicultural en el valle de Moquega, al sur del Perú
Nuestro trabajo tiene como objetivo analizar el sitio arqueológico de Yaracachi (Nomenclatura: M-225), un panorama que no resulta
fácil de estudiar por la escasez de datos publicados, pero que poco a poco va ampliándose con nuevos descubrimientos.
Moquegua es un departamento del Perú situado al sureste del país, en la vertiente occidental de la Cordillera de los Andes. Limita
con las regiones de Tacna, Puno y Arequipa y es ribereño del océano Pacífico. La zona de estudio se encuentra en las laderas de
la zona de Yaracachi, entre los 1,374 y 1,400 m sobre el nivel del mar, margen izquierdo del río Osmore, hacia el costado noroeste
de la ciudad de Moquegua. El periodo que nos ocupa es muy amplio, y las formas de vida que tienen lugar durante ese tiempo, son
muy diversas. Las diferencias entre unas y otras pueden deberse a cambios acontecidos a lo extenso del tiempo como resultado de
una evolución cronológica de las pautas de los grupos humanos que habitaban la región. La evidencia de una ocupación temprana
en Yaracachi es advertida por el hallazgo de un vestigio habitacional (plaza circular hundida) relacionado con un conjunto de
enterramientos del Intermedio Tardío y Horizonte Tardío.
Díaz-Andreu, Margarita
[25]
Chair
Díaz-Andreu, Margarita [25] see Coltofean-Arizancu, Laura
Díaz-Andreu, Margarita [25] see Jiménez Pasalodos, Raquel
Diaz-Granados, Carol (Washington University, St. Louis) and James Duncan
[47]
The Braden Art Style: Its Shadowy Beginnings in Dark Zone Cave Art
Braden, a distinct style of human figural art, has long been a topic of interest to archaeologists and iconographers. Braden originates
in the southern Prairie Peninsula and lower Missouri River Valley once occupied by Siouan populations. These people re-
established an interactive ideology while developing a complex social structure based on an elaborate cosmology. Evolving
technology in pigment sample dating helped establish the earliest anchor allowing key Braden elements to be placed into a firm
stylistic chronology. Braden originated in a Woodland culture setting that involved a resurgence of liturgical symbolism long existing
in oral traditions.
Díaz Sibaja, Roberto [198] see Martínez Vázquez, Dante Bernardo
Dickson, Catherine
[116]
Discussant
Dickson, Ephriam [52] see Nelson, Shaun
Diehl, Richard
[152]
Discussant
Diehl, Richard
[181]
Discussant
Diehl, Richard
[191]
Discussant
Dierks, Zachary (University of Iowa)
[63]
Debitage and Tools: Lithic Analysis at Woodpecker Cave
Woodpecker Cave is a Middle to Late Woodland site in Johnson County Iowa with at least three occupation layers, each of which
were likely occupied during the winter months. It was the site of a University of Iowa summer field school led by Professor James
Enloe from 2012 to 2018. Within these excavations a total of 2547 lithic artifacts were found. In the 2018 excavation alone there
were 319 pieces of debitage and 58 retouched tools. These artifacts were examined morphologically to determine possible
technological usage and raw material. Raw material identification was done by cross comparison of type collection from known
source locations at the Office of the State Archaeologist, Iowa City. Given the seasonal nature of the occupations, our expectation
would be that tools would be taken to the site and taken with the occupant as they left the site each season. The site’s debitage will
be the focus of this poster and classified into a number of categories to examine the activities and technologies in play at the site as
well as the mobility of the occupants.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    138
Dillehay, Tom
[90]
Discussant
Dillehay, Tom
[170]
Mike and Monte Verde
This paper discusses my perception in the late 1970s to mid 1980s of the reactions by and approaches of several renown First
American archaeologists to the edge-trimmed pebble tool assemblage at Monte Verde. Special attention is given to Mike Collins,
who immediately recognized cultural types and patterns that distinguished the assemblage from “just broken rocks.” Mike was able
to put aside any biases he might have held as a bifacial lithic and Clovis technology expert to objectively evaluate the Monte Verde
assemblage. His reaction and approach are discussed and compared briefly to those of others who examined portions of the
assemblage.
Dillehay, Tom [23] see Netherly, Patricia
Dillian, Carolyn (Coastal Carolina University)
[97]
Working with Non-Federally Recognized Tribes: The Waccamaw Indian People
The Waccamaw Indian People in South Carolina are a state-recognized, but not federally recognized, tribe. They are compiling the
documentation necessary to petition for federal status through the BIA’s Federal Acknowledgement Process, but it is a cumbersome
and sometimes arbitrary process that preferentially weights the experiences of western tribes, who were impacted by colonization
after the establishment of the United States government. Eastern tribes, particularly those in the coastal southeast, were impacted
during the early years of European contact and exploration, and as a result, by the late eighteenth century, were not positioned to
negotiate treaties and agreements with the U.S. government, a particularly important evidentiary item in the federal recognition
process. As the Waccamaw Indian People pursue federal recognition, there is an emerging picture of early historical contact,
dispersal, and cultural resilience, within the context of competing racial, economic, and political interests between tribes, states, and
the U.S. government. The experience of the Waccamaw Indian People echoes the legal battles fought by other non-federally-
recognized tribes in the American southeast. It is necessary for us to understand the challenges faced by these tribes, and the
importance of collaborating and consulting with them.
[97]
Discussant
Dillon, Scott [190] see Robinson, Francis
DiMarco, MacKenzie (Indiana University Bloomington)
[184]
Archaeological Heritage in Belize and Play 360
During the 2019 summer field season, I traveled with an Indiana University Wells Scholars Program to Belize to help coordinate a
Play 360 program and install playground equipment at a Maya high school. This project was informed by knowledge of local Maya
heritage. On this poster, I examine how western archaeological knowledge intersects with traditional Maya knowledge to influence
the creation of common play areas. I argue that archaeologists should be more involved in activities like this. Instead of considering
western volunteer travel and service learning as completely outside of archaeological discourse, we should be working with groups
(such as Play 360) to generate more effective means of engaging with local communities. Archaeologists are uniquely positioned to
undertake this work due to their focus on the past and often long lasting engagement with local communities.
DiNapoli, Robert (University of Oregon), Timothy Rieth (International Archaeological Research Institute), Carl Lipo
(Binghamton University) and Terry Hunt (University of Arizona)
[24]
A Stratigraphic Approach to Developing Chronologies for Monumental Architecture: A Rapa Nui (Easter Island) Case Study
Patterns of monument construction offer direct evidence for addressing a variety of questions. Periods of intense activity reflect the
ability of groups to engage in organized and cooperative efforts, while cessation of construction might suggest “‘collapse.” Resolving
the tempo of monumentality, however, is often fraught with ambiguity given a lack of formal modeling, uncritical use of radiocarbon
estimates, and a lack of attention to the information embedded within complex architectural stratigraphy. Here, we illustrate a
Bayesian model-based approach to dating monumental structures that integrates radiocarbon dates and relative architectural
stratigraphy to examine temporal fluctuations and correlations in monument construction activity. Using Rapa Nui (Easter Island) as
a case study, we demonstrate that statue platform (ahu) construction began quickly and increased rapidly after colonization,
sometime between the early fourteenth and mid-fifteenth centuries AD, with a steady tempo of construction events continuing into
the eighteenth century. These results are significant, showing that a pre-contact “collapse” of ahu construction did not occur, but
continued into the historic era despite the impacts of European arrival. Our model-based approach and its relationship to societal
change can be extended to other case studies where similar debates surrounding the tempo of monument construction remain
unresolved.
DiNapoli, Robert [135] see Hanna, Jonathan
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   139
Dinkins, Gerry [78] see McKenna, Kathryn
Diop, Pape Laity (Cheikh Anta Diop University, Dakar Senegal)
[273]
Another Form of Slave Ship: Local Nautical Technologies and Practices in the Persistence of the Senegambian Slave Trade (1818–
1888)
Despite its abolition by France in 1818, the slave trade continued along the coasts of Senegambia until 1888. When, in 1822,
France created a special African naval squadron stationed at Gorée Island to patrol the West African coasts, slave traders in the
Senegambia responded by developing new strategies to escape French vigilance. This paper explores these strategies, focusing in
particular how slave traders began to use less conspicuous local dugout canoes to transfer slaves to the Cape Verde islands where
the slaves were then loaded onto larger slave ships for Transatlantic exportation. Examining the structural characteristics and
technical efficiencies of these local watercraft that represent another form of “slave ship”, this paper also demonstrates how slave
traders exploited the weakness of trafficking contraventions laws and the bad faith of authorities. These strategies effectively
neutralized naval security, enabled the traffic to persist for almost seventy years after it became illegal, and even transformed the
transatlantic segment of slaving voyages by significantly shortening the distance travelled on larger ships from Cape Verde,
destined primarily for Cuba and Brazil.
DiPietro, Lyndsay and Kelly Graf (Center for the Study of the First Americans, Texas)
[81]
Micromorphological Analysis of Deposition, Pedogenesis, and Stratigraphic Integrity at the McDonald Creek Site, Central Alaska
Despite the fact that archaeologists have long turned to the Alaskan archaeological record to answer questions about the first
Americans, little is certain about the peopling of Beringia. The poor preservation of faunal remains in many central Alaskan
archaeological sites has made understanding the variability of lithic assemblages and, by extension, the behavior of early Beringian
populations difficult. The McDonald Creek site, a multicomponent site containing at least two late Pleistocene assemblages,
including lithic artifacts and faunal and macrobotanical remains in a primary context, may shed new light on the relationship between
the inhabitants of the site and their changing environment over the course of the late Quaternary. This study uses soil
micromorphology to characterize the depositional and pedogenic processes that have led to the development of the sediment
package at McDonald Creek, as well as to assess the extent to which periglacial processes and solifluction may have disturbed the
integrity of the archaeological record at the site. This new understanding of soil development helps to establish the sequence of
paleoenvironmental changes at the site since the late glacial period and will help to contextualize the technological, subsistence,
and settlement records at McDonald Creek.
Diserens Morgan, Kasey (University of Pennsylvania) and Kathryn Morgan
[165]
Rethinking Facadism: How Governments Use Heritage to Control the Maya Past
Political involvement in the protection of historic resources often places a façade on historic narratives that creates a distance
between communities and their heritage. Often, this control reflects leftover colonial legacies, creating structures of power that do
not allow communities to advance economically, socially, or politically. This paper explores the events leading up to a declaration of
national patrimony and creation of a historic zone in Tihosuco, Quintana Roo, Mexico. Tihosuco was the epicenter of the Caste War
(1847–1901), an indigenous rebellion that sought freedom from oppressive social and economic systems. Tihosuco has many
colonial era houses, built in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and then largely abandoned until the 1930s. Families living
there today continue to use the houses as residences, many of them needing extensive work to be truly functional again.
Government interventions have thus far only done restoration work on the facades, which does little to reestablish them as usable
dwellings, and leaves those most at risk untouched. Yet, the small influx of capital into the buildings and their recognition as national
patrimony has established them as assets in a desired tourism industry, and politicians capitalize on that potential benefit to further
their own careers.
Dixon, Boyd (Cardno GS Inc.) and Mike Dega (Scientific Consulting Services Hawaii)
[100]
Placing the Early Pre-Latte Period Site of San Roque on Saipan in Its Broader Context: 1500–1100 BC
This comparative assessment of the San Roque site in northern Saipan to other early Pre-Latte Period sites in the Mariana Islands,
circa 1500–1100 BC, presents far from uniform data that suggest that maritime settlers of the archipelago may have targeted a
range of natural settings for survival upon arrival. These settings appear to have included inland estuaries and marshes for planting
aroids, cliff lines with caves for fresh water and native forest resources, and beach dunes with shallow lagoons and offshore reefs
for suitable canoe landings from which to fish and travel. This pattern of extensive horticulture and arboriculture complimented by
maritime subsistence activities, likely stemmed from a much older if not foundational tradition of risk minimization, or
acknowledgement of and adjustment to climate instability in their SE Asia near-coastal homelands. Recent DNA research and
similarities in material culture suggest multiple origins along a “cultural corridor” from the Philippines to Sulawesi and island
Melanesia circa 1500–1100 BC, long enough to foment Lapita and Pre-Latte traditions in what was by then no longer Remote
Oceania.
Dixon, E. James (Maxwell Museum) and Loren Davis (Oregon State University)
[238]
The Rose Room Workshop
This presentation reports the outcomes of a workshop held at the Smithsonian Institution Museum of Natural History, Washington,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  140
DC, June 2019. The workshop identified stakeholders, collaborations, and synergistic relationships to establish and expand
cooperative interdisciplinary and agency partnerships to encourage, advance, and support submerged landscape (non-shipwreck)
archaeology and paleoecological research on North America’s continental shelves and the Great Lakes. Participants defined
stakeholder interests, federal and state responsibilities, sources of fiscal support, methodological and technological needs, and tribal
and cultural interests and concerns. Working groups identified potential ways to establish cooperative structure(s) to consolidate
and/or pool human, logistic, technological, and financial resources to advance research. Results and recommendations for future
directions were defined in a summative action plan. Fiscal support provided by the National Science Foundation, OPP #1735494,
Smithsonian Institution, Department of Anthropology, Museum of Natural History, and Oregon State University.
Dobney, Keith [100] see Weyrich, Laura
Dobos, Adrian [162] see Chu, Wei
Dobrov, Amanda (UC Berkeley)
[71]
Cabinets of Curiosity: The Forgotten Collections
Archaeological research comes in many forms, the most common and well known variant is excavation. However, due to such
excavations there has been a considerable amount of materials recovered, some of which has been studied but far more that still
needs to be studied. This presentation is part of a larger panel discussion about the benefits and drawbacks of using previously
excavated collections and the larger, important, picture this type of research helps develop. This presentation will center around
personal experience working with a forgotten collection of third century Roman-era Tunisian Amphora buried in the basement of the
American Academy in Rome. This collection was excavated in 1993 and some preliminary inventory type work was done on the
collection the following year. When the collection was turned over to me in the summer of 2016 it had sat untouched for 22 years.
This kind of data is still valuable and useful information that as excavating continues scholars forget about what the data they do
have can contribute to current research.
Dodge, Aina
[113]
Discussant
Dodge, Robyn (University of Texas, Austin)
[53]
Household Ritual Expression at Hun Tun
Ritual is a cultural and temporal construction used to express religion, social experience, and world ideology. Every member of
society conducted rituals. Evidence of such events are documented in the archaeological record and provide insight into ancient
Maya society. The northwestern region of Belize is host to an abundance of “support” communities located throughout the hinterland
near major urban centers. This paper examines the types of rituals documented in the hinterland at the commoner site, Hun Tun
during the Late/Terminal Classic period. An analysis of small-scale household archaeology will be applied. Evidence for localized
site-specific rituals, along with data demonstrating a general regional continuity regarding ritual expression will be explored.
Specifically, household dedication, termination, and veneration rituals will be discussed as they have been identified at Hun Tun.
Evidence for water rituals associated with the presence of limestone monuments and a sweat bath will also be presented. Lastly, the
significance of cache dedications at Hun Tun will be discussed in terms of the materials and locations identified. This synthesis will
demonstrate how rituals at Hun Tun were both economic and social expression of ancient Maya life ways in northwestern Belize.
Doelle, William (Archaeology Southwest)
[58]
Unfinished Business: Facilitating Synthetic Research by Expanding Access to Digital Databases
The digital technology that helped Desert Archaeology gain a foothold and grow in the early 1980s today looks like a fossil from an
ancient geologic era. Fortunately, digital databases evolved rapidly over time, and Desert Archaeology made major investments in
an integrated company database. That database made the results of past research accessible for all new projects, which made
synthetic research more cost-effective and feasible. As the CRM arena has grown dramatically, commitments to databases have
been highly variable. In addition, databases are generally internal to each company. Today, nonprofit Archaeology Southwest and a
team of partners at the University of Arizona, Arizona State University, and University of Colorado, Boulder, are developing
cyberSouthwest, a regional database that will be internet accessible. The site-level component of this database is richly populated
with ceramic, obsidian, and public architecture data. The intrasite component of cyberSouthwest is progressing rapidly. It addresses
the “unfinished business” of my paper title. It has the potential to make the massive amount of digital CRM data that has
accumulated over the past two decades broadly accessible.
Doering, Briana (University of Michigan), Joshua Reuther (University of Alaska, Fairbanks), Scott Shirar (University of
Alaska, Fairbanks) and Holly McKinney (University of Alaska, Fairbanks)
[82]
Reconstructing Late Holocene Behavior at Quartz Lake, Alaska
This poster combines data from compound-specific isotopic sampling, x-Ray fluorescence, and traditional material analysis from two
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  141
components at the Klein Site to reconstruct behavior on Quartz Lake ca. 1200–500 years ago. The results of this analysis show that
lake environments played an important role in the Athabascan seasonal subsistence strategy, and that Quartz Lake was likely at the
crossroads of larger late Holocene trade networks. Ongoing research continues to refine our understanding of the central role of
lacustrine settings in late Holocene Athabascan subsistence and mobility strategies following the White River Ash eruption and prior
to the effects of European colonization.
Doherty, Caitlin (Texas A&M University)
[195]
Paleoindian Raw Material Procurement in the Eastern Great Basin: The Utilization of Obsidian and Fine-Grained Volcanics at Smith
Creek Cave and Bonneville Estates Rockshelter
Geochemical analysis of lithic raw materials and artifacts has proven useful in the Great Basin with regard to understanding
prehistoric forager mobility. Particularly in the eastern Great Basin where high-quality obsidian sources are available and easily
differentiated geochemically using portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) technology, archaeologists have been able to delineate
catchment areas within which prehistoric peoples procured obsidian for toolmaking. Similar efforts to understand the procurement of
other fine-grained volcanic toolstone in the region have been more difficult. Recent geochemical analysis of lithic artifacts from the
Paleoindian components of Bonneville Estates Rockshelter and Smith Creek Cave encountered this difficulty—while the obsidian
artifacts grouped easily with samples of known obsidian sources, the fine-grained volcanic artifacts could not be as easily identified
and sometimes were not as easily distinguishable. Here, the same lithic assemblages are analyzed, incorporating old data, in light
of additional geologic samples of obsidian and fine-grained volcanics from the eastern Great Basin that were collected during a
toolstone survey in the summer of 2019. The results of the fine-grained volcanic data provide a useful comparison for evaluating the
catchment zones delineated for Paleoindian hunter-gatherers on the basis of obsidian data.
Dolan, Brennan
[175]
Hand-Held lidar at 13AM130: Merging Site Stewardship and Data Accuracy
Archaeologists and cultural resources managers have an ever-increasing tool kit to aid in the documentation and management of
archaeological sites. Over the last few years the Iowa Department of Transportation (DOT) has been employing a hand-held light
detecting and ranging (lidar) unit to map resources around the state. Through this technology, and the accuracy it offers, we have
been able to make strides specifically in the management of earthworks that are part of the Iowa DOT’s Statewide Historical Sites
Inventory and Management Plan. These types of sites are engaging for us as cultural resource managers as well as our Tribal
partners. We find that lidar data, being noninvasive, is a better way to manage these places. Recently, as part of a mitigation effort,
we mapped Site 13AM130, a small group of effigy mounds in Allamakee County, Iowa. This presentation shares new information as
well as management recommendations offered based on the 3D data collected. The focus of this presentation is that earthworks
(and similarly significant site types) benefit from highly accurate lidar data for future site stewardship.
Dolan, Sean (N3B Los Alamos)
[129]
Comparing the Life Histories of Turkeys and Tropical Birds in the Mimbres Valley, New Mexico
For the past 2,000 years, Pueblo communities in the American Southwest and Mexican Northwest have woven turkeys and tropical
birds (macaws and parrots) into their economic, social, and ceremonial fabric. Pueblo groups in the past did not view all birds as
being equal, and neither do archaeologists today as we study turkeys and tropical birds more so than any other avian species.
Archaeologists study these birds separately using similar methods, but here I use pottery iconography, genetics, diet, and other
contextual evidence to compare and contrast how people in the Mimbres Valley of southwestern New Mexico acquired, managed,
and interacted with these birds during the Classic period (AD 1000–1130). Turkeys and tropical birds are uncommon in Classic
period avifaunal assemblages, and they had similar but different life histories. This comparative study contributes to key issues in
anthropological archaeology and social zooarchaeology as I discuss the use of birds for ritual and utilitarian purposes, socio-
ecological interactions between humans and birds, and cross-cultural pathways of domestication, husbandry, and aviculture in
small-scale agricultural societies.
Dombrosky, Jonathan (University of New Mexico)
[22]
The Impact of Fish Body Size on Ancestral Pueblo Foraging Decisions in New Mexico, ca. AD 1350–1600
Small numbers of fish remains are frequently recovered from Pueblo IV (AD 1350–1600) sites in the Middle Rio Grande basin of
central New Mexico, but fish remains are rare during earlier time periods. Increased aquatic habitat quality during this time could
have increased fish body size, and the energy obtained by Ancestral Puebloan fishers could have been maximized if fishes provided
more calories due to their increased size. Paleozoologists, however, frequently estimate the body size of fishes from skeletal
remains with linear measurements and cherry-picked specimens. Such an approach will not work with archaeological fish
assemblages from the American Southwest/Mexican Northwest. The relatively small size of fish assemblages requires that the
remains present are used more efficiently. Here, I use a 3D geometric morphometric approach to more accurately and efficiently
estimate the body size of archaeological fishes from fragmented skeletal remains recovered from the Middle Rio Grande. Such an
approach can help rigorously test whether or not a shift in body size made the pursuit of fishes in small quantities optimal for
Ancestral Puebloans.
Dombrosky, Jonathan [171] see Jones, Emily Lena
Dombrosky, Jonathan [129] see Kirk, Scott
Dombrosky, Jonathan [129] see LaZar, Miranda
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      142
Domeischel, Jenna (Eastern New Mexico University) and Susan Kuzminsky (Eastern New Mexico University)
[172]
Kittens, Mittens, and Skulls: Dealing with Unsolicited Donations in Museums
Due to the implementation of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) in 1990, many archaeologists
feel confident in dealing with the issues that arise with the excavation, processing, and repatriation of human remains. Indeed,
having an established protocol in the United States has helped to eliminate legal or ethical questions that arise with repatriation and
curation, especially in museums or other institutions where remains were once displayed openly. However, questions remain when
dealing with donated artifacts and human remains from private lands and remains whose provenience is entirely unknown. At the
state or local level, there is not always a defined policy for these situations. Moreover, what are our professional and ethical
responsibilities when creating and sharing virtual 3D osteological collections? We discuss case studies that address how to handle
the curation of human remains and artifacts that do not fall within NAGPRA guidelines─and what to do when skeletal remains and
other objects are left on the museum doorstep.
Domenici, Davide (University of Bologna, Italy)
[258]
Not Only Glues: Observations on the Use of Resins in Mesoamerican Mosaics
The paper discusses some specific uses of resins on Late Postclassic Mesoamerican mosaics. While resins were mostly used as
adhesives to glue the tesserae to the underlying surface, in various instances we can observe a different use, aimed at creating
visible formal details which had a clear aesthetic and semantic value. At least in one instance, for example, resin-coated surfaces
meant to remain visible to the observer were created to represent a specific item of a godly attire. Moreover, in a set of Mixtec
mosaics, a “gritty” resinous material, mixed with sand or stone fragments of varying granulometry, was used to cover ample
surfaces in order to convey a key meaning related with the identity of the represented divine beings. In other instances, a peculiar
joint use of resin and shell tesserae to represent human and animal eyes characterizes a specific subset of mosaics, which also
share other stylistic traits as well as a common collection history. The cases discussed in the paper show how the study of the
“aesthetic” use of resins, especially when paired with scientific analyses aimed at their chemical characterization, could provide
useful hints for a cultural-historical interpretation of Mesoamerican mosaic art.
[258]
Discussant
Domic, Alejandra [59] see Bruno, Maria C.
Domínguez, Miriam (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[257]
An Archaeological History of the Tamaylacha (Jubones) River Basin, circa First Millennium BCE
The earliest written descriptions of the Tamaylacha (Jubones) River and its surroundings were penned by the priest Pedro Arias
Dávila (1582) during his journey(s) through Cañari territory. These were followed by the accounts of Francisco José de Caldas—
with von Humboldt and Bonpland in 1804, Verneau and Rivet (1912), and a few other observers of what today is southern Ecuador
and northern Peru. Beyond these chronicles and travelogues, archaeological analysis of this inter-Andean river basin further refines
our understanding of the indigenous history of the region. This talk outlines, first, the results of the compositional analysis conducted
on the ceramic wares from the site of Potrero Mendieta, dated to around the first millennium BCE, which are interpreted as proxies
of social inter-regional interaction. Second, the spatial configuration of the site, which lies on a flat hilltop overlooking the Jubones,
will be discussed and the results of the preliminary excavations of the semi-sunken circular structures that were built at Potrero
Mendieta will be presented. Finally, the regional significance of this human enclave will be contextualized with regards to the
broader research on the Formative of Southwestern Ecuador.
Dominguez, Victoria [257] see Ayers-Rigsby, Sara
Dominguez Carrasco, Maria del Rosario [168] see Folan, William
Donathan, Gavin [77] see Waters, Albert
Dong, Ke [161] see Wright, David
Dongoske, Kurt (Zuni Cultural Resource Enterprise), Giorgio Hadi Curti (Cultural Geographics Consulting) and Octavius
Seowtewa (Zuni Cultural Resource Advisory Team)
[127]
Contested Geographies and Zuni Efforts to Protect Their Inheritance: The Role of Epistemology and the Problem of Representation
Zuni geography, or earth writing, manifests in the landscape through the material presence of ancestral sites, ancestral writings
(petroglyphs), sacred places, and other resources of traditional importance. Zuni geography is an inheritance from the Zuni
ancestors, and contemporary Zunis have stewardship responsibilities to protect and appropriately manage this inheritance both in
honor of the past and in pursuit of healthy and viable futures. Capitalist geographies, or exploitative appropriations and distortions of
space and landscape through practices of dominant Western civilization are embedded in epistemologies of Western science and
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 143
an ontological system that promotes a severing with the past, where “old” knowledge is dismissed through limited and limiting
notions of “progress” and “development.” Zuni knowledge and ways of being/becoming are often at odds or not appropriately
respected by Western science, creating conflicts in the ways in which Zuni knowledge is represented, acknowledged, respected, or
disregarded in consultation processes. This paper argues that at heart of these contested geographies are Western epistemological
and ontological systems that privilege their own narrow representations as absolute truth, thereby systematically failing to both
account for and respect Zuni knowledge and its differences and honor the very purpose of consultation.
Donn, Leila (University of Texas, Austin), Timothy Beach (University of Texas, Austin) and Cody Schank (University of
Texas, Austin)
[206]
Lidar-Based Machine-Learning Computer Program to Identify Archaeological and Natural Features in the Maya Lowlands of Belize,
Guatemala, and Mexico
Computer programs that can automatically identify natural and archaeological landscape features are extremely useful for
conservation and resource management, natural hazard monitoring, and planning and development work. The first author is using
Python, GIS, and lidar imagery to develop machine-learning computer programs to identify several different types of landscape
features that are located in hard-to-access areas under dense tropical forest canopy. These features include cave entrances,
archaeologic mounds, Maya architecture, and ancient wetland fields. This type of modeling can be applied to other kinds of
landscape features with distinct morphologic characteristics, even features obscured by vegetation. Research thus far has
completed a beta-version of the cave entrance identification program along with one season of ground-verification in northwestern
Belize that has successfully identified several caves and cave-like features. Further research includes refining the machine-learning
model and integrating other types of archaeological features using several lidar-based training datasets shared by archaeological
projects in northwestern Belize, the Petén of Guatemala, and Mexico.
Donner, Kristin (Seyitömer Höyük Illustration Project) and Laura Harrison
[104]
Mix, Mold, Fire! Multimedia Educational Outreach Inspired by Bronze Age Archaeology
While fascination with archaeology is commonplace among children, family media content often focuses on problematic narratives
of treasure hunting. Archaeologists and educators need to reach out to young audiences with a more balanced narrative that
conveys the value of heritage and counteracts the perception of archaeologists as looters. In this paper, we discuss a preschool,
fourth grade and sixth grade version of a multimedia educational outreach lesson that incorporates 2D comic art, 3D representations
of heritage objects, and experimental archaeology. All lessons begin with an introduction to the comic “Mix, Mold, Fire!” that features
the misadventures of Abby, a young apprentice potter in the Early Bronze Age village of Seyitömer Höyük in Anatolia, whose
activities are archaeologically attested. Multimedia lessons expand on her story: pottery-making activities are based on Abby’s
methods, and students interact with 3D scans and 3D prints of heritage objects then create their own archaeologically-inspired
comic stories. These lessons introduce young audiences to fundamentals of archaeology “at the trowel’s edge,” and allow them to
learn techniques of visual storytelling by building narratives about the past based on their interactions with 3D scanned heritage
objects.
Donta, Jaime (POWER Engineers)
[114]
Moderator
Doperalski, Mark [190] see NH, DHR
Doperalski, Mark [66] see Oberheim, Paul
Doroszenko, Dena [228] see Patton, Katherine
Dotzel, Krista (University of Connecticut)
[13]
The Deer Are Just Going to Eat that Corn: Agriculture, Mobility, and Maize Processing in Southern New England 2000–500 BP
This paper will explore questions regarding the relationships between mobility, food production, and maize processing in Southern
New England between 2000 and 500 BP. Dr. Brian Jones, a keen gardener of native crops, approached these issues rooted in
years of his own experience. How did people in Southern New England grow, process, and eat their crops? How might this have
changed over time? Can groups grow maize while maintaining seasonal mobility? Dr. Jones was always willing to help think through
practical considerations surrounding these questions and approach them with a critical, yet open-minded eye. In that spirit, this
paper will examine phytolith evidence for domesticated and wild plants and examine the relationships between plant processing
strategies, settlement strategies, and resulting phytolith assemblages at sites including Burnham-Shepard, RI 110, Selden Island,
the Cooper Site, Hamburg Cove, Deer Run, and RI 1428.
Dou, Jiaxin [36] see Wei, Tianxu
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      144
Doubles, Catherine (University of Louisville), Jake Lulewicz (Washington University, St. Louis), Jason King (Center for
American Archeology) and Jane Buikstra (Arizona State University)
[264]
Habitation and Interaction at the German Site (11C377)
The German site (11C377) is a Late Woodland habitation site (ca 800–1200 cal CE) located at the McCully Heritage Project on a
colluvial slope north of Crawford Creek, approximately 2 miles west of the Illinois River. During the 2019 field season, Center for
American Archeology field schools conducted geophysical survey and excavation at the site. Magnetic survey results suggest
multiple structures and associated features at the site. CAA field school students partially excavated one house basin and several
associated features containing Late Bluff/Jersey Bluff pottery and associated residential debris. In this paper, we report this
summer’s fieldwork and discuss preliminary results, placing the site in context of other regional and American Bottom Late
Woodland occupation sites.
Doucette, Dianna (Public Archaeology Laboratory [PAL])
[13]
Assessing Archaeological Sensitivity along the Charles River: How Can the Physical and Cultural Landscape of Today Be Applied to
Native American Settlement Choices Thousands of Years Ago?
Settlement patterning and the predictability of patterning was often revisited by Brian Jones in his research. This paper considers
the predictability of Native American settlement choices along the Charles River and its many tributaries in eastern Massachusetts
during the Pre-Contact Period and draws from numerous surveys conducted by The Public Archaeology Laboratory, Inc. (PAL) and
other professionals over the past five decades.
Dougherty, Haley (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[130]
Urbanization in the Maya Way of Life
Although many researchers have addressed underlying themes in the history of urban studies for Maya archaeology, I argue that
some literature could provide more excavation data in an understudied area of archaeology. Current approaches to urbanism may
not be the most practical way to understand the kind of archaeological work that other urban studies can do for the Maya. This
research intends to provide a scholarly inquiry of Maya urbanization. Second, by making distinctions of archaeological analysis,
methodological implications, and theoretical models discussed in literature, I will extend my evaluation to note challenges about
research designs and how they can improve. Currently, a lack of excavation data has not been sufficient enough to provide more
archaeological context to the arguments made about social landscapes. The absence of this data has made it difficult for
researchers to define Maya urbanization. A solution might entail further research on theoretical applications in a urbanized
landscape, with supportive data from excavated archaeological sites. This research demonstrates the effect that excavation has on
the Maya, from a critical analysis of urban study works, along with discussions from other studies of urbanization that ultimately,
include substantial excavation data in these studies to support Maya urbanization.
Douglas, Allison (University of Oklahoma)
[43]
Discussant
Douglas, Peter and Benjamin Keenan (McGill University)
[128]
Climate Change during the Preclassic to Classic Transition in the Maya Lowlands
There is great interest in the possible role of climate change in Lowland Maya sociopolitical transitions. Much of this interest has
focused on the Terminal Classic, but recent research has also highlighted substantial climate shifts at the Preclassic-Classic
transition. Specifically, there is evidence for a prolonged period of wet conditions from ca. 700 to 0 BCE, spanning much of the
Middle and Late Preclassic. After 0 BCE climate records indicate both drying and greater decadal-scale climate variability,
culminating in a drier mean climate during the early Classic period. While quantifying and dating this climate shifts remains a work in
progress, it represents a clear signal of environmental change that should be accounted for in archaeological conversations
surrounding the Preclassic–Classic transition. We will discuss the different paleoclimate archives and proxy methods, their sources
of uncertainty, and the possibility for significant spatial variation in climate signals. We will then propose a synthetic view of climate
change across the Preclassic–Classic transition that takes into account these aspects of the paleoclimate data. Finally, We will
discuss the potential for analyzing signals of human activity in sedimentary archives from the Maya Lowlands, which could provide
clearer linkages between evidence for climatic and societal change.
Douglass, John (Statistical Research Inc.) and Susan Chandler (Alpine Archaeological Consultants)
[58]
The Founding of Modern CRM Archaeology
Cultural resource management (CRM) is a field that, while begun principally as university-based programs in the 1970s, has its
modern foundation in the 1970s and 1980s among founders of privately held firms. Through time, the number of private CRM firms
has grown immensely, whereas the number of university-based CRM programs has declined. Early on, CRM firms focused almost
strictly on archaeology, but today’s CRM encompasses a much wider range of opportunities for clients. This introductory paper
offers a background to this session on the founding of CRM firms in North America and a context for the papers to come.
[58]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   145
Douglass, John (Statistical Research Inc.)
[87]
Discussant
Douglass, Kristina [76] see Hixon, Sean
Dove, David
[149]
The Evolution of a Great House: Monumental Constructions, Feasting, and the Acquisition of Power in the Central Montezuma
Valley
The Montezuma Valley of southwestern Colorado lacks permanent and reliable water sources which made Mitchell Springs a
popular central valley stop. Permanent residency began by AD 650 and by 1100 it had grown into an extensive catchment-wide
community containing multiple great houses. Its six-century longevity was closely tied to environmental and topographical conditions
in its watershed. Dry-land farming at the low elevations of the central valley has rarely been possible which led to the creation of
robust runoff-diversion irrigation systems. These systems contributed to the development of several powerful house-based
production-groups. Two such groups established residency near the springs in the early days of the community and they remained
there for centuries. The monumental constructions they built and the ritualized feasts they hosted are central features of this poster.
Unusually large suites of rooms with copious ritual features were built to store, prepare and sanctify the feast food. Two hundred
years later, after their arc-shaped pueblos were decommissioned, a great house with an appended tri-wall was built there. The
functions that took place there over centuries greatly contributed to raising the stature of these ancestral architectural creations and
the space they were built on, to that of a shrine.
Dowling, Katherin [9] see Wholey, Heather
Downum, Christian (Northern Arizona University)
[255]
“Localized and Uneven”: A Comparative Analysis of Sinagua and Cohonina Foodways
The Fire Foodways Model proposed by Alan Sullivan and colleagues represents a major challenge to traditional models of maize
dependence for upland populations of the ancient Southwest. This paper examines direct and indirect evidence for the cultivation of
maize and other domesticates in the San Francisco Peaks region of northern Arizona and compares the subsistence economies of
two ancient populations archaeologists have labeled Sinagua and Cohonina. Although both groups often shared similar
environments of forest, scrublands, and high desert grasslands, evidence points to substantial differences in their foodways. The
Fire Foodways Model is supported in part, but cultivation of a variety of domesticates was a significant pursuit for populations living
in areas where irrigation, floodwater, and recession agriculture were possible. This is especially true after about AD 1100, when
cotton becomes an important part of local economies and ritual spaces. The paper also examines recent faunal analyses, which
further highlight the localized and uneven nature of foodways across the region.
Doyle, Colin (University of Texas, Austin), Timothy Beach (University of Texas, Austin) and Sheryl Luzzadder-Beach
(University of Texas, Austin)
[230]
Lidar and Multiproxy Evidence for Intensive Maya Wetland Agriculture along the Rio Bravo
We present results from a newly discovered Maya wetland raised field system found along the Rio Bravo in northwest Belize using
airborne lidar. The lidar data reveal canals and fields in a very rectilinear pattern covering ~7 km2 of the floodplain. In the summers
of 2018 and 2019, we surveyed the canals on the ground and conducted seven excavations in the raised fields and canals. In all of
the raised field excavations, we found a paleosol ~1 m below the surface, similar to other systems in the region, with a second
paleosol in one excavation ~3.5 m below the surface. In this study, we present stratigraphy, radiocarbon dates, elemental
geochemistry, and stable isotopes to reconstruct the environmental history and constrain the chronology of the ancient fields and
canals. We then apply machine-learning techniques to the lidar to automatically extract and measure individual fields and the total
extent of the system. Lastly, we use water chemistry and hydrological modeling with the lidar to identify potential water quality and
quantity management of the canals. The combination of the in situ, remotely sensed, and laboratory data gives us insight into the
timing and functionality of this expansive ancient agricultural system.
Doyle, Colin [8] see Casal, Fernando
Doyle, Colin [206] see Dale, Jedidiah
Dozier, Crystal (Wichita State University), Angelina Perrotti (Arkansas Tech University) and Elayne Rye (Wichita State
University)
[8]
Effects of Acetolysis on Starch Granules
The ability to co-currently analyze multiple microfossils from the same paleoecological or archaeological sample would allow for
faster and multi-evidenced analyses. However, most microfossils require chemical processing in order to become identifiable under
different types of microscopy; acetolysis is commonly employed in palynological study. We present the effects of acetolysis on four
starch taxa. Acetolysis differentially effects starch granule morphology. While all of the native (undamaged) starches were unaltered
from acetolysis, the exterior texture of two ground (damaged) starch taxa were further impacted after acetolysis. Acetolysis did not
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  146
significantly impact starch size measurements. The capacity to conduct starch analysis from acetolyzed samples is discussed for
archaeological and paleoecological study.
Dozier, Crystal [198] see Haley, Cambria
Drake, Lee [5] see Davis, Mary
Drake, Lee [203] see Kelly, Nigel
Drake, Stacy (Field Museum), Lauri Thompson (Center for Archaeological and Tropical Studies) and Julie Saul (Center for
Archaeological and Tropical Studies)
[53]
Exploring Ritual through Mortuary Practices and Community Influence on Burials from Northwest Belize
The practice of burying the dead is often interpreted by anthropologists as one that is imbued with social meaning. Within Maya
archaeology, mortuary data is used to inform interpretations of the social and economic standing of both the decedent and the
greater community within which the burial is located. Using aggregate data from approximately 150 human burials recovered
throughout the Three Rivers Region of northwest Belize, this paper considers the ways in which data for mortuary ritual may inform
conceptions of social and economic practices of the region’s ancient Maya inhabitants. The authors start with a broad, interregional
introduction of common mortuary characteristics encountered from burials that represent 2000 years of Maya occupation at 12
archaeological sites. The focus then narrows to explore burials from the small hinterland community of Medicinal Trail. With its
multiple household groups representing varying time periods, Medicinal Trail serves as a great case-study for investigations of
possible social, economic, and ritual influences behind shifting treatments of the dead. By emphasizing holistic mortuary data from
both large- and small-scale settings, the authors hope to contribute to conversations of changes and fluctuations in socio-cultural
beliefs, ritual practices, and economic standing of Maya communities through time and space.
Drake, Stacy (Field Museum)
[153]
Discussant
Drake, Stacy (Field Museum)
[218]
Moderator
Dreibrodt, Stefan [85] see Martini, Sarah
Drew, Brooke (Indiana State University/Cardno)
[167]
Coffins, Burial Cases, and Caskets: Coffin Hardware and Other Material Culture from a Nineteenth-Century Indiana Cemetery
The number of archaeologically excavated historic period cemeteries has increased significantly in recent years. Due to the hard
work of many dedicated scholars, we now not only have robust chronologies for nineteenth century mortuary material culture, but
we have a more nuanced understanding of the beautification of death movement that prompted the proliferation of decorative coffin
fittings. The coffin hardware recovered during the Bethel Cemetery Relocation Project is indicative of a community that, though
small and rural in nature, was heavily influenced by this movement. This assemblage includes a surprisingly varied collection of
handles, thumbscrews, and coffin plaques as well as other ornamental fittings typical of the period. Useful in establishing likely dates
of interment for unmarked burials, these materials allow us to contextualize mortuary behavior in this community through time.
Additionally, and perhaps more importantly, these temporal data make it possible to identify individuals whose markers have been
lost or misplaced. These identifications are important not only to the archaeologists investigating the cemetery but also to the
descendant community that has been actively involved in its relocation. Other artifact categories like clothing-related items, personal
adornment, and personal items, though far less numerous and varied, will also be discussed.
[167]
Chair
Drew, Brooke 167] see Herzog, Hunter
Drosou, Konstantina [212] see Harvey, Virginia
Drucker, Dorothée [162] see Wong, Gillian
Druggan, Patrick (Penn State University)
[264]
The Bounty of Woodland Ohio: Reconstructing Resource Distributions through Time and Their Implications for Subsistence and
Settlement
Ohio’s Woodland societies have long attracted archaeological attention due to the magnificent scale and complexity of their
ceremonial landscape; however, advances in the understanding of their subsistence and settlement systems have largely lagged
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     147
behind those of their ceremonial sphere. This has been particularly hampered by limited habitation excavation and potential low
visibility of these sites. This paper synthesizes available paleoenvironmental data and uses species distribution modeling to assess
diachronic trends in the distribution and availability of economically important plants. Distributional changes are reviewed with
respect to maximum entropy modeling of habitation locations and recovered paleoethnobotanical data in order to correlate
environmental parameters with the adaptive strategies embodied in settlement patterns and subsistence economies. This paper
closes by discussing uncertainties related to presently available data.
Duarte, Ricardo (Eduardo Mondlane University-CAIRIM) and Yolanda Duarte (Eduardo Mondlane University-CAIRIM)
[273]
Mozambican Maritime Landscapes of Slaving and Exchange: New Directions
This paper focuses on ongoing and emergent archaeological investigations that are opening new vistas on Mozambique Island’s
global maritime interactions over the last millennium. Providing a brief overview of the program of collaboration between the Slave
Wrecks Project and Eduardo Mondlane University that investigates submerged sites in conjunction with terrestrial ones in order to
build a picture of an evolving “maritime landscape of slaving and exchange”, this presentation will highlight recent findings on two of
these sites which offer different levels of resolution on Mozambique’s global maritime past: an “Arringa” in the remote Tete interior
from which slaves were funneld through the Island into both Atlantic and Indian Ocean trades at the end of the eighteenth century;
and a site on the Island itself that is recalibrating our understanding of over a millennium of Mozambican trade and social interaction
across the Indian, and later Atlantic, Oceans.
Duarte, Ricardo [273] see Lubkemann, Stephen
Duarte, Trever (Kamehameha Schools), Jon Tulchin (Kamehameha Schools) and Charmaine Wong (Bernice Pauahi Bishop
Museum)
[186]
Nā Makau o Wai’ahukini (The Fishhooks of Wai’ahukini)
Located in Pakini Iki ahupua’a (traditional land division) of Hawai’i Island, Wai’ahukini Village is nestled in a shoreline kipuka (void
between lava flows). The wealth of fishhook and faunal remains found at Wai’ahukini Rockshelter (H8)—a dwelling site within the
village complex—indicates that this location was used extensively for fishhook processing. Initially occupied in the fourteenth
century, Wai’ahukini Rockshelter was utilized by traditional Hawaiian tool makers to craft a range of shell and bone fishhooks that
exhibit an evolution in style from notched to knobbed shafts. The presence of metal fishhooks in the assemblage also reveals that
the site was still being used following European contact. The collection of over 1,000 fishhooks recovered, as well as faunal remains
in the form of fish bones, reflect the diversity of fish caught in this region which spans 500 years. This display was created by the
Spring 2018 cohort of the Kamehameha Schools (KS)-Bishop Museum archaeology collections internship program. The program
assists with updating current curation standards of Bishop Museum’s archaeology collections, focusing on materials that were
collected from KS’ ancestral landholdings. Program outcomes highlight a commitment to stewarding koehana (artifacts) for future
generations and support of career pathways in cultural resource management.
Duarte, Trever [262] see Filimoehala, Darby
Duarte, Yolanda [273] see Duarte, Ricardo
Dubied, Morgane [17] see Selden Jr., Robert
Dubois, Jonathan (Cal State San Bernardino)
[127]
Linked by the Living Land: Cacao as a Relational Agent in Intercontinental Interactions during the Formative Era
Recent studies have demonstrated that cacao, an economically important plant with an established symbolic and ceremonial
program surrounding it in Classic Mesoamerica, was likely domesticated in Northwestern South America. This paper will explore the
relationship between symbolism relating to cacao in both places through an examination of iconographic representations in South
America that precede the appearance of similar images in Mesoamerica, where the iconographic corpus is better understood. I
propose that an intercontinental network of interaction existed during the Formative that featured not only the exchange of material
goods like cacao, maize, and spondylus, but also the knowledge of how to better integrate them into the social and ceremonial lives
of the peoples who adopted them. This network would have been facilitated by shared ontological understandings that were
relational and that included a recognition of diverse “other-than-human” beings, including the plants and animals being exchanged,
who were agents capable of acting on their own behalf. They would have required not only the particular environmental conditions
needed to thrive that we acknowledge today, but as relational entities they would also have needed certain ceremonies, offerings,
and other practices intended to honor their role in a changing cosmological landscape.
Dubois, Katherine (University of New Hampshire) and Amy Michael (University of New Hampshire)
[212]
Reconstructing Migration to Caesarea Maritima: Bioarchaeological Analyses of Adult and Child Burials Using Strontium Isotopes
Caesarea Maritima, a long-term habitation site in the geopolitical borders of Israel, was originally built for Roman occupation. Muslim
conquest and subsequent re-fortification of the site by Crusaders contributes to its complex mortuary practices. Salvage operations
in 1980 yielded hundreds of commingled and primary burials. Currently, University of New Hampshire and Michigan State University
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   148
curate the Caesarea Maritima skeletal collection comprised of individuals of varied religious and ethnic identities. The purpose of
this research was to determine the geographic origin of individuals in the collection. The individuals were classified Christian, Muslim
or Crusader by burial position, but because there are few original notes regarding mortuary ritual and religious affiliation (and grave
goods were separated from individuals during excavation), little is known about these peoples beyond basic biological profiles. The
signature/abundance of strontium isotopes in sampled teeth was analyzed and compared to existing isotope maps of Israel. Using a
micro-spatial sampling method on the permanent incisors and second molars revealed more refined information about specific ages
of migration. The results demonstrated that individuals were of mixed origin. This research increased understanding of the lives of
the twelfth century individuals and provided the first bioarchaeological study of them in 35 years.
Dudgeon, John (Idaho State University, CAMAS)
[237]
The Empirical Standard: Creating Archaeological Explanations That Are Both Data-Driven and Testable
It has been nearly 20 years since the award of Hector Neff’s NSF archaeometry grant, “What [More] Can LA-ICP-MS Do for
Archaeology?” While small by current funding standards, this grant paved the way for a generation of archaeologists to confidently
ask empirically-testable research questions about archaeological materials. From geochemical and biogeochemical provenance to
environmental formation process studies and more, this visiting researcher program focused on access to analytical tools to address
these questions, but also was driven by an overriding concern for the reliability and validity of archaeological data created by these
tools and how the result is utilized to test archaeological hypotheses. A review of the literature either created by or informed by the
research program of Hector Neff demonstrates a clear and consistent application of an empirical standard underpinning an interest
in creating archaeological and anthropological explanations of more general relevance in the field. Far from being a mere
“technician” of archaeological method, Neff’s legacy of theoretical and methodological contributions demonstrate the importance of
precise and accurate articulation of empirical data with models for explaining human behavior and observations of change in the
archaeological material record.
Dudgeon, John [240] see Blatt, Samantha
Dudgeon, John [236] see Kumm, Ethan
Dudgeon, John [270] see Peterson, Kateea
Dudgeon, John [120] see Rakowski, Rebekah
Dudgeon, John [80] see Simmons, Wilson
Dudley, Meghan (University of Oklahoma)
[65]
Archaic House Pits in the Rocky Mountains: What Do We Know about Them Today?
Pit structures (frequently referred to as “house pits” or “pit houses”) occur throughout the Central and Southern Rocky Mountains
during the Archaic era (8,600–1,350 BP). Despite their long tenure in the archaeological record and despite being the only evidence
for permanent Rocky Mountain hunter-gatherer shelters during that time, the most recent synthesis was compiled by Lane Shields
for a master’s thesis in 1998. Based on a literature review and records search, this poster updates Shields’s synthesis, focusing on
pit structures documented over the past 20 years and new trends in their interpretation.
Dudley, Meghan [97] see Newton, Kathryn
Duffy, Lisa (University of Florida)
[150]
Metabolomics in the Study of Ground Stone Tools
Archaeological ground stone tools used for food processing have proven to be rich sources of residues, in particular microbotanicals
such as pollen, phytoliths, and starch grains. This data adds to the studies of tool function, foodways, and other lines of
archaeological inquiry. To date, ground stone has not been the target of chemical residue analysis, specifically metabolomic
analysis via liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS) in the pursuit of ancient food residues. For this study, ground stone
artifacts from ancient Maya sites in Belize and Guatemala were evaluated to determine whether this type of organic residue analysis
is successful in recovering chemical signatures. UHPLC-HRMS was utilized and a variety of metabolites of interest were identified.
Compounds recovered included carbohydrates, alkaloids, fatty acids, and other metabolites with the potential to inform on a variety
of food resources. These results demonstrate the utility of ground stone artifacts as potential resources for recovery of metabolites
important to the study of ancient foodways.
Duffy, Lisa [54] see Emery, Kitty
Duffy, Paul [135] see Boric, Dusan
Dufresne, Philippe [24] see Lanos, Philippe
Duggins, Julie (PaleoWest)
[193]
Educating Politicians: Outreach and Advocacy behind the Front Lines
PaleoWest demonstrates leadership in outreach through political advocacy at the local, state, and federal levels of lawmaking.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   149
Taking action on multiple levels and working behind the scenes, we shape public policy to meet industry needs. This paper will
discuss examples of our efforts and provide a blueprint for other CRM professionals to make similar contributions. Successes at the
local ordinance level in Florida have been realized through engagement with commissioners and the mayor. PaleoWest lobbied
Congress to provide adequate funding to the nation’s largest Federally-funded archaeological project, resulting in the New Mexico
Navajo Water Settlement Technical Corrections Act. Nationwide advocacy aims to improve legislation and procedures impacting
archaeological consulting. In contrast to outreach “on the front lines,” which often aims to reach interested members of the public,
retirees, and the next generation, political advocacy represents outreach focused on decision-makers who shape public policy.
Policy-oriented outreach occurs through strategic placement of ideas via formal and informal work with politicians, ground-level
movers and shakers, and other professionals in archaeology. Through concerted efforts, such as the examples provided in this
paper, measurable strides have been made to mold local codes, state laws, and nationwide regulation in favor of our profession’s
goals.
Duggins, Ryan (Bureau of Archaeological Research) and Heather Walsh-Haney (Florida Gulf Coast University)
[18]
Inundated Wet-Site Archaeology: Manasota Key Offshore and the Future of Submerged Precontact Archaeology on the Continental
Shelf
Delicate precontact archaeological materials located within stratified sediments withstood Holocene sea level rise and survived
thousands of years in the Gulf of Mexico. Manasota Key Offshore (8SO7030) is a Middle Archaic mortuary pond that rests in the
nearshore waters of Sarasota County, Florida. Archaeological investigations documented the preservation of prehistoric organic
materials including worked wood, cordage, and the remains of at least 11 individuals (including prenatal, juvenile, adult and geriatric
adults). Research at Manasota Key Offshore focused on identifying the boundaries of the inundated paleopond and determining the
extent and preservation of archaeological material. This unique site provides a window into Florida’s changing landscapes,
particularly in relation to prehistoric and contemporary sea level rise and subsequent human responses. The Manasota Key
Offshore site contains an abundance of in-situ archaeological material, challenging generations of archaeological attitudes that
questioned the survival of submerged sites on the continental shelf and the benefit of their study. This research has the potential to
guide state and federal cultural resource managers in the identification and protection of submerged cultural resources located
across the country’s continental shelves.
[18]
Chair
Duguid, Danielle and Jake Lulewicz (Washington University, St. Louis)
[77]
Using Elevation and the Floodplain to Analyze the Settlement and Abandonment of Sites in the Lower Illinois River Valley
Humans living in the Lower Illinois River Valley have always had their lives impacted by the waterways that cut through the valley.
By examining the settlement patterns of different populations through time, we can view a glimpse of their relationship with these
bodies of water. Utilizing location data in relation to the Lower Illinois River, I have analyzed changing patterns of occupation and
continuity of sites. This was accomplished by using the site elevation, occupation and abandonment, and number of sites in the
floodplain for each period to identify changing patterns through time. Results show how groups were moving in relation to altitude
and the floodplain, including evidence that precolumbian occupation periods consistently abandon sites of higher elevations and
continue to live at lower levels, while in post-contact occupation periods this trend reverses.
Duke, C. Trevor (University of Florida), Neill Wallis (Florida Museum of Natural History) and Ann Cordell (Florida Museum
of Natural History)
[123]
Networks of Embodied Practice: Personhood, the Body, and Potting Skill in the North American Southeast
Archaeologists over the last two decades have become increasingly interested in the relationship between personhood and the
human body. Bodily engagement with the material world can create and reproduce different kinds of social understandings, and is a
means by which persons make subjectivity durable, transmissible, and experiential. While case studies of personhood have
generally been beneficial for the field of archaeology, few have focused on how differences in skill level can impact self-
categorization. For instance, part-time potters may not self-identify specifically as “potters.” Conversely, specialized mortuary potters
that received years, perhaps decades, of hands-on training are much more likely to identify with their craft. We use metrics and
value scores to evaluate differences in potting skill from Late Woodland (ca. AD 650–1050) and Mississippian (ca. AD 1050–1550)
mortuary contexts in the Tampa Bay region. We also employ petrography and Neutron Activation Analysis (NAA) to identify where
across the southeastern landscape these differences in skill occurred. We argue that while specialized mortuary potters were
present during both the Late Woodland and Mississippian Periods, they put their skill to use for different purposes due to changes in
social networks, and thus became fundamentally different kinds of social subjects.
[123]
Chair
Duke, C. Trevor [123] see Sorresso, Domenique
Duke, Daron [5] see Davis, Mary
Duke, Daron [8] see Rice, Sarah
Duke, Guy [257] see Rowe, Sarah
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  150
Dull, Robert
[90]
Discussant
Dumouchel, Laurence [27] see Pobiner, Briana
Dunbar, James (Aucilla Research Institute Inc.) and Jessica Cook-Hale (Emory University)
[30]
Corrosion and Weathering in Lithics from Submerged Contexts: Problems, Potentials, and Future Ways Forward
Lithics from both submerged and terrestrial contexts are often corroded and weathered. It is clear that postdepositional conditions
are responsible for these changes, but it is not clear if the geochemistry of this corrosion/weathering can be characterized with
enough detail to link lithic artifacts to specific conditions such as a sediment type or even watershed. We present here a study for
proof of concept using scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectrometry to test a large sample suite of lithics from
submerged sites, both freshwater and marine. Results are mixed but suggest potential future ways forward for analysis of
postdepositional processes using these corrosion/weathering materials.
Duncan, James [47] see Diaz-Granados, Carol
Duncan, Joshua (Texas State University) and Todd Ahlman (Texas State University)
[215]
European Ceramics in the Caribbean: A Glimpse of Globalization during the Colonial Era
The Caribbean island of St. Eustatius (Statia) was a free port for much of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries where the forces
of globalization, such as people, resources, commodities, and ideas moved unceasingly, altering the world as it was and pushing it
closer toward the world we know today. Through the Colonial period, Statia profited from the successes of the Dutch “Golden Age”,
the Industrial Revolution in Britain, and the American Revolution, and once housed goods from around the world in its 200+
warehouses. Statia has remained largely untouched by tourism and development and the island’s archaeological record remains
mostly intact, meaning that it is literally covered with colonial era artifacts. This poster examines ceramic artifacts from recent
investigations at an industrial sugar complex to understand the origins of modern globalization and mass-consumerism as they
emerged in the region and shifted throughout the Colonial period. Ceramic assemblages from Dutch and British Caribbean sites
were compared to the Statian artifacts to address whether any differences or similarities existed between Dutch and British
consumerism during this period.
Duncan, Marjorie [23] see Lohse, Jon
Duncan, Neil [4] see Young, Danielle
Dungan, Katherine (Arizona State University)
[136]
Chair
Dungan, Katherine (Arizona State University)
[156]
Great Kivas, Religion, and Society in the Mogollon Highlands after AD 1000
Great kivas, with their long history of archaeological investigation and massive size, are both the best-known and most obviously
communal of Mogollon non-domestic structures. In this paper, I consider these buildings specifically as “religious” architecture and
argue that grappling with anthropological conceptualizations of religion can add new dimensions to our understanding of great kivas,
their artifact assemblages, and the—potentially political—place of these structures in their society. This discussion draws in
particular on a study of great kivas in the Mogollon Highlands after around AD 1000, including museum collections research that
demonstrates previously unrecognized patterns in great kiva assemblages.
Dunne, Jennifer [26] see Crabtree, Stefani
Dunning, Nicholas (University of Cincinnati)
[128]
Redundancy, Restoration, and Resilience: Ancient Maya Civilization’s Crash and Recovery in the Terminal Preclassic
The Terminal Preclassic period in Maya Civilization was a time of considerable change brought on in part by environmental
degradation and drought. Within the Elevated Interior Region (EIR) problems were especially acute due to the reservoir effect, a
cycle of dependency and vulnerability associated with the regional water management system. Many EIR cities declined and some
were abandoned. Recovery into the Classic period was accomplished in part by stabilization and restoration of degraded soilscapes,
and by adding greater redundancy to water collection and storage systems—a strategy that would ultimately see the reservoir effect
again play havoc in EIR urban centers in the Terminal Classic.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  151
Dunning, Nicholas [20] see Carr, Christopher
Dunning, Nicholas [206] see Luzzadder-Beach, Sheryl
Dunsmore, Erin (Tennessee Valley Authority)
[208]
Discussant
Durand, Karen [143] see Weaver, Brendan
Durham, Jordan, Elizabeth Hagan (University of Louisville) and Amanuel Beyin (University of Louisville)
[36]
Evaluating the Performance of Hand-Thrown Spears Experimentally by Controlling Shaft Length
The invention of hand-thrown spears technology displayed a cognitively-based cultural invention that allowed humans to hunt prey
from a distance. The technological innovation of hand-thrown spears allowed for humans to reduce the risk of fatal injuries when
encountering dangerous prey. This project will replicate projectile spear throwing to compare the variation in shaft length among
groups to determine how the different distances achieved can be indicative of shaft preference. Our experiment will re-create hand-
thrown spears and test distance achieved comparable to variations in shaft length, lethality, and accuracy. Our methodological
approach will comprise of groups of experienced and non-experienced throwers of various height and weight that will throw spears
at mid-range prey, model deer, to control effectiveness of hand-thrown spears from various distances and shaft lengths. Hand-
thrown spears have been traditionally made of perishable materials, such as wood, and therefore will not remain intact in the
archaeological record. This experiment will contribute to the broader debate whether variation in shaft length affects distance
achieved. Variation in hand-thrown spear length could affect prehistoric decisions of what ecosystem to inhabit—due to availability
of hafting material, apt size prey for projectile technology use, and the environmental suitability to maintain human fitness.
Dussubieux, Laure (Field Museum of Natural History)
[249]
Glass Trade in the Indian Ocean: A View from Southeast Asia
Glass beads are long-distance trade items that are found all over the Indian Ocean. They appear in Southeast Asia around the
middle of the first millennium BC. Looking at the elemental composition of the glass beads, it is possible to identify connections
between Southeast Asia and the rest of the Indian Ocean, with important changes through time. Early on, we observe that South
and Southeast Asia form an exchange sphere of its own. Toward the end of the first millennium AD, a shift occurs and a larger
network appears with similar glass beads manufactured in South Asia found in Southeast Asia and Africa. Recent research is
showing that, later, in the second millennium AD, the evolution of this network is visible in both regions through similar changes in
glass bead types. We will discuss the implications of our research in terms of trade but also in terms of glass and glass bead
production around the Indian Ocean.
[249]
Chair
Dussubieux, Laure [249] see Sarathi, Akshay
Duwe, Sam (University of Oklahoma)
[148]
Nuute’owingeh: Complicating our Understanding of Historic Period Pueblo Settlement in the Northern Rio Grande
Between the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the settlement patterns of the Pueblo world of northern New Mexico fundamentally
shifted. The ‘abandonment’ of much of the Pueblo’s traditional homeland, and the subsequent coalescence of people in large
villages along the Rio Grande and its major tributaries, has long sparked interest from archaeologists and historians. Was this
movement the continuation of a centuries-long process of Pueblo coalescence, or rather a response to early Spanish contact and
colonization? If the latter, what kinds of negotiations and tensions arose in the contestation of landscape between these disparate
peoples? And, how have Pueblo people maintained ties with their sacred places in the face of dramatic changes in land access and
ownership? I explore the complicated history of Nuute’owingeh, an ancestral Tewa village located in the Rio Chama valley that was
until recently though to be lost to development. The village offers a unique opportunity to address these questions because it
sporadically housed Tewa people from the thirteenth through eighteenth centuries, spanning Prehispanic time, the period of Spanish
contact and initial colonization, and the Pueblo Revolt and its aftermath. I discuss new data from aerial reconnaissance of
architecture and the analysis pottery and lithic material culture.
Dye, David (University of Memphis)
[166]
Mississippian and Oneota Interaction in the Lower Mississippi Valley
Oneota interactions with Mississippians are typically characterized by violence and warfare, often resulting in population
replacement, with Oneota people forcing Mississippians from their territories. Mississippians in the Lower Mississippi Valley may
have comprised a sufficiently large territorial bloc to have successfully thwarted Oneota population movements and aggression. In
this paper I suggest Mississippian-Oneota interactions during the Early Contact period were sedimented in rituals resembling the
calumet ceremonies of the eighteenth century. Oneota motifs on Lower Mississippi Valley ceramic bottles and the presence of disk-
style pipes, offer compelling evidence of ritual-based protocols that allowed mutually beneficial interactions to take place between
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      152
neighboring Mississippian and Oneota people.
Dye, Thomas (University of Hawai`i)
[24]
Reasoning between the Lines: Archaeological Application of Allen’s Interval Algebra
A technique for inductive correlation of time intervals represented by archaeological contexts on separate lines of a Harris matrix is
described and illustrated. Unlike two distinct contexts on the same line of the Harris matrix, which represent intervals that must be
earlier and later than one another, contexts on separate lines potentially represent concurrent intervals. R software is used to
explore application of Allen’s interval algebra to the indefinite intervals yielded by Bayesian calibration. Potential benefits include (1)
precise description of the relationship between intervals yielded by dated contexts on separate lines of the Harris matrix and (2)
using the algebra to infer the relationship between an interval represented by a dated context on one line of the matrix and an
interval represented by an undated context on another line with a dated context.
[24]
Chair
Dye, Thomas [24] see Moody, Bryony
Dyke, Arthur [64] see Szpak, Paul
Dylla, Emily (Texas Historical Commission)
[239]
Men of the Mission: Creating and Contesting Male Personhood on the Last Spanish Colonial Frontier
Gender roles were a particularly visible aspect of Spanish missionization in Alta California. Part of the worldview Franciscan
missionaries attempted to impart to Indigenous neophyte communities was a particular model of male personhood, rooted in
medieval European ideology. Indigenous neophytes and non-ecclesiastical colonizers embodied alternative models to this, however.
This paper examines how male personhood was constructed and contested within the pluralistic mission community of San Antonio
de Padua. I examine and compare two all-male mission households occupied respectively by unmarried neophytes and colonizing
soldiers assigned to guard the mission.
Ea, Darith [168] see Stark, Miriam
Eagle, Jon (Standing Rock Sioux Tribe)
[44]
Discussant
Earley, Caitlin (University of Nevada, Reno)
[265]
Warfare, Sacrifice, and the Captive Body in Classic Maya Sculpture
In the Late Classic period, images of captives on carved stone monuments populated ancient Maya site centers. Usually described
as war prisoners, these captives appear bound, subjugated, and downtrodden, often by powerful kings. In this paper I examine how
images of captives affected the lived experience of warfare for ancient Maya people. Based on a study of captive imagery from
throughout the Maya area, I incorporate art historical, archaeological, and historical data to argue that depictions of captives reveal
information about how people prepared for and responded to warfare. In particular, I disentangle the link between captivity and
sacrifice, examining how captives—and images of captives—were key players in administering the outcomes of war. Examining the
defeated rather than the victorious, this paper opens up a fuller range of human experience in the ancient Maya world, revealing
how warfare-related imagery affected the lives of diverse individuals in Classic Maya centers.
Earley, Frank and Thomas Huffman (University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg)
[60]
Puebloan Rock Art and the Spanish Peaks, Southeastern Colorado
Most researchers see the Sopris archaeological entity, near Trinidad, Colorado, as hunter-gatherers influenced by Pueblo people
through trade. We argue that Sopris people were Eastern Puebloan and probably spoke a Tanoan language. The Eastern Puebloan
worldview provides the context to interpret rock art in the Sopris area. Ethnographically, origin myths provided the charter for social,
religious, and spatial organization. Among other things, sets of twin deities (one for each moiety) emerged from a sacred lake and
discovered mountains in the four cardinal directions, which rose from the earth and were therefore igneous. The twin deities took
mud from the wet earth and created sedimentary hills and mesas which stand between the sacred mountains and the lake of origin.
These mountains were in a series of concentric zones that circumscribed the Eastern Pueblo world. The sacred mountains formed
the furthest zone (zone 4), and it was here that priests went to “earth navels” to ask the twin deities for rain. Other shrines located in
the hills (zone 3) were deer-earth navels where people asked for supernatural help with hunting. Rock art on the East Spanish Peak
northwest of Sopris and near the headwaters of the Purgatoire River are thus explicable.
Easton, Norm [198] see Grooms, Michael
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                               153
Eberl, Markus [232] see Johnson, Phyllis
Ebert, Claire (Northern Arizona University)
[128]
Resilience and Local Dietary Adaptations in the Protoclassic Maya Lowlands
Maya archaeologists are increasingly focused on understanding the factors that promoted resilience during the transition from the
Preclassic to Classic period (100 BC–AD 300). While many large centers declined, others flourished for another six to seven
centuries. This study brings together stable isotope paleo-dietary data from across the Maya lowlands to document this transition at
the individual level. These data indicate that by 900 BC, settled Maya farmers possessed broad subsistence strategies that focused
on both domesticated and wild foods. Wetter conditions beginning around 600 BC promoted reliance on maize as a staple crop, and
consequently the proliferation of large centers in the Petén and Pasion regions of Guatemala. Individuals living in northern and
western Belize possessed broader diets that also included marine and freshwater resources. This diversity of foods may have
helped to absorb shocks to maize production in the context of severe multi-century drought between ~AD 100 and 300. People
living in some parts the Petén, which lacks large bodies of surface water, were likely more vulnerable to impacts on drought-
intolerant crops like maize. These conditions may have contributed to the decline of many major centers in this area of the lowlands
after AD 100.
Ebert, Claire [168] see Awe, Jaime
Ebert, Claire [130] see Fitzmaurice, Rosamund
Ebert, Claire [230] see Hoggarth, Julie
Ebert, Claire [26] see Ortman, Scott
Ebert, Claire [158] see Watkins, Tia
Ebert, Julia (German Archaeological Institute), Paul Cheetham (Bournemouth University), Friedrich Lüth (German
Archaeological Institute) and Behrens Anja (German Archaeological Institute)
[107]
An Early and Middle Neolithic Ritual Landscape in Northeast Germany: Survey and Excavations on Monumental Structures of the
Funnel Beaker Culture in Western Mecklenburg
In the framework of the Priority Program 1400 “Early Monumentality and Social Differentiation” funded by the German Research
Foundation, geophysical prospections, as well as excavations have been conducted on and around several Neolithic enclosures
and burial monuments in the region of Western Mecklenburg since 2009 by the German Archaeological Institute. The results of the
geomagnetic, as well as geoelectric and ground-penetrating radar surveys have served to enhance and complement aerial
photographs and LIDAR data, as well as to detect previously unknown structures in the landscape. At the same time, they also
highlight the challenges of interpreting magnetic data obtained in glacially formed landscapes. Subsequent excavations at selected
sites, such as the megalithic burial complex of Friedrichsruhe or the Gädebehn 10 ditch enclosure, have revealed detailed formation
histories and numerous material remains. The research results provide important new insights into the Early and Middle Neolithic
social and ritual landscape in this part of northeast Germany. They also serve to answer questions relating to the chronological
development of the Funnel Beaker Culture and cultural relations between the investigated sites and previously known, significant
sites in the region, such as the flat-grave cemetery of Ostorf-Tannenwerder.
Eche Vega, J. Eduardo [105] see Cuello del Pozo, Paloma
Eck, David [186] see Tsesmeli, Evangelia
Eckert, Suzanne [172] see MacFarland, Kathryn
Eckert, Suzanne [203] see Schaefer, Jonathan
Eddy, Zoe (Harvard University)
[41]
Indigenous Archaeology, the Seventh Generation
This symposium will highlight up and coming indigenous scholars’ work within the growing paradigm of indigenous archaeology.
Though archaeologists have begun to adopt and include indigenous practices in the field of archaeology, only recently have
indigenous people began to include their own cultural methods and practices as archaeologists. Growing on the foundational work
of scholars such as Joe Watkins and Sonya Atalay, this symposium will be a discussion of the future directions of indigneous
archaeology. My participation in this symposium will highlight the work being done in museums to create indigenous spaces as well
as use indigenous curatorial practices. I will discuss and examine how, while museums will never be fully decolonized, they can
serve as spaces of rupture, renegotiation, and reconciliation.
Edelstein, Beth (Cleveland Museum of Art), Adriana Rizzo (Metropolitan Museum of Art) and Sue Bergh (Cleveland
Museum of Art)
[258]
Investigation of Adhesive Resins on Wari Attributed Objects
Between AD 600 and 1000, the Wari created a civilization so complex that many today identify it as the ancient Andes’ first empire.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   154
Wari objects seem to have been coveted all over the region for their imagery, precious materials, fine execution, and affiliation with
Wari might. Among them are inlaid objects whose adhesives have not been well studied. This paper examines Wari objects in the
collection of the Cleveland Museum of Art and the Museum of Fine Arts Houston in the interest of identifying the resinous material
used to adhere shell to stone. These resins appear similar to the eye in color, luster and fracture and have a similar hardness. The
three samples are currently undergoing analysis with FT-IR, THM GC-MS and Py-GC-MS at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Initial
results revealed a similarity between one sample and a previously-analyzed though not yet identified resin found as a paint binder in
a group of Paracas ceramics (see Kriss et al, 2018).The potential for a commonality between these two groups of objects merits
further investigation for what it may reveal about the continuity of materials used for artistic production in Peru across centuries.
Edgar, Heather [80] see O’Donnell, Lexi
Edington, Stacy, Jessica Cerezo-Román (University of Oklahoma), Glenys McGowan (University of Queens), Brett Kaufman
(University of Illinois, Urbana) and Hans Barnard (Cotsen Institute of Archaeology)
[240]
Beyond Sacrifice: The Life Course of a Child from the Neo Punic Site Zita in Tunisia
Tophets are Phoenician and Punic cemeteries where infants and young children were possibly sacrificed, then cremated, placed in
urns, and ritually interred. However, the Zita tophet, near Zarzis, Tunisia, dating from ~100 BCE to 50/100 CE presents a more
complex picture allowing us to reconstruct a number of aspects of the life and death of the individuals. This study looks at the life
course of one of the individuals from the site to attempt to reconstruct some aspects of the individual’s life as well as how the
individual was treated after death by the community. The data used for this study include a reconstruction of the biological profile,
thermal alterations, and posthumous treatment of the body. These data suggest that the individual had chronic health problems and
significant investment and care by the community was placed in the funeral and burial. These insights will allow us to move beyond
questions of the presence or absence of infanticide and ultimately will result in a better understanding of these necropoleis.
Edwards, Briece (Confederated Tribes of Grand Ronde)
[116]
Discussant
Edwards, Nicolette (Southern Methodist University) and Mark McCoy (Southern Methodist University)
[77]
The Influence of Taphonomy on Gaps in Radiocarbon Dates: A User-Friendly GIS Model
Spatial gaps in the distribution of archaeological sites are often attributed to taphonomy. However, archaeologists rarely attempt to
test or quantify how variables such as rainfall may, or may not, be influencing preservation. This study focuses on providing a simple
way to assess the source of potential gaps within region radiocarbon data to avoid systemic errors in interpretations. Dated sites
across Holocene Southern Africa are classified by modern annual rainfall; a proxy for conditions potentially influencing the survival
of archaeological deposits. The procedure uses GIS software and Microsoft Excel as a straightforward, and open-sourced,
approach. While the results require full consideration of the location and context of the archaeological sites and/or region for
appropriate evaluation, contra what one would expect, our assessment suggests that there is no significant influence of rainfall on
survivability. This suggests that the spatial gaps in radiocarbon dating are due to another factor, or factors, such as population
density and/or biases in field survey. To check the quality of a radiocarbon dataset and avoid inaccurate interpretations more fully
will require re-examination based on alternative and multiple variables.
Edwards, Nicolette [22] see Lupo, Karen
Edwards, Richard (University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee) and Robert Jeske (University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee)
[264]
Motives, Migrations, and Middle Mississippians: Fort Ancient and Aztalan Case Studies
Material culture and bioarchaeological evidence indicates that people moved from the American Bottom into the Mississippi and
Crawfish River valleys of southern Wisconsin and the Ohio River Valley of Indiana and Ohio between AD 1050 and 1200. These
migrations, however, should not be seen as a unitary phenomenon. It appears that the American Bottom emigration to each
destination had different motives, timing, and demographics. This paper focuses on the settlement of Aztalan in southern Wisconsin
and multiple Fort Ancient settlements in the Ohio River Valley. Stable carbon isotope data indicate that, as a whole, the migrants
who are buried at Aztalan had a different socio-economic status than individuals who were buried in Ohio River Valley. While both
populations contain significant variation, we argue that Aztalan was settled by higher status families than the families that settled the
Ohio Valley. Migration to the different regions was likely motivated by different intragroup social and political dynamics following the
coalescence of population in the American Bottom circa AD 1000–1050. Understanding the range of motivations for departing the
American Bottom has significant implications for how these groups interacted with local Late Woodland populations and the nature
of culture change that ensued within these two different regions.
[264]
Chair
Edwards, Richard [264] see Jeske, Robert
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   155
Eeckhout, Peter
[200]
Inca Impact on the Site of Pachacamac: A Critical Reassessment of the Archaeological Evidence
The way in which the Inca Empire secured control of conquered areas shows great variations. Therefore highlighting the degree of
control, that is, the level of integration of regions and sites, has become one of the main objectives of most researchers working in
the imperial provinces. The famous site of Pachacamac, on the central coast of Peru, is no exception. If everyone agrees that it was
a major settlement within the Tahuantinsuyu, and that the changes brought by the Incas were important, there is currently no
consensus on the nature of these transformations, neither on the chronology of the monuments that evidence it. Examining the
various models that have been proposed since the end of the last century, it results that if all are based on archaeology,
interpretations vary greatly.
Eerkens, Jelmer [83] see Goring, Daniel
Effingham, Joseph (Idaho State University) and Samantha Blatt (Idaho State University)
[240]
Dental Morphology of the Prehistoric Chamorro, Guam
Dental morphology has a long history of use in understanding the biological distance and migrations of past populations. Though
distribution of the frequencies of morphological traits of teeth have been documented around the world, variation within Micronesia is
the least studied among the peoples of the Pacific, leaving peopling of the region the least understood. This project records dental
morphological traits from a collection of dental casts of pre-Spanish Chomorro remains from Guam in order to document the
peopling of Micronesia through their affinity to other known groups. A collection of 57 casts were scored for 21 non-metric traits of
dental crowns using rASUDAS protocols and software. Frequencies of traits were compared to other C.G. Turner II datasets and
diversity of traits within this sample were compiled. Higher frequencies of Carabelli’s cusp, protostylids, deflecting wrinkles, and cusp
7 were observed than expected. However, Chomorro affinity is consistent with Sundadonty of East Malay Archipelago and Ainu, but
their relationship to Philippine or Taiwan samples remains debatable. As knowledge of the dental morphology of living and
prehistoric Micronesians increases, the population history of the Pacific and its role in understanding worldwide patterns of migration
will be clarified.
Egan, Rachel (Front Range Community College, CU-Boulder)
[157]
Prehispanic Social Networks: The Case for Innovation and Adaption as Responses to Repeat, Catastrophic Eruptions in the Tilarán-
Arenal Region of Costa Rica
Scholars have long noted the plethora of ways past societies have responded to volcanic eruptions. However, too often the story
has been one of collapse and/or failure. Incorporating long time-scales has proved necessary for shifting focus to the innovative and
adaptive ways cultural groups have been able to not only withstand but often also thrive, in these catastrophic environments. This
paper will explore how modern technology can help us parse adaptions to the periodic volcanic eruptions which plagued the Tilarán-
Arenal region of Costa Rica. Through GIS and volcanic modeling, it is possible to predict, for past eruptions, the size and extent of
disturbance and the length of ecological recovery. Using these data, we can then begin to assess the relationship between cultural
patterns and the adoption of new behaviors, including the novelty of separating villages from cemeteries and other important places.
This occurs along with the simultaneous connection of multiple exogamous villages to each other through processional footpaths
which appeared starting around 500 BC. Perhaps most importantly, this paper will address what these cultural traditions mean in the
context of volcanic eruptions and if understanding them can be helpful for constructing resilience within contemporary populations in
the region.
Égüez, Natalia (AMBI Lab University of La Laguna [Spain]), Jean-Luc Houle (Western Kentucky University), Oula Seitsonen
(University of Oulu) and Jamsranjav Bayarsaikhan (National Museum of Mongolia)
[62]
Herbivore Dung Biomarkers: A Reference Collection for the Archaeology of Pastoral Domestic Spaces in Western and Central
Mongolia
Lipid biomarkers such as alkanes, fatty acids and sterols together with their stable carbon and hydrogen isotope ratios are
nowadays leading proxies for the identification of past climate variability, human activities and animal presence in a site. These can
be extracted from modern faeces, desiccated dung and soil sediments. When applied to geoarchaeological contexts, these
indicators reveal significant insights on past animal diet, land use and paleoenvironment. This paper presents lipid analyses of dung
pellets from five livestock species (i.e., goat, sheep, cattle, yak and horse) retrieved from modern contexts, as means for reference
collection for the better characterization of archaeological pastoral domestic deposits. Dung molecular fingerprints are compared to
sediments and well-preserved excrement pellets recovered from archaeological winter campsites located in Uvs and Arkhangai
provinces. Results show that husbandry management and local steppe palaeoenvironments can be tracked down through detailed
herbivore faecal characterization. We argue that mass spectrometry methods when applied to pastoral households help unveil
complexities of pastoral production systems in Mongolia and Central Asia. The research is part of the Western Mongolia
Archaeology Project (WKU and National Museum of Mongolia) with analyses carried out at the Archaeological Micromorphology and
Biomarkers Laboratory, University of La Laguna.
Égüez, Natalia [62] see Houle, Jean-Luc
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   156
Eichner, Katrina (University of Idaho)
[91]
Moderator
[91]
Discussant
Eichner, Katrina [165] see Eldredge, Kaitlyn
Eiselt, Sunday [17] see Etter, Bonnie
Eisenhofer, Raphel [100] see Weyrich, Laura
Ek, Jerald (Western Washington University)
[133]
Imported Imperialism: The Impact, Aftermath, and Lasting Political Legacy of Teotihuacan in the Maya Lowlands
The nature of Teotihuacan influence in the Maya Area has been a topic of enduring controversy. An increasingly large corpus of
evidence indicates direct military intervention at multiple cities in the Maya Lowlands starting in 378 CE. In the ensuing generations,
the Teotihuacan-affiliated Mutal Dynasty of Tikal exerted control over a network of vassals. Western Mesoamerican influence was
not limited to material culture but included new forms of political interaction and expansionist foreign policy. However, there has
been far less emphasis on the geopolitical impacts of the collapse of this western empire in the Maya Area. The decline of
Teotihuacan as a major power fomented hegemonic war, instigating lasting changes in the political landscape. The Kaanul state, a
dynasty with indigenous roots, would extend control over much of the Maya Area in the aftermath. Yet, this new geopolitical order
was built on enduring political structures which would be reproduced, modified, and perpetuated by kingdoms up to five centuries
after the end of direct Teotihuacan influence. The central thesis of this paper is that general historical trends in the Maya Area
reflected in local dynastic histories were embedded within broader pan-Mesoamerican geopolitical dynamics, including the rise and
fall of Teotihuacan.
Ekdahl, Amanda, Corina Kellner (Northern Arizona University), Kerry Thompson (Northern Arizona University), Ora Marek-
Martinez (Northern Arizona University) and Leah Mundell (Northern Arizona University)
[184]
NAGPRA’s Final Rule in Practice in U.S. Southwest Universities
Universities that house NAGPRA eligible collections have unique challenges and opportunities when repatriating human remains,
however, there is a lacuna in the academic literature surrounding these issues. I explore the policies of repatriation in three
universities to understand the ways in which university structure affects repatriation of Culturally Unidentifiable Human Remains
(CUHR). CUHR have historically been used to exploit loopholes in NAGPRA to continue research on Native American ancestors,
the 2010 Final Rule provided guidelines for repatriating those remains but there has been little examination of how this rule has
been put in effect practically. Using postcolonial/indigenous theory and legal pluralism, I asses how NAGPRA and the Final Rule are
understood and enacted in three universities in the U.S. Southwest, a region with a large American Indian population. Preliminary
ethnographic research suggests that the complex hierarchical university structure, curation challenges, and opaque funding for
NAGPRA compliance can hinder CUHR and NAGPRA policies in these institutions, which may be different than non-university
museums. Studies such as this highlight how structural context in university settings affect NAGPRA and the Final Rule compliance,
especially in the U.S. Southwest.
Eldredge, Kaitlyn (University of Idaho) and Katrina Eichner (University of Idaho)
[165]
Teacup Sherds and Rifle Cartridges: Defining Frontier Consumption Patterns and Daily Life as Practiced at Fort Davis, Texas
This paper analyzes consumption patterns and the intricacies of daily life in the context of a nineteenth-century U.S. military fort.
The authors discuss an assemblage recovered during a surface survey conducted on private property in Fort Davis, Texas. The
sheet midden materials discussed were deposited by military personnel from the mid-1880s through the fort’s official abandonment
in 1891. Consideration of domestically and institutionally produced refuse offers a unique perspective into the construction of an
American presence on the Western American frontier. Ceramics, glass, and various metals are used to consider how daily practice
reinforced ethno-racial, gendered, and national identities among residents at the fort. Analysis of these materials contributes to our
understanding of how the Western American frontier was historically defined, and how that definition is interpreted today. Of
particular interest are the experiences of Black enlisted soldier, women, and Hispanic civilians, and the changing ways in which
these communities related to one another and to the White, Euro-American community on a shifting frontier landscape.
Elgart, Alison (Florida Gulf Coast University) and Heather Walsh-Haney (Florida Gulf Coast University)
[188]
In Search of MIA from the Greatest Generation: Florida Gulf Coast University Partners with the Defense POW/MIA Accounting
Agency (DPAA) to Bring U.S. Servicemen Home
Florida Gulf Coast University (FGCU), a 20-year-old state school, recently formed a partnership with the Defense POW/MIA
Accounting Agency (DPAA). In June 2019, FGCU participated in its first mission, which was the investigation of a WWII aircraft
crash in Germany. For FGCU, this was the culmination of several initial endeavors. It was the first joint effort between the
Departments of Justice Studies and Social Sciences, where undergraduate students from the Anthropology Program with
archaeological experience and graduate students in forensic anthropology both participated. Our crew of 10 students, two
professors, a forensics lab manager, a CRM archaeologist, a linguist, a DPAA EOD, and an Air Force medic worked together very
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     157
efficiently. Methods included traditional archaeological and forensic archaeology techniques, with an emphasis on metal detection.
Our team was the first to excavate this crash site. Although we had the whole team on site for only about three weeks, we
excavated 320 m2 and investigated three possible bomb or impact craters within the site. We identified large amounts of small
aircraft wreckage and collected possible material evidence that has the potential to correlate the site to a known loss incident.
Eller, Andrea [242] see Pott, Laura
Elliot Jones, Justin [37] see Zhao, Yu-chao
Elliott, Michelle (Université Paris 1, Panthéon-Sorbonne) and Yoanna Herrera-Santos (Université Paris1, Panthéon-
Sorbonne)
[133]
Reconstructing Land-Use and Socio-environmental Change at Epiclassic Chicoloapan Using Plant Macroremain Analyses
The site of Chicoloapan Viejo represents a long-term occupation that spanned multiple cultural phases, each associated with
changes in population size, settlement pattern, and socio-political organization. These changes were also accompanied by climatic
fluctuations of varying intensity. This socio-environmental evolution through time would have thus necessitated adaptability in
subsistence and resource management strategies, which in turn would have produced significant impacts on the landscape in and
around the site. In this paper, we present the results of paleoethnobotanical analyses of seed and charcoal remains from several
Epiclassic excavation contexts at Chicoloapan. These include potential agricultural zones and various domestic areas associated
with both elite and commoner households. Through comparisons among these contexts, we are able to create an inventory of the
wild and domesticated plant resources that were used at Epiclassic Chicoloapan and to infer the range of ecological and anthropic
zones that were present at this time. We are also able to identify certain practices of plant collection and cultivation, as well as to
explore how these activities may have differed throughout the site and according to households’ socio-economic status.
[133]
Chair
Ellis, Grace (Colorado State University), Jonathan Haws (University of Louisville), Michael Benedetti (University of North
Carolina Wilmington) and Lukas Friedl (University of West Bohemia)
[36]
Middle Paleolithic Human Occupation in Level JJ at Lapa do Picareiro, Portugal
We analyze artifact distribution in Level JJ at Lapa do Picareiro, a Middle Paleolithic cave site located in the Serras de Aire
mountain range in central Portugal, in order to gain insight into human occupation and site formation dynamics. Documenting and
observing cultural horizons in cave environments can be extremely difficult due to complex sedimentary processes. However,
analysis of high-resolution spatial data allows researchers to identify lenses of human occupation and reconstruct human
occupational patterns in environments where complex formation processes exist. Level JJ represents a thick, homogeneous
stratigraphic level that dates to around 40–47 kya. High resolution spatial data on Level JJ has been collected since 2014 when
extensive excavation of this level began. Preliminary analysis of intra-level spatial patterning of artifacts from Level JJ has revealed
multiple cultural horizons within the same stratigraphic unit, suggesting human occupation was sporadic and short-lived during this
time period. This research contributes toward an understanding of human occupation and site formation processes at Lapa do
Picareiro and more broadly, to human use of caves in the Middle Paleolithic.
Ellis, Grace [36] see Carvalho, Milena
Ellis, Olivia (University of Arizona), John Walden (University of Pittsburgh), Ian Roa (University of Pittsburgh), Michael
Biggie (Los Angeles Maritime Institute) and Rafael Guerra (University of New Mexico)
[178]
Understanding Diachronic Patterns of Feasting Related to the Development of Political Complexity at the Late Classic Maya Polity
of Lower Dover, Belize
Feasting is considered to have played an important role in socio-political relations in Classic Maya society. Both elites and
commoners took part in these public events to varying extents, and for different reasons. Feasts are described as promoting social
cohesion, and perpetuating social inequalities through displays of wealth and status. For these reasons, understanding patterns of
feasting within a polity and on different hierarchical levels of society can provide a better understanding of Classic Maya socio-
political dynamics. This poster addresses the extent to which the emergence of the Late Classic (AD 600–900) Maya polity of Lower
Dover, Belize impacted patterns of feasting across the immediate settlement. Analysis of faunal and ceramic assemblages from
commoner and intermediate elite contexts from three neighborhoods assess how social actors at multiple scales of the political
hierarchy staged feasts and how this changed following the rise of the Lower Dover polity. The poster then draws on
ethnographically documented examples to explain the changing patterns evident in assemblages associated with feasting.
Ellyson, Laura (Washington State University) and Stefani Crabtree (Santa Fe Institute & Utah State University)
[165]
Network Analysis of Hopi Sheepherding Groups from Early Twentieth-Century Orayvi
The Third Mesa Hopi village of Orayvi is possibly the oldest continuously occupied village in the United States, having been founded
as early as the twelfth century. Ethnographers have described Orayvi as the most conservative Hopi town because it rejected all
attempts at directed culture change from the Spanish beginning around 1630 until the fissioning event in September 1906. In part
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   158
because of this split, Orayvi has been the subject of intensive study with both social and economic factors described as causes for
this split. A recent study suggests that inequality, based upon ginis derived from the distribution of house sizes, at Orayvi was typical
of pastoral societies. In this research, we examine this further in the context of Hopi sheep herding groups. Using data from the
1901 United States Census of Orayvi, we use network analysis to explore herding groups in relation to other factors including social
stability based on whether or not a family remained or returned to Orayvi following the 1906 split.
Elquist, Ora (Public Archaeology Laboratory) and Holly Herbster (Public Archaeology Laboratory)
[63]
A Seasonally Occupied Village at Vineyard Haven, Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts: Archaeological Investigations at the Lagoon
Pond Bluff Site (19-DK-274)
Archaeological investigations conducted in collaboration with the Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head (Aquinnah) have documented
5,000 years of Native American occupation at the Lagoon Pond Bluff Site on Martha’s Vineyard, ranging from the Late Archaic
period into the early Contact period. Nearly 250 features were documented that included living surfaces, evidence of structures,
shell middens, roasting platforms, hearths, refuse pits, storage pits, and other pits. A combination of diagnostic artifacts, feature
types, and radiocarbon dates suggest more intensive, longer-duration occupations during the Middle Woodland through early
Contact periods. The distribution of the features indicates at least two main settlements or activity areas. Faunal materials suggest
these later occupations occurred during the warm season (spring/summer) occupations, whereas other sites in the area are typically
associated with fall, winter, and/or spring occupations.
Emery, Kitty (FL Museum of Natural History, UF), Antonia Foias (Williams College), Lisa Duffy (Florida Museum of Nature,
University of Florida), Sophie Reilly (Northwestern University) and Elizabeth Webb (University of Western Ontario)
[54]
Chocolate, Manioc, and Maize: Kante’t’u’ul and Chachaklu’um in Motul de San José’s Realm
Between 2013 and 2015, the Periphery of Motul de San José Archaeological Project conducted fieldwork at two subsidiary sites,
Kante’t’u’ul and Chachaklu’um, located within 5 km of Motul de San José, the primary Late Classic center in this zone along the
northern shore of Lake Peten Itza. Paleoethnobotanical and chemical residue analyses have highlighted the variety of resources
exploited by the residents of these sites, from cacao orchards to corn infield gardens to root crop cultivation. These resources may
have moved between sites, and especially from the subsidiary sites to Motul via two means (minimally): market exchange or tribute
payments. The spatial distribution of these resources at the three sites provides hints to the economic integration of the polity,
whether through either or both means of movement of goods. In his most recent work, Against the Grain, Scott (2017) argues that
rising political elites relied on seed grains like maize to expand their taxation but discouraged root crops because the latter were not
easily found and counted, nor light for transport or easily storable. The implications of Scott’s ideas for the evidence from Motul and
its periphery will be explored.
Emery, Kitty [129] see Fladeboe, Randee
Emery, Kitty [178] see Thornton, Erin
Engan, Emily [186] see Galvan, Dagmar
Engan, Emily [142] see Stewart, Caitlin
Englehardt, Joshua (El Colegio de Michoacán) and Michael Carrasco (Florida State University)
[191]
The Tenaxpi Egg: Ecology, Representation, and Conceptual Convergence in Olmec Art
Through the lens of “conceptual convergence,” we examine the multiple symbolic strands that inform specific Gulf Coast sculptural
images, focusing especially on the Tenaxpi Egg/Homshuk sculpture. This sculpture, excavated on Tenaxpi Island in Lake
Catemaco, shows a figure sculpted on an egg-shaped stone. This image likely references several stories from the region in which
an old couple find an egg from which a boy emerges. Among the Zoque Popoluca of the Tuxltla Mountains of southern Veracruz,
the boy is named Sintiopiltsin, “god-ear-of-corn.” This deity is the source and therefore precursor to actual maize, while at the same
time being maize himself. After introducing this object, we examine the complex references that this image possibly presents.
Specifically, we suggest that while maize is an important symbolic element, other metaphors drawn from diverse ecological systems
played an equally significant role in this specific case, and in other Gulf Coast imagery. Through this example, we consider the
fluidity of conflated or shared attributes within indigenous thought, in which myth, history, ideology, agriculture, and the environment
are interwoven. We critically engage this framework by exploring theoretical and methodological issues associated with emic and
etic conceptualizations of Formative Period artistic programs.
Enright Parsick, Erin (Applied EarthWorks Inc.)
[204]
Evaluating Qasil: Using Alternative Data Sources for Determining National Register Eligibility of CA-SBA-87.
In support of California Department of Transportation Refugio Bridges Replacement Project, Applied EarthWorks, Inc. (Æ) was tasked
to evaluate CA-SBA-87 for National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) eligibility. CA-SBA-87 is at Refugio Beach along the Santa
Barbara Channel coastline, contains evidence of multiple periods of prehistoric occupation, and is the named ethnohistoric Chumash
village of Qasil. Due to previous disturbances of the site during highway construction, fieldwork to collect data for formal NRHP
evaluation was not feasible. Therefore, Æ used alternative sources of data including ethnographic data, information from excavations
completed in 1969 by G. James West, and the associated curated artifact collection to assess the significance and integrity of CA-SBA-
87. Using these alternative data sources, Æ and Caltrans were able to argue for CA-SBA-87’s eligibility under NRHP Criteria A and D.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    159
Ensley, Ross (Mirador Basin Project/FARES), Richard Hansen (University of Utah), Carlos Morales-Aguilar (Université
Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne) and Josie Thompson (Mirador Basin Project/FARES)
[163]
Landscapes of the Mirador-Calakmul Karst Basin
The Petén Karst Plateau, bounded by normal faults on the southeast and northwest sides, was created during a Tertiary extensional
event that also created the Rio Hondo Fault Zone to the East. The plateau, and its surrounding lowlands, can be subdivided into six
terrains, each dominated by a particular form of karst. These include fluviokarst, intermittent lakes, cockpits, residual hills, baselevel
poljes, and structural poljes. Within this framework, the Mirador-Calakmul Karst Drainage Basin lies in the southern portion of the
plateau, straddling the Mexico/Guatemala border. Following the U.S. Geological Survey, a karst drainage basin is a mapping unit
defined by the total area of surface and subsurface drainage that contributes water to a conduit network and its outlet springs.
Comprised of the Mirador and Calakmul watersheds, the basin is bounded on the east by an anticline, on the north by a drainage
divide with the Desempeño watershed, and on the west by a low ridge marked by a series of springs and steephead valleys. The
landscape of the basin is dominated by fluviokarst bajos but also exhibits other karst forms including dolines, giant kamenitza, giant
runnels, solution corridors, and civales.
Enzmann, Jonas [238] see Segschneider, Martin
Eppich, Keith (Tyler Junior College TJC, The College of East Texas)
[93]
Discussant
Eppich, Keith (Tyler Junior College TJC, The College of East Texas)
[211]
Archaeological Context and Contemporary Acoustics of Ceramic Drums Recovered from Late Classic El Perú-Waka’, Guatemala
Ceramic drums appear in Classic Maya art, being carried in the hand or nestled between the legs of Native American musicians.
However, they have received scant, if quite detailed, attention in the scholarly literature. This presentation seeks to expand our
knowledge of these ancient musical instruments using a number of complete and partial drums recovered from the ruined city of El
Perú-Waka’. Located in the northwest of Guatemala, El Perú-Waka’ existed for the 13 centuries of Classic Maya civilizations with an
exceptional and vibrant potting tradition. One of the products of this potting tradition was cylindric ceramic drums. Archaeologically,
such vessels seem associated with large offerings or feasting contexts, sharing context with ocarinas and polychrome serving ware.
This presentation examines the form, construction, and surface treatment of such vessels together with their contextual association.
Furthermore, it examines the potential sounds that ancient musicians would have produced on such vessels. (Ceramic drums
produce different notes that wooden ones.) Lastly, the paper places the drums in their cultural context within the past, attempting a
partial explanation for their form, function, usage, archaeological context, and acoustics.
Eren, Metin [232] see Mraz, Veronica
Ergun, Müge [83] see Ugras, Funda
Erickson, Clark (University of Pennsylvania) and Jedidiah Dale (University of Texas)
[4]
Precolumbian Management of Water and Aquatic Resources in the Wetlands of the Bolivian Amazon
The domestication of landscape by Amazonian peoples is well documented. Historical ecologists highlight the creation,
management, and enhancement of resources over millennia: higher than natural biodiversity, increased abundance of economic
species of plants and animals, Amazonian Dark Earth, and other anthropogenic improvements. In addition to a range of crops grown
in raised fields, gardens, and agroforestry, the large communities in the Baures region of the Bolivian Amazon relied on fish and
other aquatic resources. A complex network of earthen causeways, canals, fish weirs, and fish ponds was built in the seasonally
inundated savanna and wetlands covering hundreds of square kilometers. Causeways and canals were probably constructed for
communication and movement to access settlements and resources on forest islands. This canoe culture realized that causeways
could also transform annual flood dynamics within the vast wetland margin. Using GIS, error corrected DEMs, hydraulic modeling
and simulation, we show that massive volumes of flood water were controlled, managed, and exploited by earthworks with
substantial capture and abundance of useful aquatic resources and extended canoes use. In the Bolivian Amazon, indigenous
knowledge of flood regimes and development of large-scale landscape engineering contributed to a thriving, successful, and
possibly sustainable lifeway in late prehistory.
Ermish, Brendan, Shannon Boomgarden (University of Utah), Duncan Metcalfe (University of Utah) and Jordin Muller
(University of Utah)
[245]
Maize Root Depth and Implications for Irrigation
Prehistoric maize farming has been well-documented in Range Creek Canyon, Utah. Evidence includes numerous corn cobs, maize
storage structures, starch on ground stone tools, and pollen and isotopic evidence from sediment cores. Maize farming experiments
in Range Creek suggest dry farming would not have been a sustainable option for the Fremont. With access to a permanent water
source, irrigation farming would have been the most effective method of delivering controlled amounts of water to their crops, and
thus allow for improved yields. Ongoing experiments in Range Creek seek to understand the efficiency in timing and amount of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     160
water necessary to produce the highest yields despite the costs associated with irrigation. Pivotal to understanding this trade-off is
documenting root depth of dry adapted maize varieties under varying irrigation regimes. With limited water, should the Fremont
water deeply less often or shallow more often? To document variability in root growth, an experiment was conducted to document
the roots of Pima 60-Day Maize. By watering three separate bins at different depths, we are able to measure phenotypic response in
root length as a function of the depth at which the water is provided.
Ermish, Brendan [245] see Boomgarden, Shannon
Ermish, Brendan [245] see Muller, Jordin
Esarey, Duane [211] see Bardolph, Dana
Eschbach, Krista (Arizona State University) and John Worth (University of West Florida)
[192]
Ceramics, Categorical Identification, and the Changing Social Structure of the Spanish American Colonies
Archaeologists frequently have used distinct decorative styles, often found on serving vessels, as indicators of social identity and
status. For the Spanish American colonies, focus has been placed on tableware, particularly majolica, as a measure of economic
status and socio-racial identity, linked to Spanish-European commensality. Growing research throughout Latin America has
demonstrated wide variability in the distribution of majolica tableware that challenges simplistic interpretations. Geographic location,
settlement function, and transformations in the colonial social structure all contributed to diverse patterns in ceramic distribution. In
this paper, we examine diachronic variation across three centuries and two geographic locations within the Spanish American
empire: Port of Veracruz and Northwest Florida. Historians have documented at least three large-scale shifts in the organization of
colonial society, from the géneros de gente (types of people)—based on categorical distinctions borrowed from Iberia—to the more
well-studied casta system and, finally, to incipient economic classes. Through an examination of assemblages from Florida and
Veracruz, we critically evaluate the changing role of majolica as a symbol of categorical distinction in colonial Mesoamerica and the
borderlands.
[192]
Chair
Eschenbrenner, James
[52]
Recording Trash: Validating the Analysis of Trash Dumps and Stopping Them in the Future
The Orchard Combat Training Center (OCTC) is an Idaho Army National Guard (IDARNG) tank and helicopter training area which
encompasses a total of 143,000 acres across southern Idaho, just south of Boise. The OCTC is owned by the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) but is managed by the IDARNG. Under a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) between the BLM and the
IDARNG, the public is allowed free-roaming access to the land in exchange for guard training. As archaeologists, we are given the
task of recording the public’s material remains in the desert. The most common type of artifacts are cans in the form of can dumps.
The value of analyzing the historic trash dumps is that it relates to our culture, human behavior, history, and the environment.
Presently, yearly training area cleanups can clean up the contemporary trash. Future dumping can be prevented by providing signs,
public outreach, and educating the public to clean up after they have used the land.
[52]
Chair
Esdale, Julie (Colorado State University, CEMML) and Kelly Graf (Texas A&M University)
[81]
Spatial Arrangement of the Northern Archaic Component at the McDonald Creek Site, Central Alaska
McDonald Creek is a multicomponent campsite located in the central Tanana Valley south of Fairbanks, Alaska. In addition to late
Pleistocene components, archaeological excavations at the site have uncovered a productive Northern Archaic occupation dating to
the middle Holocene. A technological analysis of the lithic assemblage has delineated specific tool production areas across the site.
Late stage bifacial tools of different raw materials were resharpened in discrete areas. Notably, microblade core reduction debris of
the same materials were also found in the individual debitage clusters. This indicates that multiple technologies were concurrent at
the scale of single behavioral events. Site activities were repetitive and represent only a small range of behavior over a short visit.
The middle Holocene component at the site is very different than earlier occupations which exhibit longer term habitation and
subsistence activities.
[81]
Chair
Esdale, Julie [81] see Graf, Kelly
Esdale, Julie [81] see Henry, Aureade
Esdale, Julie [52] see Skinner, Dougless
Eshleman, Sara (University of Texas, Austin) and Timothy Beach (University of Texas, Austin)
[206]
Remote Sensing of the Maya Environment in Northwestern Belize
Lidar and other remote sensing technologies have advanced archaeology and multiple other fields, including ecology. For
archaeology, we often remove the forest from lidar images in order to examine anthropogenic construction. In this paper, we put the
forest back and demonstrate how the northwestern Belize lidar consortium is using interdisciplinary studies toward understanding
the environmental settings associated with Maya history. These environments provide resources for past and present populations
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    161
and have experienced many human impacts through time. Here, we assess the spatial distribution of forest attributes and their
relationship to environmental characteristics in northwestern Belize. Our analyses indicate that elevation, local relief, topographic
position, and aspect explain the majority of the variance in canopy height. At the same time, the canopy-topography relationship
varies with spatial resolution and exhibits spatial non-stationarity, but with distinct trends within geographic areas. These initial
studies lend to future work that integrates past and present human presence and activities and aids the understanding of long-
lasting human-environment interactions.
Esker, Donald (Marietta College), Ren Zhang (Baylor University) and Steven Forman (Baylor University)
[19]
Carbon and Oxygen Isotope Chemistry of Hall’s Cave Lagomorphs
Hall’s Cave is a limestone solution cavern in Kerr County, Texas. It has been the subject of Late Pleistocene paleontological
research since 1968. The cave is unique because it contains a record of near-constant sedimentation for the last ca.17 ka. This
sedimentary record spans the Younger Dryas climate anomaly and end-of-Pleistocene megafaunal extinction from ca. 12.9 ka to
11.7 ka. Fossils from large mammals have been described from the cave, but no such taxa are found in great abundance. In
contrast, the cave has produced abundant rodent and lagomorph remains from near the deepest point currently excavated to a near
modern Capra aegagrus dung layer. Thirty-one teeth from Lepus cf. L. californicus and Sylvilagus sp. were collected for carbon and
oxygen isotopic analysis. Both isotopic systems showed a small change of -0.57‰ ∂13C and of -0.59‰ ∂18O across the extinction
period, despite well-documented environmental changes during the same time elsewhere in North America. One possibility is that
selective feeding by the lagomorphs may have dampened the ∂13C signal and that a ground-water moisture-source dampened the
∂18O signal. Alternatively, the region may have experienced relatively minor climate changes across the Pleistocene-Holocene
boundary relative to other regions in North America.
Esparza Olguín, Octavio [130] see Tsukamoto, Kenichiro
Espenshade, Christopher
[252]
When Abandonment Is Not What It Seems: Bateys and a Mythical Landscape in Puerto Rico
When considering the abandonment behavior observed at many bateys and ceremonial sites in Puerto Rico, two common traits are
noteworthy. First, the bateys are left intact, with rock art of high cultural value left in place. Second, the bateys show evidence of
visitation in periods postdating their construction. Building on data from south-central Puerto Rico, the concept of an additive mythic
landscape is considered. Important to this discussion is the rejection of the site perspective and the embrace of the landscape view.
It is suggested that certain landscapes in Puerto Rico were slowly developed through time as locations for pilgrimages and
celebrations of greater than cacique-level importance. Through time, way stations were added to the pilgrimage route. Rather than
one batey replacing another, the landscape was elaborated, with the earlier bateys and rock art locations still playing an important
role in the interaction of society and the mythic landscape.
Espino Huaman, Richard (Universidad Nacional San Luis Gonzaga de Ica), Jo Osborn (University of Michigan), Camille
Weinberg (University of Texas, Austin) and Brittany Hundman (DirectAMS)
[21]
Caminos entre los valles de Chincha y Cañete: Un acercamiento hacia las conexiones de nuestros antepasados prehispánicos en
el Perú
En los últimos años, investigaciones arqueológicas en los valles de Cañete y Chincha han avanzados nuestro conocimiento de
estas regiones, sus sociedades, y sus transformaciones durante el Intermedio Tardío y el Horizonte Tardío. Sin embargo, aunque
queda claro que había conexiones fuertes entre las culturas Huaco y Chincha, falta definir cómo eran la conexiones entre ambas
culturas. En esta ponencia, exploramos sus conexiones y las evidencias dejadas a través del tiempo la cual surgen varias
interrogantes. ¿Cómo se movía la gente entre los valles de Cañete y Chincha? y ¿cuál era la ruta que seguían? De acuerdo a
nuestros datos trataremos de dar respuestas a nuestras interrogantes y generar un mejor conocimiento de las conexiones viales
entre estas regiones, lo cual nos permitirá avanzar nuestros estudios sobre las conexiones sociales, económicos y políticos de los
Huarco y Chincha.
Espino Huaman, Richard [21] see Osborn, Jo
Espino Huaman, Richard [125] see Weinberg, Camille
Espinosa, Silvana [67] see Belardi, Juan
Estabrook, Richard
[44]
Moderator
Esteban, Irene [11] see Fisher, Erich
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  162
Estes, Aaron (Cardno)
[167]
Beyond Bethel: Applications and Adaptations of SfM Photogrammetric Methods in CRM
In the summer of 2018, the Bethel Cemetery in Indianapolis, IN was excavated by a team of CRM and university archaeologists. An
experimental aspect of the project was to test a methodology for using structure from motion (SfM) photogrammetry to map and
document each burial during excavation, instead of using traditional methods. After proving to be a successful method for
documenting the excavation at Bethel, the method was used on other contracted CRM work. Cardno, the firm in charge of the
Bethel excavation, has had the opportunity to utilize this photogrammetry methodology to document two other cemeteries: the Fort
Brooke Estuary Cemetery in Tampa, FL and the Calvert Family Cemetery in Evansville, IN. While each application used essentially
the same formula for photographing and modeling various features, each has had its own unique environmental and technical
challenges. Each new set of challenges became opportunities to adapt and modify the original Bethel SfM methodology to new
situations and environments. Through these further infield applications Cardno archaeologists have continued to expand the
potential uses of SfM methods in CRM since its initial Bethel debut.
Estrada-Belli, Francisco (Tulane University) and Sandra Balanzario Granados (INAH, Mexico)
[223]
Dzibanché: The Early Capital of the Kaanul (Snake) Kingdom Seen through Lidar
Dzibanché is an archaeological zone in southern Quintana Roo encompassing several large ceremonial complexes, Dzibanché,
Tutil, Kinichna and Lamay connected by causeways. According to contemprary texts, it was the early capital of the Kaanul (Snake)
kingdom with vast hegemonic influence across the Classic Maya Lowlands. Ichkabal is a large Preclassic ceremonial center located
11 km NE of Dzibanché. These sites are central to ongoing debates regarding the place of origin of the Snake dynasty and the
nature of its political influence beyond southern Quintana Roo. Here we present the preliminary results of a lidar survey over
Dzibanché, Ichkabal and neighboring areas. The new data reveal several new features including extensive residential and
agricultural areas, several new causeways and outer ceremonial complexes. These data suggest a greater development of
monumental architecture in the Dzibanché zone than previously known and a high degree of integration between urban zones
(Dzibanché), rural zones and outer ceremonial centers (e.g., Ichkabal) since the Preclassic period.
[223]
Chair
Ethier, Jonathan [62] see Piezonka, Henny
Ethridge, Gary [149] see Hovezak, Tim
Etnier, Michael [129] see Bovy, Kristine
Etnier, Michael [59] see West, Catherine F.
Etter, Bonnie (Southern Methodist University), Robert Selden Jr. (Stephen F. Austin University) and Sunday Eiselt
(Southern Methodist University)
[17]
The Toyah Phase Paradox in Three Dimensions
The Toyah Phase has been the subject of debate since J. Charles Kelly first defined it in 1947. Known widely as the Toyah Phase
Paradox, research has struggled to reconcile the homogenous expression of this protohistoric to historic archaeological record in
central Texas and the high levels of ethnic diversity witnessed by French and Spanish explorers at the turn of the eighteenth
century. Recent studies have related geographic and temporal variation in artifact styles to “communities of practice” using standard
2D measurement techniques, with varying degrees of success. We build on this research by using a 3D geometric morphometric
approach to examine 26 Perdiz projectile points, a hallmark of Toyah assemblages. These points were recovered from two
contemporaneous sites located some 100 miles apart in the core area of Toyah Phase settlement. The primary goal of the study is
to explore whether 3D imaging can identify localized variants of Perdiz points based on shape. This work, in turn, may be used to
infer patterns of interaction between village clusters through network analyses at the regional scale. Implications for how cultural
plurality in central Texas may have influenced Spanish missionization are discussed.
Evans, Amanda (Coastal Environments Inc.), Louise Tizzard (Wessex Archaeology Ltd), Megan Metcalfe (Wessex
Archaeology Ltd) and Alexandra Herrera-Schneider (Coastal Environments Inc.)
[238]
White Caps and Laptops: Geophysical Results from the 2019 Survey of Submerged Precontact Landscapes in the Northwestern
Gulf of Mexico
Sea-level rise models since the last glacial maximum demonstrate that the North American landmass available for pre-contact
human habitation was larger than at present. In the northwestern Gulf of Mexico, less than 1 m2 of the continental shelf has been
sampled and tested archaeologically. Out of 106 sediment cores acquired for archaeology, two have identified preserved landscape
elements of interest; a probable rangia shell midden and a charcoal horizon. Both cores were collected in modern water depths of
17 m BSL, and both returned radiocarbon dates of approximately 8500 yrs BP. The two cores are 48 miles apart from one another,
but in between the two locations, along the shoreline, are known archaeological sites dating to the same time period. Using the two
locations and the modern shoreline, geophysical survey including both chirp subbottom and parametric sonar was conducted at
targeted areas within a 234-square-mile polygon of interest. This paper will present the survey design, and preliminary results from
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 163
the geophysical remote-sensing survey cruise in May and June, 2019, which resulted in collection of over 650-line km of data. The
authors will also present plans for vibracoring in spring of 2020.
[238]
Chair
Evans, Denise [143] see Scheinsohn, Vivian
Evans, Laura [77] see Smith, Heather
Evans, Susan Toby (Penn State University)
[150]
Pathways to Power: The Aztec Empire in 10 Maps
Five hundred years ago the Aztecs of Mexico were losing their grip on a tribute empire that covered much of the area modern
Mexico. The empire had been only about 90 years in the making. The story of the growth of empire moves through the
Mesoamerican landscape, Aztec power spilling out of the Basin of Mexico—south, west, east—toward the hot lands, toward the
treasures coveted by the lords: feathers, jaguar skins, cotton, and chocolate. This poster shows the growth of empire in 10 maps,
color-coded by time period to best display the surges of expansion over the careers of six Tenocha emperors (and two from
Texcoco) who established and extended this organizational wonder of the ancient world.
Everett, Genevieve (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[190]
From Bloody Marys to Bifaces: How One Public Archaeology Program Has Made It All Possible
It’s not every day that a single encounter while slinging Blood Marys behind a bar leads you to the State Conservation and Rescue
Archaeology program (SCRAP) and your academic and professional mentor, Richard Boisvert. Dick’s decades of dedication to
SCRAP has afforded its army of volunteers from all over the country with the opportunity to spend weeks in the summer learning
how to properly excavate and document archaeological sites. In addition, Dick makes the wealth of data from the SCRAP field
school available to scholars as potential thesis and dissertation research topics. This paper outlines recent master’s thesis research
comparing the chipped stone artifact assemblages from excavation Block K at the Paleoindian component Potter Site (27-CO-60)
located in Randolph, New Hampshire with the Jefferson VI (27-CO-74) Salvage Block in Jefferson, New Hampshire. This
comparison not only examines spatial distribution of lithics within one Paleoindian site (27-CO-60), but also helps the principal
investigator make inferences about the similarities and differences between two Paleoindian sites in proximity. Public archaeology
programs such as SCRAP are an invaluable part of North American Archaeology, one that has a legacy that continues to positively
affect students and the advancement of our collective knowledge of the past.
Everett, Mark (Texas A&M University)
[19]
Electrical Resistivity Tomography at Hall’s Cave
The ERT (electrical resistivity tomography) geophysical method has been used at Hall’s cave to characterize the subsurface to ~20
m depth inside and outside the cave. A preliminary interpretation is suggested in which different zones in the tomograms represent
different geological environments. Inside the cave, zones of low resistivity are identified as accumulations of cave sediments. The
thickness of cave sediments is ascertained from the depth extent of low-resistivity zones. Some areas of the cave interior have thick
sediment accumulations whereas other areas have thinner accumulations underlain by limestone blocks detached from the roof or
flowstones. Zones of very high resistivity are interpreted as void spaces. Several large voids have been found, the most significant
of which extends along a line NE of the cave entrance. This finding indicates that the talus slope might be a locus of collapse of an
extensive NE-SW-oriented cave system of which Hall’s cave is just a part. Other void spaces appear in many places outside Hall’s
cave suggesting the existence of a regional network of caves. In addition, there are extensive zones of high resistivity that are
interpreted as karstified or fractured limestone. There are also substantially large regions of intact limestone.
Everhart, Timothy (University of Michigan Museum of Anthropological Archaeology)
[107]
Digging Data: Refining Interpretations of Geomagnetic Surveys of Scioto Hopewell Ceremonial Landscapes
Scioto Hopewell ceremonial landscapes have been a fixture of public imagination and archaeological research for more than two
centuries. This attention has recently been translated to the geophysical revolution in American Archaeology, resulting in the
collection of massive geophysical datasets, especially of geomagnetic data. Interpretations based on these geomagnetic data have
generally been approached only at the scale of identifying features, correcting antiquated site maps, and discovering new
earthworks. Concomitantly to the widespread application of geophysical techniques, archaeologists have worked to sample the
earthworks in service of documenting their construction histories and relationship to the broader Scioto Hopewell ceremonialism.
This paper synthesizes the advances of both lines of inquiry into Scioto Hopewell ceremonial landscapes by employing a
comparative analysis of ground truthed landscapes to enhance interpretations of geomagnetic data to recognized smaller-scale
earthen architectural elements and the variability therein.
Evershed, Richard [61] see Miller, Melanie
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     164
Evoy, Angela (Trent University)
[62]
Neolithic Resource Use and Adaptation in the Eastern Gobi Desert: Functional Analysis of Axes and Adzes
Stone axes and adzes first appeared in the eastern Gobi Desert at 8.0 cal BP and were incorporated into the technological package.
At the same time, changes in local ecological conditions reflect a transition from continuous grass/shrub-steppe across the
Mongolian Plateau to the development of dispersed patches of dune-field wetland oases and high-elevation forests. This study
focuses on exploring the adoption and function of axes and adzes in the eastern Gobi Desert and their relationship to the
development of these new forested ecologies. Using an experimental and use-wear approach, I analyze 29 axes and adzes from
four sites in the eastern Gobi Desert of Mongolia and Inner Mongolia. Results indicate that axes and adzes were primarily used for
woodworking but include other activities. Furthermore, the adoption and manufacture of axes and adzes represent an increasing
investment in producing formal technologies as resources within these new diverse ecological patches were intensively utilized.
Ewen, Charles [3] see Grubb, Muriel
Extract, Jonathan (University of California Riverside)
[189]
Mythical Charters: Landscape, Ethnogenesis, and Chichimecs in Late Postclassic Mexican Cartography
Late Postclassic Central Mexican foundation narratives do not depict unified states. Instead, the cartographic histories of
Cuauhtinchan are pictorial texts preoccupied with the tenuous justification of sovereignty in a factional political landscape. A primary
means of this justification was the appropriation of standardized myths into a polity’s own chauvinistic foundation history. One such
key trope, the citation of ancestry from the “savage” Chichimecs, I argue, was based not on historical kinship or lineage, but was an
appeal to social boundaries and the rights of political domination. Following the work of James Scott, I propose that the northern
desert or Gran Chichimeca was a zone of active resistance to stratified exploitation and that the presence of fundamentally different
migratory groups mis-amalgamated as Chichimecas, helped contour the spatial ideology mapped by Cuauhtinchan. The analysis of
how cartographic texts treat history can elucidate Nahua emic treatments of cyclical and mythic time, while also suggesting the
social relationship between territory, identity, and the everyday practices of moving through space.
Eyeington, Ashley
[101]
Geoarchaeological Approach to Resolving the Origins of Bison Bone Beds at Bonfire Shelter, 41VV218, Val Verde County, Texas
Bonfire Shelter is a large prehistoric rockshelter site located within the Chihuahuan Desert of west Texas. Early investigators
determined the site to be the location of multiple bison jump events; however subsequent investigations have disputed this
interpretation. My thesis research focuses on deposits at the southern end of the site within the talus cone, a depositional cone
below the rim of the canyon. The purpose of my research is to answer the questions of whether the Paleoindian bone bed
represents a bison jump event and if so, does it represent one or multiple events. Geoarchaeological methods including particle size
analysis, magnetic susceptibility, and loss-on-ignition are providing a better understanding of the formation processes of the talus
cone and as a result, insights into the origin and number of events represented within the Paleoindian bison bone bed. This
presentation summarizes the results of my thesis research.
Eyeington, Ashley [165] see Overfield, Zachary
Fagan, Brian
[46]
Where the Cow Sleeps, or How I Learned about Life in the African Past
Sixty years ago, I excavated a series of 1,000- to 500-year-old villages in Central Africa, generally digging alone without specialist
assistance. One was a subsistence farming village far from ancient trade routes, the other, Ingombe Ilede, “the Place where the
Cow sleeps,” in the remote Middle Zambezi Valley, inhabited by gold and ivory traders. This is the story of how I experienced
firsthand the harsh realities of subsistence farming from the local people in the Middle Zambezi Valley. It is also the story of how I
learned the difficulties of reconstructing unwritten history and studying cultural diversity from archaeological sites. This was the first
time I learned that my finds, however spectacular, were useless unless shared with the people whose ancestors I was studying.
Public outreach then became the primary focus of my career.
Fahey, Brian, Kelsi Stroebel (School of Human Evolution and Social Change), Olivia Boss (School of Arts and Sciences,
Rutgers University) and Curtis Marean (Institute of Human Origins, School of Human Evolution and Social Change)
[38]
Systematic Differences in Sieved and Point-Provenienced Fauna Ecofacts from PP5–6, South Africa
In zooarchaeological analysis, there is a tendency to give point-provenienced ecofacts analytical priority over ecofacts found in
sieved material. To test for the effects of this bias, we conducted a zooarchaeological and taphonomic analysis of faunal ecofacts (n
= 841) found in the 10 mm sieved material from Pinnacle Point 5–6 (PP5–6). This is a Stone Age site on the modern south coast of
South Africa that has a high-resolution record of human behavior and environmental change during the Middle Stone Age. All fauna
encountered and seen by excavators in excavation are point-provenienced in situ, with no omission of small-sized or unidentifiable
specimens. All sediment is subsequently sieved for any material missed in excavation. The 10 mm sieved specimens were
compared to the point-provenienced faunal specimens from corresponding stratigraphic levels to test for systematic differences
between provenienced and sieved faunal ecofacts. This analysis shows that ignoring fauna recovered from 10 mm sieve could lead
to different zooarchaeological and taphonomic site interpretations.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  165
Fairbairn, Phoebe [53] see Stanyard, Zachary
Fairley, Helen (U.S. Geological Survey)
[255]
Shaking the Pinyon Tree: Alan Sullivan’s Contributions to Long-standing Debates about Ancestral Puebloan Subsistence in the
Grand Canyon Region
The subsistence strategies of ancestral Puebloans who lived in Grand Canyon’s rugged environment between AD 900 and 1250
have been a subject of speculation for as long as archaeologists have worked in the region. While most Grand Canyon
archaeologists subscribe to a subsistence model of small-scale horticulture supplemented with seasonal hunting and foraging, Alan
Sullivan has argued for an alternative model in which the procurement and processing of wild food resources—especially pinyon
nuts—dominated the local Puebloan economy. Prior to Sullivan’s work in the area, interpretations of Puebloan subsistence relied
heavily on indirect evidence such as settlement distributions and architecture, whereas Sullivan employed more direct evidence
such as food processing features and paleobotanical remains to define an alternative model. Although many researchers remain
unconvinced that pinyon nuts and other wild foods were more important than horticultural products in Grand Canyon’s subsistence
economy, Sullivan’s provocative arguments, and the supporting data he amassed during three decades of research along Grand
Canyon’s South Rim, have greatly invigorated discussions surrounding this topic. Perhaps most importantly, Sullivan’s work set new
standards for the types of evidence required to argue for or against future interpretations of ancestral Puebloan subsistence
strategies in the Grand Canyon region.
Farace, Anthony
[78]
Assessing Visual Ceramic Petrography at Wickliffe Mounds, Kentucky
Ceramic petrography has long been criticized as being a method that is too subjective, creating a variety of outcomes depending on
the analyst. The following project determines the provenance of Mississippian ceramics from the Wickliffe Mounds Archaeological
Site in Ballard County, Kentucky using the creation of visual, petrographic fabric groups. The project assesses the validity of visual
petrographic fabric groups by also implementing quantitative methods through the use of point-counting and PETROG software. The
results are compared through a principal component analysis showing that similar results are found through each method. The
analysis shows that Wickliffe Ceramics are produced using clays within a short distance of the village and mounds.
Farah, Kirby (University of Southern California)
[57]
Persistent Pasts: The Impacts of Collaborative Archaeological Research on Local (Hi)stories at Xaltocan, Mexico
Over the past 30 years, archaeological projects at Xaltocan have been highly collaborative, often involving local community
members in a variety of innovative ways. Local collaborators have been invaluable partners in the recovery and interpretation of
archaeological data, while increased community involvement with archaeological projects appears to have fueled renewed local
interest in Xaltocan’s Postclassic (AD 900–1521) legacy. Over the decades, residents of Xaltocan have constructed monuments,
formed cultural organizations, and planned events geared toward highlighting specific narratives about Xaltocan’s past. Sometimes,
these narratives differ from those reflected in the archaeological record. Inspired by these observations and hungry to learn more,
Proyecto Patrimonio Xaltocan (PPX) is designed to gain a better understanding of how residents of Xaltocan describe their heritage
in relation to where they live and how archaeological research at Xaltocan has contributed to this process. PPX is largely an
ethnographic project, which centers local retellings of the past, in the hopes of learning the diverse ways in which peoples are (or
are not) blending local or family (hi)stories with archaeological knowledge. Among other things, this project highlights alternative
narratives and seeks out ways to center these narratives in the context of future collaborative archaeological research.
Farahani, Alan (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[139]
Moderator
Farina, Adriano [25] see Mattioli, Tommaso
Farina, Angelo [25] see Mattioli, Tommaso
Farley, Ned [78] see Richards, John
Farley, William (Southern Connecticut State University)
[12]
Hearth, Home, and Colonialism: Cultural Entanglement at Calluna Hill, a 1630s Pequot War Household
This paper explores the nature of cultural change and continuity during the early colonial period (ca. 1615–1637), an understudied
period in southern New England. The earliest years of intercultural exchange between Europeans and Native people in the region is
believed to have brought sweeping disturbances to Native American lifeways, however the nature and pace of those changes is little
understood. The site of Calluna Hill (CT 59–73) is the location of a small Pequot village burned by the English during the Pequot
War in 1637. The excavation of a domestic site from these earliest years after the arrival of Dutch traders and English settlers to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                          166
Connecticut is exceptionally rare and offers us an opportunity to understand the complex and agentive ways that the Pequots
adopted novel materials and ideas into their worldview. I use the theory of cultural entanglement to understand the direction and
nature of cultural transformation in a period absent the asymmetrical power dynamics of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. I
examine Pequot indigenization of materials and architecture to assess the ways that Pequots maintained long-standing practices to
mitigate a fast-changing colonial environment.
Farmer, Andrea (MCX CMAC, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers) and S. Terry Childs (Department of the Interior [Retired])
[132]
Employing Innovative Solutions to the Archaeological Curation Crisis
In the 1940s, federal agencies began large-scale construction projects that produced archaeological collections with both short and
long-term scientific value to the agency, curatorial institution, and the nation. These efforts, as well as the enactment of federal
preservation laws in the 1960s and 70s, generated a backlog of archaeological collections that were processed to varying non-
uniform standards and degrees and often not properly curated. These and many other factors contributed to the curation crisis faced
in our discipline for decades now. Federal agencies, including the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Department of the Interior,
have developed and implemented both local and national approaches to manage these important cultural resources. This paper
explores the curation crisis and presents innovative and unique solutions that have been used to address the curation crisis in the
federal government, such as the consolidation of archaeological collections into federally compliant regional centers, coupling
veterans in need of transferrable job skills with archaeological laboratory work, efforts to generate and preserve digitally born
collections, and the creation of a standardized cataloging database that will be publicly accessible in the future for research,
interpretation, heritage needs, and public programs.
[132]
Chair
Farmer, Andrea [132] see Joseph, J.
Farmer, James (Independent Scholar)
[141]
The “Lack” of “Creativity” in Precolumbian Art: The Impact of Terence Grieder’s Early Scholarship on Recent Rock Art Studies
In his earliest scholarship, Terence Grieder set forth several broad-ranging concepts regarding the interpretation of ancient
American art and its relationship to archeological methods of the time. Grieder was an avid proponent of the idea that in spite of
deep-set historical classifications imposed on ancient American culture (i.e., “Olmec,” “Maya,” “Anasazi,” “Moche,” etc.), virtually all
documented ancient American societies shared a basic set of fundamentally similar beliefs and ideologies; that all ancient American
art forms extending well into the past had always been technically, intellectually, and iconographically highly sophisticated; and as a
result of these two assertions, as well as his application of strict art historical analysis, the traditional notion of “creativity” in both
ancient American archaeological and art historical scholarship has undergone significant reconsideration. This presentation focuses
on three of his earliest publications, and the impact of his approach on recent studies of two early ancient American rock art
traditions, specifically the Barrier Canyon Style centered in Utah, and the Pecos River Style in southern Texas. Long believed to be
disassociated with any historic Native American peoples, and thus archeologically “extinct,” recent scholarship has demonstrated
strong iconographic ties to later Puebloan and central Mexican (Aztec and Huichol) beliefs.
[141]
Chair
Farquhar, Jennifer (University of Pittsburgh), Arlene Rosen (University of Texas, Austin) and Yadmaa Tserndagva
(Mongolian Academy of Sciences)
[62]
Adaptive Strategies of Early Herders in Mongolia’s Desert-Steppe: Implications for Understanding Social-Ecological Dynamics, the
Development of Food Production, and the Study of Long-Term Social Change
Currently, archaeologists have a limited understanding of the origins of pastoral economies in the Mongolian desert steppe, due to a
lack of data in this region. Our project in the Ikh Nart Nature Reserve in southeastern Mongolia is addressing this gap through a
multiscalar investigation of human-environment interactions, specifically the relationship between climate change and land use, and
how adaptive strategies impacted natural and social environments during the transition from a foraging economy to herding (ca.
4000 BP). Our recent archaeological survey and excavations have identified several archaeological sites dating to this important
economic transition. Ongoing geoarchaeological work contextualizes these finds, revealing evidence for increased aridification and
decimation of wetlands during this economic shift. These data will be combined with recent landscape-level investigations to assess
settlement mobility prior to, during, and after these transitions as a way to understand adaptive strategies of early herders, including
differences in how, when, and why people moved, illuminating how people make decisions about changing environmental
conditions. Examining the nature and timing of these strategies can help to identify factors that lead to sustainable and lasting
systems, or alternatively to abrupt alterations or reorganization of social and economic systems
Farrell, Sean (Texas State University)
[101]
Refining Chronology and Site Formation Processes at Bone Bed 1, Bonfire Shelter: A Geoarchaeological Approach
Texas State University’s excavations at Bonfire Shelter in Val Verde County, Texas, have yielded new data regarding site formation
processes associated with Bone Bed 1, a series of potentially older than Clovis strata bearing the remains of extinct Pleistocene
fauna. Excavators in the 1960s and 1980s argued that the remains were culturally modified, but no unambiguous artifacts were
recovered. This paper reports the results of the renewed excavations at Bone Bed 1. Two excavation blocks and one sampling
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    167
column spanning the Bone Bed 1 strata and portions of the Late Paleoindian Bone Bed 2 were excavated. Geoarchaeological
methods including loss on ignition, particle size, and magnetic susceptibility assays supplemented with X-ray diffraction, total
organic carbon, and stable carbon/nitrogen isotope analyses were implemented to deconstruct the depositional environment at the
end of the Pleistocene and contextualize the presence of faunal remains within these strata. New AMS radiocarbon dates
associated with mammoth and horse remains provide better temporal control for Bone Bed 1. The potential implications of these
data for Bone Bed 1 and the Early Paleoindian record of Southwest Texas are explored.
Faulseit, Ronald (Field Museum)
[138]
Making the Landscape Divine at Dainzú
Throughout its prehispanic occupation, Dainzú played a significant ceremonial role in the Oaxaca Valley of Mexico. In the Formative
period (200 BCE–CE 200), prominent terrain features were intentionally incorporated into the settlement’s design with the intent of
making a shared place through ritual practice. For example, a ball court and temple complex built at the base of Cerro Dainzú were
linked to a shrine on its summit, requiring people to navigate the difficult and unpredictable topography between them as part of a
ritual procession. By walking this challenging landscape together, they were not only creating a sacred place, but also building
community in the process. In later centuries, settlement growth led to expansion into new territory, and leaders found novel ways to
construct communities tied to the landscape. In this paper, I will examine diachronic patterns in place-making practices at Dainzú
and discuss their social and political implications.
Fauvelle, Mikael (Boise State University)
[203]
Obsidian Exchange and Political Change: Shifting Patterns of Obsidian Use across the Late Classic and Postclassic at Fracción
Mujular
Fracción Mujular is a small domestic settlement located on the slopes of Cerro Bernal near the Pacific Coast of Chiapas, Mexico.
Founded under the auspices of the Early Classic center of Los Horcones, Fracción Mujular was occupied for nearly 1,000 years,
persisting through the collapse of Los Horcones at the end of the Early Classic and entering into a period of rapid expansion during
the Late Classic. Over the course of its occupation, the inhabitants of Fracción Mujular used large quantities of imported obsidian,
favoring obsidian from Mexico over more proximate sources in Guatemala. This paper presents the results of pXRF sourcing of 502
obsidian artifacts from Fracción Mujular. My results show a clear shift in obsidian provenience through time, with obsidian from the
Pachuca source heavily favored during the Early Classic, while obsidian from the Zaragoza source dominates the assemblage in the
Late Classic and early Postclassic. In this paper I present several possible explanations for this shift, and discuss potential
implications for our understanding of the ancient political and economic landscape of the Pacific Coast of Chiapas.
Faux, Jennifer (Palo Verde College)
[189]
Human Representations of Structure: A Theoretical Examination of Half-Conical Figurines from Teotihuacan, Mexico
Despite their ubiquity at Teotihuacan, little is known regarding the role of Half-Conical figurines in the everyday lives of
Teotihuacanos. These figurines are referred to as Half-Conicals due to their semi-conical shape. Produced primarily during the
Xolalpan (350–550 CE) and Metepec (550–650 CE) periods of Teotihuacan’s history, these aesthetic human representations are
rarely studied. While many figurine typologies were revealed in Teotihuacan’s material culture, these figurines varied from earlier
traditions in their aesthetic quality-they are far more ornate and elaborately adorned than previous figurine traditions. Present in
high, middle, and low-status households, these figurines were likely available to all Teotihuacanos. Given their pervasiveness and
importance in the Teotihuacan figurine tradition, I seek to evaluate the sociopolitical implications of Half-Conical figurine use at
Teotihuacan through a practice and agent-based approach, arguing that these figurines were one of the many engines by which
Teotihuacan elite perpetuated their social power. This social power, enacted by the elite through a top-down approach, led to
dramatic changes in the social structure, structure that affected all elements of public and private life, including Half-Conical use in
everyday life.
Feak, Angela (University of Michigan), Brian Stewart (University of Michigan), John Kingston (University of Michigan) and
Genevieve Dewar (University of Toronto)
[76]
Tracking Paleoaridity through Multi-Isotope Analyses of Ostrich Eggshells at Spitzkloof Rockshelter A, South Africa
Stable isotopes in ratite eggshells record information about the birds’ diet during shell formation, making them valuable proxies for
paleoenvironmental reconstruction. Here we present the results of carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen stable isotope ratios in ostrich
(Struthio camelus australis) eggshell (OES) collected in excavation at Spitzkloof A, a rock shelter in the semi-arid desert of
Namaqualand, South Africa with a late Pleistocene cultural sequence spanning ~60–17 ka. Our analysis of the organic and
inorganic fractions preserved in OES fragments contributes to a complex picture of diachronic changes in local vegetation, aridity
and temperature, allowing for critical consideration of which aspects of ostrich behavior and physiology—and by extension the
surrounding environment—are recorded in OES. Our results augment ongoing efforts to develop a robust paleoenvironmental
record for Namaqualand, allowing us to better contextualize human exploitation of this now-marginal setting during the late
Pleistocene, and of arid environments by early members of our species more generally.
Fedick, Scott (University of California, Riverside) and Louis Santiago (University of California)
[178]
Evaluating the Food Values of Alternative Crops and Implications for Drought Effects on the Ancient Maya
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      168
Far from being limited to maize, beans and squash, the ethnographic Maya are known to make use of 497 species of food plants
indigenous to the Maya Lowlands. This study presents initial results of determining “food values” based on nutritional content for
these plant species, and the methods used to determine the values. The results have significant implications for expanding our
understanding of ancient Maya foodways, and alerting paleoethnobotanists to consider the archaeological visibility of alternative
crops that may have contributed to ancient subsistence. A specific goal of the study is to identify drought tolerant species of high
food value that could have mitigated the effects of ancient droughts on food supply, and which may find growing importance to
modern farmers udder conditions of ongoing climate change.
Feinberg, Joshua (University of Minnesota)
[19]
Layered Sediments of Hall’s Cave Preserve a Record of Geomagnetic Field and Environmental History for the Last ~18,000 Years
Naturally occurring magnetic minerals often become entrained within sedimentary environments and can provide an enormous
amount of information about the direction and intensity of the Earth’s ancient magnetic field, as well as about environmental
conditions through time. The well-dated, layered sediments within Hall’s Cave provide a high-resolution archive of paleomagnetic
and paleoenvironmental data of great value to both geophysicists and paleoclimate researchers. Hall’s Cave sediments provide a
record of geomagnetic field direction and strength for the last 17,000 years cal BP. Intriguingly, at ca. 3000 years ago, the intensity
data indicate an almost four-fold increase in geomagnetic field strength lasting several hundred years and contemporaneous with
more short-lived, decadal-scale geomagnetic spikes reported from the Near East. Evidence for this extreme intensity event outside
of the Near East has major implications for our understanding of dynamics within the planet’s liquid iron outer core. Variations in the
concentration, composition, and grain size distribution of magnetic minerals throughout the Hall’s Cave section also capture clear
centennial-scale environmental perturbations, including Heinrich event 1, the Bølling-Allerød, the Younger Dryas transition and the
‘8.2 ka event.’ Thus, temporal changes in precipitation, temperature, and vegetation above the cave are retained by the sediment’s
magnetic mineral assemblage.
Fenn, Thomas (Department of Anthropology), Laure Dussubieux (Field Museum, Chicago), Shinu Abraham (St. Lawrence
University) and Alok Kanungo (IIT Gandhinagar, India)
[249]
Ancient and Historic Glass Production in India: Preliminary Results of Raw Material Analyses
Glass, and particularly glass beads, was a common commodity of Indian Ocean trade, beginning as early as the mid-first millennium
BCE and continuing through the second millennium CE. While existing elemental and isotopic analyses of glass beads recovered
from outside India have identified glass production recipes likely from India and South Asia, little else is known about the potential
production sources within these regions. An NSF-supported project designed to explore ancient glass production in India has
completed a second year of fieldwork, and preliminary results of elemental and isotopic analyses aimed at characterizing glass raw
materials from India are now available. The foci of research in India were sampling glass raw materials (e.g., sand, reh [alkali
source], etc.) from regions of known and presumed historic and ancient glass production. To this end, dozens of potential raw
material loci have been sampled in five main regions of India (Tamil Nadu/Pondicherry, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat, and
Uttar Pradesh), and those materials have been or will be subjected to elemental and isotopic analyses. While not all raw material
samples are clear matches with ancient glass recipes, preliminary elemental and isotopic results show connections to glasses from
within and beyond India.
[249]
Chair
Fenn, Thomas [249] see Abraham, Shinu
Fenn, Thomas [234] see Miller, Ian
Fenton, Monica (Louisiana State University) and David Chicoine (Louisiana State University)
[233]
The 2019 Malacological Assemblage from Cerro San Isidro: Preliminary Insights into Ancient Foodways in the Moro Region of the
Middle Nepeña Valley, Peru
Andean zooarchaeologists have extensively documented the importance of marine resources in ancient coastal Peru. Preliminary
zooarchaeological results of the first excavation season at Cerro San Isidro prove no different. The multi-component hilltop site sits in
the lower yungas zone of the middle Nepeña Valley, coastal Ancash, Peru, at least an eight-hour walk from the ocean. The 2019 field
season focused on an elite compound and documented three superimposed occupational phases going back to at least ca. 500 BCE.
This paper focuses analysis on malacological taxa. While both marine and terrestrial species were identified, four species of marine
bivalves—Donax obesulus, Semimytilus algosus, Perumytilus purpuratus, and Mesodesma donacium—dominate the mollusk
assemblage. I compare the relative proportions of each taxon for each phase in order to shed light on the degrees of continuity in how
ancient Andean peoples supplied and processed marine shellfish throughout time. I discuss what the results imply in light of data from
neighboring coastal settlements, in particular Caylán, Huambacho and Samanco in the lower and coastal section of the Nepeña Valley.
The paper offers preliminary insights into ancient foodways in the previously understudied region of Moro.
Ferguson, Jeffrey (University of Missouri)
[30]
Discussant
Ferguson, Jeffrey [203] see Schaefer, Jonathan
Ferguson, Jeffrey [120] see Van Keuren, Scott
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      169
Ferguson, T. J. (University of Arizona)
[58]
Discussant
Ferguson, Victoria [251] see Chapman, Ellen
Fernandes, Paul (Sarl Paléotime, Université Bordeaux 1), Vincent Delvigne (UMR 5199 PACEA, Service de préhistoire
Université) and Jean-Paul Raynal (UMR 5199 PACEA, Max Planck for Evolutionary Anthropology)
[30]
“I’ve been havin’ some hard travelin’. . .”: Using the Evolutionary Chain Concept in a Dynamical Approach
The originality of this approach is in applying various scales of observation to every aspect of a classical approach in order to
develop the notion of evolution. A type of siliceous raw-material (genetic type) is now understood as a population composed of
different sub-types which characterize the range of primary and secondary sources (sub-primary, alteritic, colluvial, alluvial…)—we
say gitologic types—from which they originated before they were collected by humans and finally we classify the sub-types resulting
from archaeological use, discard and taphonomic history. Our analysis methodology uses three grid-charts, grouped in a database.
Each chart focuses on a particular aspect in the life of the siliceous raw-material: 1) Grid 1, “petrography,” deals with siliceous raw-
material genesis. 2) Grid 2, “gitology,” holds information about the processes related to the pre-depositional phase (= pre-
archaeological conditions). 3) Grid 3, “taphonomy,” holds information related to the postdepositional phase (archaeological use and
site history). This database seems to be adapted to clarify questions about siliceous raw-materials and solves some problems of
definition and description encountered by archaeologists. We outline our methodology and illustrate its different aspects based on
the evolutionary chain of siliceous raw-material using geological and archaeological case studies.
Fernandez, Marco [5] see MacDonald, Brandi
Fernandez, Rachel (Center for Digital Antiquity)
[95]
Discussant
Fernandez Diaz, Juan Carlos (University of Houston / NCALM) and Ramesh Shrestha (University of Houston / NCALM)
[206]
Overview of the 2016 NCALM Lidar Surveys over the Orange Walk District of Belize
During the first week of July of 2016, the National Center for Airborne Laser Mapping (NCALM) conducted three flights with which a
total of 373.2 km2 of high density multispectral lidar were collected. These data were gathered over three distinct areas of interest
within the Orange Walk district of Belize which include 274.6 km2 along the Rio Bravo and Blue Creek, 39.8 km2 northwest of Tres
Leguas and 58.8 km2 along the Rio Hondo between Blue Creek and San Roman. The Teledyne Optech Titan multispectral lidar
sensor was used to collect the topographic and spectral data at a nominal lidar pulse density of 25 shots per m2. This talk will
introduce these datasets coverage, technical characteristics as well as their potential and limitations for archaeology and ecology
investigations.
Fernandez Diaz, Juan Carlos [102] see Stanton, Travis
Fernandez-Gotz, Manuel (University of Edinburgh)
[48]
Oscillating Settlement Networks: Aggregation and Dispersion in Iron Age Central Europe
Recent studies on early urbanism have highlighted the non-linear character of settlement aggregation processes, with periods of
increasing nucleation generally followed by others of dispersion and a return to more decentralized patterns. Iron Age Central
Europe provides a perfect case study for exploring the oscillation of settlement networks in time and space. The Early Iron Age
witnessed the development of the first urban centers which, while heterogeneous in layout and functions, can be interpreted as part
of a network of peer polity interaction. A multi-scalar approach allows for the identification of different levels of settlement hierarchy,
which were subject to dynamic changes. This paper will introduce the main results of recent research, analyzing the oscillation of
settlement networks at both a supra-regional and regional-local scale.
Fernandez-Gotz, Manuel (University of Edinburgh)
[207]
Discussant
Fernandez-Repetto, Francisco (Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán) and Lilia Fernandez-Souza (Universidad Autónoma de
Yucatán)
[57]
Cultural Heritage, Storytelling, and the Intimate Museum: Digital Museum in San Antonio Sihó, Yucatán
Based on previous archaeological research conducted in San Antonio Sihó, in 2018 numerous dialogues with junior high school
teachers took place, to develop a strategy where students would start to think about cultural heritage with emphasis in their
surroundings, mainly nature and sociocultural context. After a series of visits, we decided to develop a virtual digital museum that
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 170
could contribute toward developing an awareness of cultural heritage, past and present. Inspired by Orhan Pamuk’s idea of small
museums—as opposed to monumental museums—we propose an intimate museum or museo cercano. Using digital resources,
mainly photography and video, the museum’s collection is being built upon local knowledge, stories such as the history of henequen
hacienda, patron saint fiestas, corn field production and personal experiences and interactions with archaeologists. Here, we would
like to showcase and reflect over the entire process of transformation from these stories into the museum’s collection.
Fernandez-Souza, Lilia [57] see Fernandez-Repetto, Francisco
Fernandini, Francesca (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú)
[21]
One Settlement, Many Communities
Research centered in the prehispanic urban settlement of Cerro de Oro, in the Peruvian South Coast, is showing a wide variety of
cooking techniques, disposal arrangements and even culinary preferences which seem to reflect possible different social groupings
within the settlement. This paper will present research performed in different residential spaces within Cerro de Oro, focusing on
spatial arrangements and use of space, as well as contextual analysis of food related spaces. This information will be used to
explore the particular social configuration that characterized the urban society of Cerro de Oro.
Fernandini, Francesca [243] see Varillas, Rosa María
Fernstrom, Katharine (Towson University)
[164]
Mapping Human Imagery in Precontact North American Social Networks
Precontact North American human figures are very diverse in style when style embraces media for example ceramic vs shell;
technology for example pipe vs ornament; and appearance for example seated vs standing or full figure vs face. Stylistic areas on
the landscape can be defined for elaborate ritual figures but geographic distinctions among less elaborate figures are not as clear.
This paper asks two questions: 1) Did geographic boundaries for styles of prehistoric human figure production parallel boundaries of
political and cosmological organization across North America and 2) can we differentiate hierarchies of human figure production and
usage that correspond to organizational hierarchies of household vs upper level administration? An example of the first question
encompasses the distinction between fired and unfired ceramic clay figurines, in which clay can dissolve but ceramic cannot, which
may be a significant ritual difference. An example of the second question encompasses the distinction between ceramic figurines,
human figural pipes, and shell or copper ornaments. Clay is a ubiquitous material accessible and used by households and
leadership, while copper and shell seem to be used primarily in ritual leadership.
[164]
Chair
Ferrara, Scott (Binghamton University [SUNY])
[119]
Considering Plants as Indicators of Protohistoric Cultural Change in Mohawk Valley, NY
The Protohistoric period of the Mohawk Valley, NY is defined by the introduction of European trade goods within the archaeological
record circa AD 1525. However, the paleoethnobotanical analysis of macrobotanical assemblages is devoid in discussions of
Protohistoric cultural change in the archaeological record. This research examines the impact of colonialism through a
paleoethnobotanical analysis of the Swart Collection, an assemblage of soils collected from Mohawk Valley archaeological sites
ranging from the Early Woodland period to the seventeenth century. The findings in this study elucidate how foodways, medicinal
practices, and fuel use were affected by European influences. This illustrates the degree to which human-plant use played a role in
the cultural hybridization that marked a major change in lifeways and the archaeological deposition of material culture. Further, this
synthesis of a statistically valuable macrobotanical dataset of the Mohawk Valley contributes to a broader understanding of
Indigenous lifeways of the studied region, along with contributing to the paleoethnobotanical record of the Northeast.
Ferraro, Joseph (Baylor University), Gary Stinchcomb (Murray State University), William Lukens (University of Louisiana,
Lafayette), Katie Binetti (Baylor University) and Steven Forman (Baylor University)
[8]
Late Quaternary to Holocene Human Occupation of the Chalbi Basin, Northern Kenya
Modern humans currently occupy most habitats on Earth. Despite substantial theoretical and practical interest, however, relatively
little is known regarding the evolutionary history of human occupation of extreme arid environments. Questions of chronology and
constraints, as well as the character of relevant hominin adaptations remain—at best—only partially-answered. Recent research in
the Chalbi Basin, northern Kenya, explores human occupation of an arid, inland African basin over the last 36 ka. Modern conditions
reflect an arid bushland and dune field (<200 mm rain/yr) giving way to an expansive salt pan, the remnant of a past alkaline lake.
Geological analyses detail changes in past vegetative cover and lake levels, broadly cycling between desert conditions and lake-
margin bushland/grasslands. Archaeological excavations at Farre (GfJo2) sample a slight promontory above the modern pan. The
upper unit dates from 36 ka to 22 ka. Controlled excavations in this layer recovered 4,000+ archaeological lithic pieces, representing
a range of locally-available lithologies. Small, informal quartz and chalcedony flakes dominate the assemblage. Despite evidence of
increasingly arid paleoenvironmental conditions through time, the archaeological record is continuous through this excavated upper
unit. A range of techno-cultural adaptations are proposed and discussed. Funded by NSF BCS-1524036, BCS-1524041
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   171
Ferras, Mélanie (Paris-Sorbonne)
[266]
Archaeological Contexts and Social Uses of Pututus in the Prehispanic Central Andes
Pututus are marine shell trumpets (organologically, horns), known in the Prehispanic Central Andes from the Archaic period to the
Late Horizon. Different classes of those sound-producing artifacts have been discovered: some of them cut from various species of
marine gastropods, and others produced in ceramics that imitate the gastropod shape (skeuomorphs). Pututus can be analyzed as
sound-producing instruments via acoustical and organological studies, but they also must be understood as archaeological artifacts,
with a strong social focus. By analyzing them within their specific archaeological contexts, we can better comprehend their status,
and also trace the evolution of related sound practices through time. Thus, it is possible to determinate different social uses of
pututus, which are, most of the time, related to their acoustical possibilities. In this study, I take a complementary approach to
analyzing archaeological contexts, sound-related evidence, and iconographic data to produce a comprehensive evaluation of social-
sound practices involving pututus in the Perhispanic Central Andes.
Ferraz da Silva, Tiago (USP, MPI-SHH), Tábita Hünemeier (University of São Paulo), Johannes Krause (Max Planck Institute
for the Science of Human History), Cosimo Posth (Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History) and André
Strauss (University of São Paulo)
[244]
Genetic Diversity of Shell Midden Builders along the Brazilian Coastline
The expansion of South American groups along the coastline of Brazil has been studied through many different disciplines. Along
the Brazilian coast the vast presence of large shell middens, the so-called Sambaqui, is remarkable. The knowledge accumulated
about the Sambaqui builders societies has demonstrated an evolving process of complexification and acculturation through time.
Nevertheless, many questions remain unanswered about those coastal settlements. Archaeogenomics studies provide the
possibility to investigate the genetic variability of ancient groups and to trace the genetic affinities between past and present-day
populations. However, few archaeogenetic studies have looked at the genetic variation of prehistorical groups from Brazil, and the
demographic history of the Sambaqui builders remains largely unknown. To shed light on the genetic variation of early Brazilian
coastal groups, we sampled ancient human remains dated between around 10,000BP and 950BP from 11 archaeological sites
located along the Brazilian coast. We produced genomic capture data enriched for a targeted set of around 1.2 million single
nucleotide polymorphisms to compare the genetic ancestry of different groups. Integrating them with the known genetic variation of
other ancient South American individuals will help to increase the understanding of putative past migrations and admixtures along
the coastline of Brazil.
Ferring, Reid
[170]
The Alpha and Omega of Clovis Lithic Technology: Evidence from the Gault and Aubrey Sites in Texas
Among Mike Collin’s many researches, his work on Clovis lithic technology, including the Gault assemblages, is significant for
Paleoindian studies. Situated on an outcrop of high-quality Edwards Chert, Gault’s Clovis artifacts register all phases of lithic
reduction, including production of bifaces, blades and many retouched tools. At the Aubrey Clovis Site, almost 10,000 lithic artifacts
from two camps are indicative of long-distance procurement: Tecovas quartzite and chalcedony predominate, but lessor materials
include Arkansas Novaculite, Alibates Jasper and several varieties of Edwards Chert. Despite the low frequencies of bifaces and
retouched tools, as well as the very different raw materials, Aubrey artifacts bear unmistakable signatures of the Clovis biface and
blade technologies documented at Gault. Just as important, the Aubrey lithics clearly show the high degree of blank and tool
curation associated with high mobility on the Southern Plains. The Gault and Aubrey lithic assemblages thus provide key insights
into patterns of Clovis raw material procurement, processing, transport and final discard that contribute toward definition of a
multifaceted Clovis Chaîne Opératoire.
Ferris, Jennifer (Cardno)
[253]
Refining Interpretations of Technological Organization Using Stone Tool Functional Analyses: Recent Investigations at the Olcott
Site
The Olcott site (45SN14), first recorded nearly 60 years ago, was fundamental in defining the Old Cordilleran Culture in western
Washington. Situated on a narrow river terrace upstream from two named Stillaguamish villages, the Olcott site was heavily utilized
for hunting for thousands of years. Though it is characterized as a hunting locale due to the high occurrence of stone tools, no
organic materials or features have been found on site to support this functional interpretation. Recent excavations at the site
provided an opportunity to conduct macro- and microscopic analyses on the newly recovered stone tools. Combined with
experimental use-wear studies, these analyses better refine our understanding of tool use and technological organization at the site.
This approach exemplifies methodologies advocated by William Andrefsky Jr., who contributed greatly to technological and
experimental analyses in archaeology.
[253]
Chair
Fertelmes, Craig (Logan Simpson) and Colleen Strawhacker (National Snow and Ice Data Center)
[125]
You Reap What You Sow: Long-Term Consequences of Divergent Hohokam Subsistence Strategies in the Queen Creek Drainage
of Arizona
Site AZ U:14:49(ASM) is a large prehistoric Hohokam village located along an ephemeral stream within the Queen Creek drainage
of south-central Arizona. Nearly a century of research at the site has revealed that the village was inhabited for at least 800 years
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 172
(ca. AD 700–1500) and, to this day, remains an important place among descendant O’odham. Recent data recovery excavations at
AZ U:14:49(ASM) further revealed that the population of the village waxed and waned opposite of other sites in the Queen Creek
area. To explain this variation, we employ resilience theory, which explores the interplay between human decisions and the
transformation and persistence of socioecological systems. Specifically, we posit that settlement at AZ U:14:49(ASM) was beneficial
during periods of drier conditions given its location at the interface of multiple ecotones and within a unique hydraulic setting.
However, when wetter climate conditions prevailed, population at the site declined as households pursued more intensive farming
strategies in the fertile lowlands. This paper discusses the variable risks and ultimate consequences of human actions designed to
promote household economic stability.
Fertelmes, Craig [79] see Phillips, Bruce
Fertelmes, Craig [229] see Plumlee, R. Scott
Festa, Marcella (Northwest University, Xi’an)
[205]
The Social Side of Death: Mortuary Variability and Social Complexity in the Ili Region (Xinjiang)
The Ili region, in northwestern Xinjiang, is a large valley open to the Kazakhstani steppe and has been acknowledged as crucial for
understanding the eastward spread of the Andronovo culture (ca. 1900–1200) in the Bronze Age (ca. 2000–1000 BCE). In over fifty
prehistoric sites excavated since the last century, considerable quantities of pottery and metals have been found that are
typologically and compositionally comparable to the Andronovo material from Semirech’e and northeastern Kyrgyzstan. Most
research, however, has overlooked that, in sharp contrast to the cultural homogeneity of the assemblage, grave structures and
burial rites vary considerably and do not consistently adhere to the Andronovo model. This phenomenon can be investigated as a
context to study the local society and its evolution. The understanding of mortuary variability can also provide more solid foundations
for discussing mechanisms of cultural interaction with the Andronovo culture. In this research, mortuary data are cross-examined,
according to scales of analysis, and through human-environment interaction analysis. Data are subjected to statistical analyses in
order to highlight patterns of continuity and discontinuity in burial practices across time and space. The social dimension of mortuary
behavior is ultimately discussed, and the socio-economic evolution of the research area outlined.
Fiallos, Pedro [201] see Ortiz, Byron
Fiedel, Stuart [103] see Morrow, Juliet
Fiel, María Victoria [198] see Franco, Nora
Field, Erin [221] see Bush, Dominic
Field, Julie (Ohio State University) and Joy McCorriston (Ohio State University)
[226]
Teachable Moments: Assignments and Assessment in the Anthropocene
Over the past five years, we have redesigned our GEC level World Prehistory and Introduction to Archaeology course to engage
with the prehistory of the Anthropocene. Writing our own text has allowed us to focus student attention on major concepts that are
relevant to understanding the history of the Anthropocene, such as diversity, technology, extinctions, human decision making,
building monuments, conspicuous consumption, and extracting the modern world. But how do we convey the lessons of our courses
beyond merely reading text? Further, how does assessment provide evaluation but also feedback that carries learning forward?
Here we discuss assignment generation and assessment within the framework of a course dedicated to teaching the Anthropocene.
We present our goals as the instructors of these topics, and ideas for in-class and out-of-class lessons that focus on archaeology’s
unique perspective on the Anthropocene. We investigate how assessment and student feedback can further enhance student action
and understanding of archaeology’s relevance in an anthropogenic future.
[226]
Chair
Field, Julie [76] see Kirgesner, Samantha
Field, Julie [226] see McCorriston, Joy
Field, Sean (University of Notre Dame), Donna Glowacki (University of Notre Dame), Tim Hovezak (Mesa Verde National
Park, NPS) and Kelsey Reese (University of Notre Dame)
[149]
The Far View Archaeological Project: An Introduction
Over the history of Mesa Verde National Park, the Far View community has been the focus of multiple, yet discrete archaeological
projects, from Fewkes’ excavations in the 1920s to more recent architectural documentation and stabilization in 2012. However,
there are gaps in survey coverage, site forms require updating, and the community lacks an overall synthesis and interpretation of
its social history. We report on our first season of a new, five-year collaboration, the Far View Archaeological Project (FVAP). The
primary goal is to re-assess settlement on Chapin Mesa through a full coverage survey of the Far View community, a densely
populated pueblo village centered on Far View Great House. We use modern high-resolution techniques, including GPS mapping
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 173
and drone-based photogrammetry, to record Pueblo habitations. We present the results from our first season when we recorded
eighteen sites, including fifteen habitation sites and covered 38 acres. While many of these sites had been previously recorded, or
were excavated by J.W. Fewkes in 1922 (Far View Tower), and by R. Lister and the UC-Boulder Field School (1954–56; 5MV866,
5MV875), we also identified three previously unrecorded sites. Preliminary results suggest there is a possible great house in Far
View West.
Fields, Mara (Baylor University), Todd Ahlman (Texas State University), Grace Tolan (Rhodes College), Jon Russ (Rhodes
College) and Stephen Carmody (Troy University)
[215]
Residue Analysis of Clay Tobacco Pipes from an Eighteenth-Century St. Eustatius Plantation
This study examines clay smoking pipes recovered from an eighteenth-century plantation sugar works (SE095) on the Dutch
Caribbean island of St. Eustatius. The pipes are used to date the assemblage and gain a better understanding about acquisition,
smoking, and discard practices of enslaved Africans who labored on the plantation. Results from residue analysis on pipe bowls
gives insight into what people at the sugar works were smoking, confirming whether it was tobacco, a combination of plants, or other
substances being smoked in the pipes. The results of the preliminary study pooled with residue analysis provide a clearer picture of
the site history for the sugar works as well as the day-to-day personal activities of the enslaved Africans who lived and labored on
the plantation.
Fields, Ronald
[69]
New Archaeological Data from Old Southwestern Caves
This research provides results funded by the New Mexico Archaeological Council and the Albright-Wirth Grants. This provides
insight on an ancient votive offering practice that occurred in the American Southwest and in other regions in North America. The
results of this ritual practice provides researchers with preserved atlatls, spears, bows, and arrows that may shed light on the
technological change in ballistics from the atlatl/dart to the bow/arrow. Was the technological change the result of a gradual
technological transition or an abrupt technological replacement? These results are preliminary at best but may provide one of many
steps to answering this research question.
Filimoehala, Darby (International Archaeological Research Institute Inc.), Alex Morrison (International Archaeological
Research Institute), Jennifer Huebert (International Archaeological Research Institute), Jon Tulchin (Kamehameha
Schools, Wahi Kupuna Program) and Trever Duarte (Kamehameha Schools, Wahi Kupuna Program)
[262]
Stewardship, Community Engagement, and Archaeological Research: The Koehana of Ka’ūpūlehu
E ʻai i kekahi, e kāpī i kekahi. Eat some, salt some (Mary Kawena Pukui, ʻŌlelo Noʻeau No. 252). Kamehameha Schools (KS), a
private Native Hawaiian organization and charitable educational trust, has stewardship of large archaeological collections from
Ka’ūpūlehu, Hawai’i Island, generated by historic preservation-related archaeological work conducted from the late 1980s-early
2000s. KS management of these collections is guided by three principles: kūleana (responsibility) to mālama (care for) koehana
(cultural material) collected from wahi kūpuna (ancestral sites), fostering sustainable archaeology, and looking to kūpuna
(ancestors) to inform modern resource management. This has resulted in collaborations with Hawaiian and non-Hawaiian
stakeholders, environmental groups, and archaeologists to develop a collections management plan for the curation of cultural
material, assess research opportunities, and create strategies to engage KS beneficiaries. Archaeological outcomes have included
the generation of zooarchaeological data to guide current marine stewardship efforts, the refinement of the settlement chronology
for this area, and archaeobotanical research to inform community-based dryland forest restoration. As educational outreach,
workshops have been conducted with students and community members and the results of collections-based archaeological
investigations have been discussed at community meetings. The research and educational potential of these collections, however,
is expansive.
Finley, Judson [26] see Freeman, Jacob
Finn, Elliot [84] see Lopez-Finn, Elliot
Fisch, Mike [232] see Mraz, Veronica
Fisher, Abigail (Southern Methodist University) and Lewanne French (Bluebonnet Animal Clinic)
[22]
Canine Dental Damage and Dental Pathology as Indicators of Changing Haulage Roles during the Transition to Agriculture
Dogs were an important resource for many Plains peoples, especially for the transportation of materials (e.g., timber, meat, water).
The use of dogs for traction may have even facilitated high mobility in early North and South American populations. This high
mobility eventually decreased with the introduction of agriculture across the northern Plains. Did the adoption of agriculture also
change the roles of dogs and their significance as a hauling tool? This research assesses canine dental/mandibular damage and
dental pathology on the northern Plains to investigate changing care, dietary, and husbandry practices associated with the adoption
of agriculture. Dentition and cranial fragments are often the only surviving elements from canids in the archaeological record, and
thus a significant source of data for the treatment of these animals. If dogs decreased in significance, there may be observable
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  174
changes in nutrition and treatment, reflected in dental development, observable trauma, and pathology.
[22]
Chair
Fisher, Chelsea (Washington and Lee University)
[46]
Pushing Back against the Greenwashed Agricultural Past
“Greenwashing” is advertising or marketing that misleads consumers into thinking that a product or company is environmentally
responsible. Many allegedly “sustainable” global food corporations greenwash, and increasingly, they do so by drawing misleading
connections between their products and the agricultural past. These corporations leverage particular portrayals of the agricultural
past to sell food—effectively treating farmers as ahistorical, apolitical, and static. The past becomes a prop. This kind of
greenwashing erases the ongoing legacies of Colonialism in modern food systems, and because it disproportionately affects
Indigenous communities, it is an issue of environmental justice. So how can we push back? In this talk, I outline a call to action for
environmentally conscious consumers to challenge the greenwashing of the agricultural past. Using global examples and my own
experiences in archaeology and community engagement in the Maya lowlands of Yucatán, Mexico, I urge people to reclaim the
agricultural past from the corporations as a pathway toward more environmentally just food systems at home and around the world.
[46]
Chair
Fisher, Erich (Arizona State University), Shara Bailey (New York University), Hayley Cawthra (Geophysics and Remote
Sensing Unit), Irene Esteban (Evolutionary Studies Institute) and Stephan Winkler (iThemba Labs, Pretoria, South Africa)
[11]
Update on Research at the Site of Waterfall Bluff, Eastern Cape Province, South Africa
Excavations at Waterfall Bluff, South Africa document evidence of occupation in a persistent coastal context from MIS3 to the
Middle Holocene. Remains of marine mollusks and fish show for the first time that coastal foraging was a component of some
hunter-gatherer groups’ subsistence practices during glacial phases in the Late Pleistocene, and that this practice continued into the
Early Holocene. Here, we provide updates from recent excavations in deposits dating to the Last Glacial Maximum (26.5–19 ka),
which show a complex depositional history of lateral (i.e., from the shelter outward) and vertical sediment accumulation over time. A
complete LGM sequence has now been recovered from which we have recovered two human teeth (a molar and canine). Only three
human remains in Africa date to the LGM, yet none are well-dated, and all come from questionable contexts. The precise
sedimentological, geochronological, and archaeological context of our teeth is supported by laser total station and photogrammetric
mapping, sediment micromorphology, and geochronology analyses using >40 radiocarbon ages and 5 OSL ages. Our robust
radiocarbon sampling strategy now makes Waterfall Bluff one of the best dated sites from this time period in southern Africa.
Fisher, Kevin [263] see Kulick, Rachel
Fisher, Lynn (University of Illinois, Springfield)
[226]
Teaching the Climate Crisis in a General Education Course: What Can Archaeology Contribute?
With its comparative approach, time depth, and close intertwining of natural and social science perspectives, anthropological
archaeology is a rich source of insights relevant to environmental issues and problem-solving today. However, environmental
archaeology courses are typically upper-level electives that reach relatively small numbers of students, while introductory world
prehistory texts devote few pages to contemporary issues. This paper examines lessons learned in many years of teaching a
general education course that draws on prehistoric, historic, and sociocultural case studies to explore the history and diversity of
human-land relationships. The goal of the course is to provide a deeper historical context for today’s global challenges by studying
the role of human activities and social/economic systems in shaping the historical, constructed landscapes of the world. Building on
ideas from environmental education, I assign research projects allowing students to investigate a single place at several points in
time, developing a sense of place and awareness of interactions between local and global processes at varying spatial and temporal
scales. I analyze student projects and explore their informal self-assessments to identify aspects of the course that impact student
learning and consider how archaeologists can do more to highlight contributions of the discipline.
Fisher, Philip (Washington State University)
[253]
Topographic Morphometric Analysis of Late Paleoindian Projectile Points: Goshen and Plainview of the Great Plains
Topographic morphometric analysis uses 3D models of projectile points to detect similarities and differences in flake scar patterns
that result from tool production. In small hunter-gatherer populations, such as those during the Paleoindian period, flintknapping
knowledge and technique would be passed from generation to generation. It is therefore expected that flake scar patterns should
appear similar within a point type or between types that share a learning lineage of flintknapping knowledge. Topographic analyses
can be used to address possible relationships of projectile point types that appear in chronological succession or that occur in
adjacent geographic regions. This knowledge can assist archaeologists in resolving questions concerning cultural continuity or
population replacement in the archaeological record. In this study, topographic morphometric analysis is applied to address the
relationship of two unfluted Late Paleoindian lanceolate projectile point types: Goshen points from the northern Plains and Plainview
points from the southern Plains. The results of this study, in conjunction with other archaeological data, suggest that these two point
types are geographic expressions of a shared learned lineage of flintknapping knowledge and technique.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      175
Fisher, Suzanne [56] see Harle, Michaelyn
Fitton, Tom (University of York, UK), Stephanie Wynne-Jones (University of York, UK) and Abdallah Ali (Department of
Museums and Antiquities, Zanzibar)
[216]
Marking Time: Mapping Settlement and Urban Transitions on Zanzibar
This paper describes the ongoing archaeological investigation of Unguja Ukuu through the Urban Ecology and Transitions of the
Zanzibar Archipelago Project (UETZAP). As one of the earliest Swahili settlements of the East African coast, Unguja Ukuu is an
ideal location for exploring spatial and temporal transitions in processes of settlement and urbanism. We focus on the innovation of
an archaeospatial methodology, combining multiple survey techniques with legacy data, to explore settlement growth, urbanism,
and changes in environmental exploitation as part of a fluid process. Previous excavations have revealed keyhole stratigraphic
sequences and broad phases of occupation, but the combination of new and legacy survey data with Bayesian modeling of
excavated radiocarbon sequences has enabled a new consideration of the site’s layout and growth, and the incorporation of
environmental data enables discussion of the changing character of the site and ecological relationship of the Swahili inhabitants
with their local environment. This analysis has prompted a discussion of the ways in which we conceptualise settlements on the
basis of broad phasing, and draws attention instead to the idea of settlement on Zanzibar, as well as the wider East African coast,
as an ongoing process of persistent, knowledgeable exploitation.
Fitzgerald, Curran (University of North Carolina, Greensboro)
[260]
Beasts of No Nation: Animals and Exchange during the Late Intermediate Period in the Moquegua Valley, Peru
The traditional characterization of southern Peru during the Late Intermediate Period (LIP) as a landscape of ceaseless violence and
political fragmentation suggests a general breakdown in the infrastructure of subsistence following the collapse of the Middle
Horizon Wari and Tiwanaku polities. Such interpretations portray a crude devolution in land use from engineered state agricultural
regimes to struggling LIP agropastoralists, the collapse of state-facilitated exchange networks, and shrinking spheres of interaction
driven by settlement nucleation and internecine conflict. This paper presents the preliminary results of faunal analyses from LIP
assemblages in the Moquegua valley of southern Peru that appear to contradict this narrative. Domestic faunal assemblages from
excavations at Las Peñas and Cerro Capanto indicate that both marine and highland resources were part of the quotidian diet of LIP
inhabitants of the upper Moquegua Valley, while a sample of faunal remains from mortuary contexts in the middle Valley further
suggests broad relationships of complementarity during this period. These data suggest that, far from “just surviving” in a landscape
irreconcilably fractured by state withdrawal and collapse, LIP inhabitants of the Moquegua Valley forged far-reaching relationships of
complementarity and exchange that had not been possible under the strictures of state hegemony.
Fitzhugh, William (Smithsonian), Michael Mlyniec (Smithsonian) and Igor Chechushkov (Smithsonian)
[50]
More Than Just a Pot: The Social Life of Soapstone Vessels among the Southern Labrador Inuit
Throughout the Canadian Arctic and Greenland soapstone (steatite) oil lamps and cooking pots were a common and crucial
component of Inuit daily life. Maintaining a houseful involved elaborate behavior structured around the hearth and its technical and
social components. Despite their importance and their ubiquitous presence in archaeological sites, soapstone vessels have received
little scholarly attention. This paper featuring data from excavations at seventeenth to eighteenth-century Inuit sites along the
Quebec Lower North Shore explores material, social and ritual aspects of this technology in a context of early European contact and
culture change, when soapstone vessels were being replaced by copper and cast iron pots. Issues involved in this conversion
include sourcing, manufacture, transport and exchange, mechanics of use, heat sources, breakage and repair, spiritual life, and
ritual disposal. Soapstone cookware was expensive and highly curated; yet its end-of-life remains are common archaeological finds.
While mostly focusing on the historical Southern Inuit, the use of soapstone vessels among Labrador Inuit, Thule, and Dorset
cultures, and from Inuit oral history and ethnography, provide comparative perspective.
Fitzmaurice, Rosamund (University College London), Tia Watkins (University College London), Claire Ebert (Northern
Arizona University) and Jaime Awe (Northern Arizona University)
[130]
Ancient Games: New Evidence of Patolli in Xunantunich, Belize
Patolli is a Mesoamerican board game best known from written Spanish accounts during the time of conquest and thereafter.
Growing archaeological evidence of the game in Maya lowlands during the Terminal Classic period (AD 750–900/1000) is
increasing our knowledge of patolli in Pre-Columbian times. In this paper we discuss new evidence of patolli documented in
structures surrounding Plaza A-III at the Classic period Maya city of Xunantunich, located in the Belize River Valley region of west-
central Belize. Like other elite spaces at Xunantunich, many of the excavated rooms in structures surrounding the elevated plaza,
composing the site’s northern palace group, contain partial or complete patolli boards incised on terminal phase architecture. We
compare these data from Xunantunich to other patolli boards across the Belize River Valley to address questions about formal and
functional characteristics of these features. We also discuss the timing of the introduction of patolli in the Belize Valley, the socio-
political implications of its Terminal Classic introduction into this region, who may have played the game, why it is predominantly
found in elite spaces, and from where it may have originated.
Fitzmaurice, Rosamund [178] see Saldaña, Gabriela
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  176
Fitzpatrick, Leslie (Mercyhurst University), Emma Bonthorne (Aditu Arkeologia), Danee Wilson (Aditu Arkeologia) and Fran
Valle de Tarazaga (Aditu Arkeologia)
[240]
Stable Isotopic Examination (δ18O, δ15N, δ13C) of Human Remains from the Monastery of Santa María de Zamartze, Uharte-Arakil
Municipality, Navarre Chartered Community, Spain
An initial subset (n = 5) of the human remains (N = 155) recovered during the 2011 to 2015 excavation seasons from the Monastery
of Santa María de Zamartze burial grounds were analyzed for stable oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon isotopes derived from bone and
tooth carbonate and collagen. As this site is positioned in close geographic association with a medieval religious pilgrimage route
and several of the individuals were recovered with probable religious-based burial goods, the stable isotope analyses conducted for
this investigation elucidate the probable geographic region of origin for the individuals sampled. Mobility profiles across the life
histories of these individuals as well as dietary profiles are examined as well. This preliminary research contributes to the emerging
stable isotope dataset for this territory in Spain and constitutes some of the primary data related to the medieval period in Navarre.
Fitzpatrick, Scott (University of Oregon)
[100]
Chair
Fitzpatrick, Scott (University of Oregon) and Christina Giovas (Simon Fraser University)
[271]
Sociocultural Dynamics of Surf Clam (Atactodea striata) Intensification and Fishing Declines at Chelechol Ra Orrak Rockshelter
(Palau, Micronesia)
Analysis of a large molluscan assemblage (MNI >15,000) from the Chelechol ra Orrak site in Palau, Micronesia provides important
insight into prehistoric marine subsistence strategies between ca. 3000–0 BP. During the first two millennia of site use, surf clams
(Atactodea striata) and humped conch (Gibberulus gibberulus) increase significantly, accounting for the majority of molluscan
remains. Surf clams especially dominate the assemblage and show a continued, dramatic rise in numbers between ca. 1000 and 0
BP, at the same time that virtually all other taxa decline. Although this trend reflects increased foraging emphasis on the sandy
littoral/shallow sublittoral zone where A. striata may be collected, because other nearshore molluscan taxa do not increase, the
pattern suggests selective intensification of surf clams alone. We evaluate Medieval Warm Period and Little Ice Age associated
climate change and anthropogenic “overharvesting” (exploitation depression) as potential causes of A. striata intensification, but
conclude that neither explanation is supported. Alternative sociocultural variables may be responsible for the archaeomalacological
patterning observed at Chelechol ra Orrak. Taken together with previous human paleoecology studies for Palau, the findings
presented here demonstrate the potential for a range of effects associated with long-term human-environment interactions in these
islands.
Fitzpatrick, Scott [271] see Ardren, Traci
Fitzpatrick, Scott [135] see Hanna, Jonathan
Fitzpatrick, Scott [59] see Jorissen, Philippa
Fitzpatrick, Scott [123] see Lawrence, John
Fitzpatrick, Scott [100] see Napolitano, Matthew
Fitzpatrick, Scott [100] see Ono, Rintaro
Fitzpatrick, Tony (University of Wyoming)
[75]
Collagen and Apatite Stable Isotope Values from Bison Bone at the Hell Gap Site
This work adds collagen δ15N and δ13C to the apatite δ13C and δ18O values previously presented by the author, as well as C:N ratios
demonstrating the viability of many samples from Hell Gap. Bison bone can be found throughout Paleoindian deposits at the site,
providing a possible proxy for regional climate change. Carbon ratios for collagen samples (n=23) range from -19.08‰ to -14.60‰,
and apatite, which is currently a smaller subset of samples (n=13), from -9.4‰ to -6.5‰. Apatite-collagen spacing of carbon is
between 8‰ and 10.41‰, with an average of 9.23‰. Apatite δ18O values range from -10.2‰ to -8.0‰ and collagen δ15N from
5.15‰ to 10.62‰. These data are compared with existing paleoclimate information from Hell Gap and the surrounding area.
Flad, Rowan (Harvard University)
[45]
Chair
Fladd, Samantha (University of Colorado, Boulder), Adam Watson (American Museum of Natural History), Vernon
Scarborough (University of Cincinnati) and R. Gwinn Vivian (Arizona State Museum)
[98]
Implications of Agricultural Practice for Chaco Society
The extent and effectiveness of agriculture in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico has long been debated in Southwest archaeology. The
environmental marginality of the canyon, particularly limited access to water, and questions over population size during the Pueblo II
occupation (800–1150 CE) continue to dominate discussions of the sociopolitical development of the canyon. Guided by Stephen
Plog’s vision and his unwavering belief in the value of the data-rich legacy documentary record, the formation of the Chaco
Research Archive constitutes a major watershed in Chaco archaeology. The unprecedented access to the near-entirety of original
excavation records has spurred renewed archaeological investigations, which, in turn, have fundamentally altered our
reconstructions of Chaco society. One such recent research project yielded the revelation that several cultural features previously
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    177
assumed to date to the 1000s “fluorescence” were in fact formed at least a century earlier, profoundly reorienting our understanding
of the regional chronology. In this paper, we combine research on water management and agricultural practice with this new
understanding of Chaco chronology to discuss the implications for local sociopolitical development and organization. Following Dr.
Plog’s lead, we emphasize the importance of reanalyzing and reinterpreting existing data in order to improve our reconstructions of
the past.
Fladeboe, Randee (University of Florida), Kitty Emery (Florida Museum of Natural History), Erin Thornton (Washington
State University) and Camilla Speller (University of British Columbia)
[129]
Further Investigation of Turkey Wellness and Treatment in Mesoamerica
It is well-established that the turkey occupied a prominent and multivalent role in several different prehistoric Mesoamerican
societies, referenced by numerous remains found at archaeological sites across this region. This paper revisits the ongoing
construction of a health profile of domesticated turkeys based on skeletal remains gathered from an expanded database of Maya
and Central Mexican sites, in order to assess and compare regional differences in turkey treatment and use. Building on previous
studies, we have continued to gather data on pathology and morphometrics using computer tomography (CT) scanning. We
synthesize this information with data gathered from isotopic and aDNA evidence in order to review distributions of sex and species,
and identify variations in the nutritional support and management of Mesoamerican turkeys between different sites.
[129]
Chair
Flanagan, Kelin (Archaeological Consulting Services Ltd.), Astrid Runggaldier (University of Texas, Austin) and Samantha
Krause (University of Texas, Austin)
[14]
Maya Structures for Wet and Dry Seasons: Adaptive Strategies and Microenvironments at the Site of Chulub in the Crooked Tree
Lagoon System
This study evaluates interrelationships between two ancient Maya structures excavated at the Terminal Classic-Early Postclassic
site of Chulub, located on the shores of a lagoon in the wetland environment of Crooked Tree island, Belize. Both structures are
associated with a linear depression that is seasonally inundated with water. We examine a comparative framework of analysis of
features known as “pocket bajos” identified in other recent investigations at the northern Belize site of Aventura, which can serve as
a parallel for similarly integrated human-environment relationships at Chulub during the same time period. Pocket bajos at Aventura
were integral for a variety of subsistence practices, blurring the lines between agriculture and opportunistic resource gathering. We
delineate the material assemblages and spatial layouts from excavations at Chulub, and in addition present the outcome of a
sediment sampling strategy, addressing our questions on the nature of the depressions as water features coeval with site
occupation. We further explore the implications of adaptive strategies like seasonal aquaculture, and posit that the structures at
Chulub, and by extension the human activities that took place there, need to be understood in direct relationship with the geological
and microenvironmental features of this lagoon system.
Flegontov, Pavel (University of Ostrava, Czechia), Leonid Vyazov (Kazan Federal University) and Airat Sitdikov (Khalikov
Institute of Archaeology)
[173]
Managing the Explosive Growth of Archaeogenetics: Admixture Graphs and Graph-Based Archaeological Databases
Archaeogenetics is now undergoing a period of explosive growth. However, this rapid growth creates problems. Human history from
the genetic perspective is a complex graph of population splits and “gene flows”, but many studies do not explore graphs directly,
relying on ordination methods and allele or haplotype sharing statistics instead. Thus, the first problem is the lack of standardized
and universally accepted protocols for testing complex graph models. Another problem encountered in quite a few studies is
imbalanced and quasi-random sampling across archaeological sites and periods that makes even the most sophisticated genetic
analyses of limited use for understanding history. We believe that archaeogenetic sampling should be driven by historical questions
and guided by a global database cataloguing archaeological sites and all kinds of associated information, including genetic data and
results of genetic analyses. We have developed a graph-based database on the Neo4j platform (https://www.culturetat.info/) that
allows integrating virtually any type of data associated with an archaeological site. Currently the database is focused on
archeological sites in the Volga basin (Russia), but it has a potential to function as a “social network” for scientists worldwide, which
would bring about its rapid growth.
Fleisher, Jeffrey (Rice University) and Joe Merchant (Rice University)
[249]
Indian Ocean Glass Beads from Miyoba Mound in the Kafue River Floodplain, Zambia
This paper reports on an assemblage of Indian Ocean glass beads excavated from the Middle Iron Age mound of Miyoba in western
Zambia at the hook of the Kafue River. Miyoba was a long-occupied settlement during the late first and early second millennium AD
represented by approximately 5 m of occupation debris that include house floors, midden deposits, and iron smithing debris. The
assemblage contains 115 glass beads; most are glass beads with finished ends, with a small number of wound beads. The deepest
stratigraphic glass bead is a garden roller, likely imported from K2 in South Africa—this is the northernmost find of a garden roller to
date. We will describe the assemblage, examine the chemical signature of a sample of these beads and their connections to
previously established bead series, and discuss the implications of the trade in Indian Ocean beads in the far inland for early second
millennium Zambia.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   178
Fleskes, Raquel (University of Pennsylvania), Graciela Cabana (University of Tennessee, Knoxville) and Theodore Schurr
(University of Pennsylvania)
[169]
Genomic Insights into Kinship and Labor at Seventeenth-Century Patuxent Point, Maryland
High mortality and low birth rates led to a primarily migrant population of Europeans settling in early seventeenth-century Maryland,
raising questions about the extent to which kin groups influenced labor and settlement strategies at early plantation sites. To explore
this issue, we analyzed the biological histories of 18 individuals buried at the Patuxent Point site in southern Maryland. Midden
excavations indicated that the site was occupied by members of the middling planter class, who occupied the site from ~1650 to
1680 CE. Two burial clusters separated by two isolated burials suggested the presence of domestic households, prompting
investigations into the existence of families, indentured servants, and/or enslaved African individuals there. To further elucidate their
biological relationships, we extracted DNAs from all 18 of individuals. The DNA extracts were enriched for human genomic DNA and
subjected to next-generation sequencing, with the resulting data being statistically analyzed to explore genetic diversity and kinship
in the samples. After situating these data within existing archaeological and osteological evidence, we are able to reconstruct the
mortuary patterns of the Patuxent Point site as they relate to labor and migration strategies in seventeenth-century Maryland.
Fletcher, Roland (University of Sydney)
[28]
Discussant
Fletcher, Roland (University of Sydney)
[48]
Urban Network Resilience and Fragility
Residential densities within the settlements of sedentary communities vary between about 1,000 persons/ha and less than 10
persons/ha. Some regional settlement networks consist predominantly of settlement with compact, high density residence patterns
while others are dominated by settlements with dispersed, low-density residence patterns. Compact settlement networks display
substantial resilience. While individual settlements may fail the networks continue. By contrast networks of settlements with
dispersed occupations patterns tend to fragment after the demise of the major settlements. New networks form away from the
former metropolitan heartland regions as can be seen following the ninth-century CE demise of the Classic Maya network and the
fourteenth-fifteenth century CE demise of Angkorian empire network. The resilience of compact urban settlement networks has
appeared to be normal and unproblematic. But now the very different futures of networks of dispersed settlements are known the
differing network outcomes require explanation. Once compact urbanism is present in a region its networks generally appear to be
permanent. But what of the Harappan network? Conversely the overlap of the Pre-Classic to the Classic Maya dispersed urban
network may be of great significance for dispersed settlement networks. There are some implications for the future of present-day
urban networks.
[48]
Chair
Flood, John (Indiana University East), Edward Herrmann (Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences), Scott Hipskind
(Cardno) and Jeremy Wilson (Indiana University)
[232]
Household-Level Stone Tool Economies among Illinois Valley Mississippians: A Case Study from the Lawrenz Gun Club Site
Archaeological excavations at Lawrenz Gun Club, a fortified Mississippian Period village in west-central Illinois, have provided a
context for examining the daily lives of those who lived there from the late eleventh through the early fourteenth century AD. As part
of a larger research project examining the founding, fluorescence, and eventual abandonment of the largest Mississippian village in
the central Illinois River valley, this study focuses on diachronic changes in lithic raw material procurement and use, as well as stone
tool manufacturing, associated with domestic structures. The data indicate that while early households at Lawrenz (AD 1050–1200)
relied almost solely on the widely available Burlington chert, the locally available La Moine River chert became increasingly
important during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. The analyses also indicate that these late Mississippian households at
Lawrenz relied more heavily on Mill Creek chert for agricultural activities and invested more energy into the production of formal
tools rather than expedient flake-based tools. These diachronic data suggest villagers developed a more formalized approach to
their flaked stone economy during the latter half of Lawrenz’s occupation.
Florence, Kathryn
[164]
Dancing with Death at Monte Alban: Interconnected Polities and Violence in a Disembedded Capital
In terms of Mesoamerican violence, the sacrificial practices of the Aztec Triple Alliance and Maya polities come to mind. However,
these studies overlook the manifestations of violence that existed in the Oaxaca region of Mexico in the Formative/Preclassic period.
Relatively obscure outside of Latin American archaeology, the site of Monte Alban was one of the first inter-regional cosmopolitan
centers in Mesoamerica, rising to prominence between 100 BC and AD 200. The site gained influence over the Oaxacan highlands,
but also came into conflict with polities beyond their boundaries that ultimately ended in war. Here I show how Monte Alban used
visual representations of violence and death in the Danzantes reliefs as a tool for demonstrating their control over far-flung
populations that were now subservient to a disembedded capital. These stone slabs display the artistic rendering of the
dismembered bodies of slain combatants, standing as a metonym for the defeated city-state. I propose that by showing them so
openly at a site where there would be representatives of the defeated and possible political allies, Monte Alban was enacting
violence itself, resulting in a threat of domination and the promise of subjugation to their regime.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    179
Flores, Alexandra (University of Oklahoma)
[78]
Analysis of Results from a Geophysical Survey Conducted at the Brackett Site (34Ck43) in Eastern Oklahoma
This poster presents the results of a multi-sensor geophysical survey conducted at the Brackett site (34CK43) located in
northeastern Oklahoma. The Brackett site is a Harlan Phase (AD 1150–1250) Spiro-related mound site that was excavated by the
Works Progress Administration (WPA) during the late 1930s. This project is the first geophysical survey that has been performed at
Brackett, utilizing magnetometry, ground-penetrating radar, and electrical resistivity. These results reveal anomalies that are
consistent with archaeological features typical of the Spiro region, as well as anomalies that are indicative of remnants from the
WPA excavations. A landscape approach is taken to examine how Brackett fits into the larger Spiro region.
Flores, Jorge (Binghamton University [SUNY])
[257]
Salt Exploitation in the Northern Ecuadorian Highlands: Beyond the Economic Benefits
Salt studies in Ecuador are limited, however, important contributions about the exploitation and trade of this resource have been
analyzed by outstanding ethnographic and ethnohistorical efforts. These efforts have suggested that salt production was exercised
under a system of multi-ethnic colonies controlled by centralized institutions in order to consolidate the economic and political
aspects of larger administrative entities. Such affirmation has been analyzed under premises shaped by an environmentalist
determinism which emphasize on the accessibility to this resource and the political structure behind such activity. Archaeologically,
salt influences over the population on the northern Ecuadorian Andes have not been fully explored yet, and the lack of alternative
perspectives are also less evident. However, in this presentation, I will show preliminary data about how salt was able to transform
not only the economy of the Chota-Mira Valley region but also how salt was able to transform bodies and different social aspects of
daily life. This preliminary work seeks to demonstrate that salt facilitated, persuaded and organized Santa Catalina de Salinas by
connecting people and things. The main goal is to understand how salt acted as a generative force in the creation and organization
of local communities over changing historical circumstances.
Flores, Mary Faith [129] see Conrad, Cyler
Flynn, Barrett [52] see Skinner, Dougless
Flynn, Erin (PAL)
[176]
Mining Diamond Hill Resource Area: A Precontact Quartz Quarry in Northern Rhode Island
Although we have not found diamonds, we have recovered an overwhelming assemblage of quartz artifacts from the Diamond Hill
resource area. This area appears to have provided precious lithic resources to Native American inhabitants during at least the
Archaic period. The Pine Swamp Quarry site was identified during an archaeological survey for an electrical transmission line in
2018. Additional investigations revealed several fire-related features at the site, raising questions about the extent and use of this
resource area beyond lithic extraction. Modern quarrying in the area may have erased traces of the pre-contact quartz source, but
the recovered assemblage from the Pine Swamp Quarry site contributes to our understanding of extraction technologies and raw
material and campsite selection, and to the overall narrative of past occupations in the Diamond Hill area. Recovered evidence
suggests that site use spanned several millennia, over which varied tool forms were preferred and/or replaced, as has been seen at
other recorded quarry sites in the general vicinity. Diamonds are forever, and quartz, too.
Foias, Antonia (Williams College)
[126]
Maya Polychrome Production and Exchange in the Southern Lowlands: Lessons from the Ik’ Polychrome Style of Motul de San
José
Debates on the nature and scale of the Classic Maya economic systems have been ongoing, and especially in relation to Maya
polychrome traditions. Of these polychrome traditions, the Ik’ Style of Motul de San José is probably the most famous. Since 1998, I
have worked with Ron Bishop on the chemical, stylistic and contextual analyses of Ik’ Style vessels found at Motul de San José and
beyond. The discovery of refuse from a ceramic workshop attached to the royal palace at Motul in 1998 has provided extraordinary
opportunities to reconstruct Maya polychrome production in conjunction with INAA chemical analyses. This paper will describe the
results of these long-term studies, focusing on the wasters and other polychromes from the palace workshop. Clays sampled across
Motul’s region were also submitted to INAA, and allow us for the first time to directly connect pottery production with regional clay
sources.
Foias, Antonia [54] see Emery, Kitty
Folan, William (Univ. Autónoma de Campeche), Joel Gunn (University of North Carolina, Greensboro) and Maria del
Rosario Dominguez Carrasco (Univ. Autónoma de Campeche)
[168]
The Importance of Neutron Activation Analysis in the Study of Ceramic Vessels and Clay Figurines of Calakmul, Campeche
Analyses performed by neutron activation on a wide collection of ceramic sherds and figurines provided important information
related to the origin of the raw materials used for the manufacture of these objects through trace elements. The objects were
recovered from various structures in the central core of Calakmul, Campeche (I, II, III and VII). These data also allowed us to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       180
visualize types of social and political relationships and the level of exchange of goods, that Calakmul maintained with other sites in
the Maya area. Most productive in this regard were orange and fine gray ceramics that originated in the Usumacinta region. One of
the vessels was of the codex-type discovered in a funerary context. Its analysis showed that it was manufactured in the nearby site
of Nakbe, in a place identified as a possible production site of this type of prestigious ceramic.
Folk, Maureen (Binghamton University), Sarah Baitzel (Washington University, St. Louis) and BrieAnna Langlie
(Binghamton University)
[61]
Migration and Agricultural Practice: A Paleoethnobotanical Analysis of Los Batanes in Southern Peru
For centuries, people have moved to new locations carrying agricultural and botanical knowledge with them, while adapting to their
new environments. In the lowland valleys of the south-central Andes, altiplano populations encountered and adopted new plant
resources into their diet alongside existing agricultural practices and cuisine. During the tenth–twelfth centuries, AD Tiwanaku-
affiliated agropastoralist Cabuza communities established the site of Los Batanes in the middle Sama Valley, Peru, (500 masl),
occupying a strategic location in a temperate oasis valley with access to the Pacific coast. Preliminary analysis of
paleoethnobotanical samples show that residents of Los Batanes cultivated or had access to chili peppers, chenopods, other
domesticates and wild plant resources in addition to maize. In order to understand plant availability and uses in the valley, we
constructed a vegetative comparative collection from the middle Sama valley to understand plant use in the region today and how it
has changed over the past millennium. This study reflects on current understandings of Tiwanaku-affiliated plant use to identify how
Cabuza people transformed subsistence practices to reflect a negotiation of immigrant origins and emergent identities.
Follensbee, Billie (Missouri State University)
[2]
Diamond in the Rough: Olmec and Olmec-Related Occurrences of the Rhombus Motif and Its Variations
As ancient cultures throughout the world developed textiles, knotted and woven fabrics lent themselves to the development of
geometric rhombus patterns, first as the diamond-shaped mesh of knotted nets and later as square patterns in plain-weave cloth.
Further early experimentation in basketry and cloth twill weaves led to the development of chevron, triangle, zigzag, diamond, and
diamond-and-dot motifs. Scholarly research has identified and discussed these textile motifs throughout the ancient Americas,
further revealing how these patterns were recognized and meaningful, with links to gender, affiliation, and status. Little research,
however, has been conducted on rhombus textile motifs in Formative period Mesoamerican cultures such as the Olmec. This is in
great part because direct evidence of Olmec textiles is scanty, consisting of only a few fragments of cordage and woven mats, two
fabric-impressed clay sherds, and artifacts recently identified as tools for the manufacture of textiles. Close analysis of this existing
evidence, along with the identification of these textile motifs in Olmec ceramics, sculpture, and architecture, reveals that rhombus
and related patterns are strongly in evidence in the Formative period, and that as with later Mesoamerican cultures, these motifs
likewise held deep, symbolic meaning for the Olmec.
[2]
Chair
Follensbee, Billie [191] see McElfresh Buford, Katie
Ford, Anabel (UCSB)
[31]
Discussant
Ford, Anabel (UCSB)
[124]
Intensification without Modification: Tropical Swidden and the Maya
As we look at the development of a domesticated landscape and agriculture, and the archaeological correlates, we need to understand
that capital based investment and arable farming are only one path to intensification. Labor based economies, particularly those of the
Americas before European conquest, present an entirely distinct track toward domestication. Tropical settings in general, and the Maya
in particular, demonstrate a mastery of nature, cultivating biological capital as a product of their culture. Embedded fields transform to
forests in a poly-cultivation practice that emphasize diversity that prevails in the tropics. The Maya milpa cycle reduces temperature and
evapotranspiration, conserves water, promotes biodiversity, builds fertility, inhibits erosion, and nurtures people. These labor
investments do not leave direct traces on the landscape, save the implicit density of settlement.
Ford, Anabel [7] see Horn, Sherman
Ford, Ben (Indiana University of Pennsylvania) and William Chadwick (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
[213]
Preliminary Results from Newport Site (36IN188)
Newport village was founded in circa 1787 to facilitate movement of people and goods from Pennsylvania’s early road system to
riverine highways. The town was largely abandoned by 1840, but contained several taverns, blacksmith shops, and infrastructure for
loading boats on, and crossing over, the adjacent Conemaugh River. At its height approximately 30 families lived in the village and
were served by a store and U.S. Post Office. As an early settlement in western Pennsylvania, linked directly to the development of
transportation and trade in the region, this site contains important information about the frontier period of the Midwest. Recent
excavations at the site have begun to determine the site boundaries, identify the street layout, and investigate the village store to
better understand local trade. These excavations also revealed evidence that the landscape was settled by Native Americans
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  181
centuries, and possibly millennia, earlier.
Ford, Paige (University of Oklahoma) and Shawn Lambert (Mississippi State University)
[47]
Who Is Making These Pots? Stylistic and Iconographic Analyses of Early Caddo Fineware Pottery from Cahokia
This paper investigates early Caddo-Cahokian connections through the iconographic and stylistic analyses of early Caddo fineware
pottery found in both Caddo and Cahokia contexts. We address questions concerning ceramic production and distribution to shed
light on whether finewares were produced by Caddo potters who lived and worked at Cahokia, were produced by local Cahokia
potters who copied Caddo motifs, or if the vessels were brought to Cahokia from the southern Caddo area. This investigation will
help us to better understand the nature of Caddo-like vessels at Cahokia and provides a means of identifying and interpreting new
levels of social interactions between the Caddo world and Cahokia.
Ford, Paige [97] see Newton, Kathryn
Forest, Marion (Brigham Young University) and Andrew Somerville (Iowa State University)
[133]
Return to Hacienda Metepec: Exploring Continuity and Change at Teotihuacan
Recent archaeological research in Central Mexico has examined the transformations of prehispanic communities during the
Epiclassic period (AD 550–850) from the perspective of Teotihuacan’s neighboring settlements and peripheral regions. Less
attention, however, has been given to the concomitant structural changes that occurred within the urban settlement itself.
Excavations conducted in 1979 by Evelyn Childs Rattray at Hacienda Metepec (9:N1E7), near the eastern edge of Teotihuacan
urban core, yielded important archaeological data relevant to understanding the Classic-Epiclassic transition and to better
characterizing the economic, ritual, spatial, and demographic transformations at the site. Surface collection data from the
Teotihuacan mapping project and Rattray’s excavations demonstrate a continuous stratigraphy at Hacienda Metepec from the
Classic to the Postclassic periods and the presence of a sizable Coyotlatelco (Epiclassic) phase occupation. In this paper, we
synthesize previous research conducted at Hacienda Metepec and discuss the importance of this data within the context of our
current knowledge of the Classic-to-Epiclassic transition and in light of current hypotheses regarding these changes. Finally, we
present an outline of future field research at Hacienda Metepec.
Forget Brisson, Laurence (Université du Québec à Montréal), Michel Lamothe (Université du Québec à Montréal), François
Hardy (Université du Québec à Montréal) and Kelly Graf (Texas A&M University)
[81]
Contributions of IRSL and 14C Geochronology to the Issue of Initial Settlement in the New World: The Case of the McDonald Creek
Archaeological Site
The McDonald Creek archaeological site from central Alaska (USA) has been dated using Optically Stimulated Luminescence (OSL)
in order to document the initial settlement in the New World. Eolian sediment samples (loess) from stratigraphic profiles have been
systematically dated using this method and have been compared to the radiocarbon ages of the different human occupations
present at the site. The interpreted geochronology suggests an initial human occupation of the area at the end of the Upper
Pleistocene, which is in good agreement with the regional archaeological framework. A measurement protocol for the luminescence
dating method with infrared stimulation (IRSL) has been developed to obtain accurate and reliable results for the minerals extracted
from these late glacial loess sediments. The LPH-IRSL (low temperature preheat IRSL) protocol thus allows in this case the
establishment of a detailed geochronological framework for the Central Alaska region. A relationship can be made between the
eolian sedimentation rates and the territorial habitability patterns of the early human groups present in central Alaska. This
relationship is implicitly relating paleoenvironments to regional climate changes, since loess accumulation rates can be directly
correlated with the glacial history of the region, especially with the fluctuating position of the ice margin.
Forkel, Robert [262] see Hermann, Aymeric
Forman, Steven [19] see Esker, Donald
Forman, Steven [229] see Plumlee, R. Scott
Forman, Steven [19] see Sun, Nan
Forman, Steven [8] see Tew-Todd, Victoria
Forrest, Daniel (PAL Inc.)
[13]
Occam, Rorschach, and Schrödinger Walk into a Bar: Reflections on a Twenty-Year Conversation about the Early Holocene
Archaeology in New England
The early Holocene archaeological record of New England is a stubborn beast. It resists our efforts to describe coherent geographic,
technological, or temporal patterns spanning the Late Paleoindian and Early Archaic periods. While the past twenty years have
witnessed a remarkable advance in our understanding of the Paleoindian occupations in the region, the earliest Archaic manifestations
remain enigmatic, heterogeneous, and frustratingly disconnected from the preceding and succeeding cultures. This was not what two
young archaeologists believed would happen when we jumped into the “Hollow Scene” fray of the ‘90’s, driven by discoveries of two
important sites dating to the Late Paleoindian and Early Archaic. Brian Jones and I agreed that a diverse cultural landscape
characterized New England after 11,000 cal BP. We disagreed about how difficult it would be to convince our peers and why.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      182
Forrest, Daniel [232] see Kelly, John
Forste, Kathleen (Boston University), Susan Allen (University of Cincinnati), Jean Berkebile (U.S. Forest Service, Apache-
Sitgreaves NF) and Martha Wendel (University of Cincinnati)
[255]
Seeds and Stems on the Edge of Splendor
In this paper we use standardized and relative statistics to analyze archaeological plant remains (seeds, plant parts, and wood
charcoal) from a Late Pueblo II (AD 1050–1100) multi-room house of the Upper Basin (MU 125), located in the pinyon-juniper
forests of northern Arizona just south of the Grand Canyon. Through the analyses of multiple lines of archaeobotanical evidence, we
address both cultural and ecological questions. We infer the occupants’ subsistence strategies and the spatial organization of
subsistence activities, in the context of the ecological conditions around the site. This targeted, spatially intensive investigation of
humans’ economic resource production and their interaction with their vegetated surroundings enables us to understand the
variability of subsistence strategies implemented in the prehispanic Southwest, and their impacts on ecosystem history. Specifically,
we provide evidence supporting the importance of small-seeded ruderal plants that are often dismissed as intrusive “seed rain”
based on qualitative rather than quantitative assessment, as well as the importance of fire in propagating the region’s most
important economic plants.
Fort, Mathew [233] see Simon, Mary
Forton, Maxwell (Binghamton University)
[148]
Landscape of Shields: Regional Trends in Shield Iconography in the Late Pueblo III World
The Late Pueblo III period on the Colorado Plateau was a time of great social and environmental change and uncertainty for ancient
Pueblo populations. One response to this regional unrest was the depiction of shields in pictographs and petroglyphs, often in
association with defensive cliff dwelling communities. This shield imagery is interpreted as apotropaic wards, clan symbols,
expressions of warning to outsiders, or some combination of these functions. Prior research demonstrates certain ancient Pueblo
populations developed distinct spatial practices of where shield imagery was placed on sites, reflective of populations coalescing
into regional social units. This poster expands upon this spatial study to see if different ancient Pueblo populations had preferences
for specific decorative designs adorning shields or particular forms of shield bearers in pictographs and petroglyphs. This study
assesses whether Late Pueblo III communities expressed aspects of identity and social organization in their depictions of shields.
Distinct regional patterns for shield designs supports a fracturing of the Late Pueblo III world into distinct social units, while designs
shared across the Colorado Plateau indicate shared pictorial traditions across social and geographic boundaries. I aim to
demonstrate how iconography has a place in holistic studies of social organization in Southwest/Northwest archaeology.
Forton, Maxwell [122] see Margotta, James
Foster, Spencer
[178]
Beyond Stone: Organic Alternatives for Atlatl Dart Points among the Classic Lowland Maya
During the Classic period (250–900 CE), the atlatl, also known as a spear or dart thrower, was the predominant projectile weapon of
the lowland Maya. It remained as such until the Postclassic (900–1500 CE) when bow and arrow technology entered the region.
However, despite the atlatl’s dominance as both a tool of war and hunting, archaeological excavations in northern Belize recover
relatively few stone points. My research studied the potential use of organic materials as alternatives for chipped stone projectile
points among the lowland Maya. Bone, wood, and bamboo rarely survive the processes of time in the subtropical climate of the
region and would not appear in the archaeological record except under exceptional preservation conditions. My research applied
elements of experimental archaeology to help determine if these materials could be used as functional replacements for stone
projectile points. By replicating atlatl and dart designs from historic, ethnographic, and archaeological sources and testing their
capabilities, I tested the effectiveness and convenience of the organic materials as projectile points.
Fournier, Nichole, Erin Thornton (Washington State University), Shannon Tushingham (Washington State University), Cara
Monroe (University of Oklahoma) and Alan Leventhal (San Jose State University)
[233]
Childhood Diet and Life History Patterns of Late Holocene Populations in the San Francisco Bay Area
Children’s diets have been reconstructed from five Late Holocene San Francisco Bay Area sites (CA-ALA-329, CA-SCL-134, CA-
SCL-215, CA-SCL-623, and CA-SCL-870), based on the carbon and nitrogen isotopic composition of bone and dental tissues. The
occupation of these sites corresponds with significant socioeconomic changes as well as environmental fluctuations associated with
the Medieval Climatic Anomaly (MCA). Previous reconstructions of adult diets show a transition from a largely marine-based, to a
mainly terrestrially-based economy during this time. In the present study, childhood dietary information is explored during this same
temporal period in order to ascertain whether children’s diets, too, were affected by these major socioeconomic and environmental
changes. Diet during infancy and early childhood speaks to certain life history events, such as age-at-weaning and the age at which
children begin acquiring the majority of their calories themselves. Therefore, it can have a large impact on people lasting throughout
their lifetimes. Results indicate early ages of the onset of both weaning and independent foraging. Potential reasons for these
findings, as well as their significant implications, will be discussed.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     183
Fowler, John [76] see Guiry, Eric
Fowler, William (Vanderbilt University)
[90]
Moderator
[90]
Discussant
Fox, Amy (University of Toronto)
[23]
Broadpoint Typology of the Late Archaic Period in Eastern North America: On the Snook Kill, Atlantic, and Lehigh/Koens Crispin
Varieties
Northeastern North American regional typologies define three related types of broadpoint: the Atlantic point in the Maritimes and
New England, the Snook Kill point in New York and Ontario regions, and the Lehigh/Koens Crispin point in the Susquehanna and
Delaware River valleys. Each point existed at the same time and was made on locally available raw materials. A sample of 246
broadpoints all defined regionally as one of those types is studied using 2D elliptical Fourier outline analysis. Using a principal
components analysis, the point types are compared for differences in shape. A complete lack of defining characteristics that would
separate the types is described. A history of Archaic Period research is taken into consideration to explain the reasons that these
point types were initially separated and not considered the same type. What results is a critical examination of historic practice in the
light of the existence of this previously undiscovered technological flintknapping community.
Fox, Jacqueline (Logan Simpson) and Travis Cureton (Logan Simpson)
[79]
Dry Farms and Field Houses: Settlement Archaeology of the Upper Casa Grande Irrigation Communities
Recently completed surveys and excavations on the Florence bajada above the Gila River have documented dry farming fields with
an unprecedented level of detail. We used these data to reconstruct the settlement system those fields were part of and found that
the organization of production within dry farming fields was similar to that practiced in the irrigated fields. Both field systems were
managed out of habitation sites using a system of field houses, but produced different commodities with maize and cotton grown in
the irrigated fields and agave grown in the dry farmed fields. We also examined diachronic changes within the dry farming fields and
found they were established by the late Pioneer period and saw varying levels of use through the Soho phase of the Classic period,
before being completely abandoned by the Civano phase of the Classic period.
Fox, Jon (Fort Lewis College)
[236]
Characterizing Clovis Lithic Technological Organization from Upper Dugout Wash and Other Sites in the Greater Bears Ears
Landscape
During the 2019 Fort Lewis College Archaeological Field School previously unknown Paleoindian occupations were documented in
southwestern Colorado. These newly identified sites add significantly to a growing body of information about the Late Pleistocene
human occupation in the region. The research presented here aims to develop a better understanding of how Clovis-age hunter-
gatherers (ca. 13,000 BP) used this landscape. This research uses technological and morphological analyses to characterize the Clovis
assemblage from the Upper Dugout Wash site in southwestern Colorado. Comparisons are then made to additional Clovis
assemblages at regional curation facilities to assess Clovis lithic technological organization across the Greater Bears Ears Landscape.
Fracchia, Adam [188] see London, Marilyn
Frachetti, Michael (Washington University, St. Louis), Edward Henry (Colorado State University) and Ann Merkle
(Washington University, St. Louis)
[48]
Nomadic Cities and Network Modularity: Scalar Analysis in Ancient Urbanism and Social Connectivity
The discovery of small to mid-sized cities (Tashbulak and Tugunbulak) built by the Qarakhanids (ninth–twelfth century CE) at high
elevation suggest nomadic khanates may have shaped a model of “modular” urbanism, which we define as a hybridized form of
urban centrality and nomadic kinship structure, wherein cities and towns functioned as economic, political, and religious nodes
within highly “modular” systems. Unlike better known oasis cities, these high-altitude centers acted as nodes and transfer points for
a much larger, dispersed nomadic population (who were not necessarily living in the town/city itself). Modularity here is used to
mean that regional power was generated through scalable clusters of connectivity between diverse urban transfer-hubs, where
power, wealth etc., helped defined wider communities of participation and enabled network growth without significant population
pressure in the towns themselves. As such, the growth or decline of particular centers (within a module) might not change
quantitatively the overall functionality of the cluster, unless broader systemic connectivity expanded or collapsed. This paper
explores this conceptual turn in understanding Silk Road cities and towns, and illustrates preliminary results on modeling how
modular urbanism might have functioned in Medieval Central Asia
Frachetti, Michael (Washington University in St. Louis)
[173]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   184
Frachetti, Michael [261] see Merkle, Ann
Franco, Nora (CONICET-UBA), George Brook (University of Georgia), Lucas Vetrisano (IMHICIHU [CONICET]), Clara
Compagno Zoan (University of Buenos Aires) and María Victoria Fiel (University of Buenos Aires)
[198]
The Alice 3 Stone Circle (Upper Santa Cruz River Basin, Argentinian Patagonia): Characteristics and Chronology
Human occupation of the Upper Santa Cruz River Basin dates from ca. 11,200 cal BP to recent, with a hiatus during the Medieval
Climate Anomaly (MCA). Re-occupation during the Little Ice Age (LIA) involved a biological change in the population as well as
cultural changes. An isolated, open circular structure with concentric rings was discovered on a fluvio-glacial terrace at Alice 3,on
the southwestern shore of Lago Argentino. The concentric circles were formed using cobbles from the terrace sediments. So far, no
artifacts associated with the circle have been found. Two similar circular structures have been discovered in the middle course of the
Santa Cruz River, separated from each other by 100 lineal km. Three test pits within the Alice 1 circle uncovered no material
suitable for dating and so an attempt was made to obtain ages using lichenometry and by radiocarbon dating of organic material
adhering to the undersides of three cobbles. The radiocarbon and lichenometric age data indicate circle construction near the time
Europeans entered the area. This suggests that construction of open-air rock structures was a cultural innovation introduced by new
inhabitants during the LIA.
Frank, Jacob [124] see Langlie, BrieAnna
Frank, Michael [185] see Hill, Catherine
Franke, Kristina [59] see Cable, Charlotte
Franklin, Jay, Linda Countryman (EcoPlan Associates), Bruce Phillips (BGP Consulting LLC), John Jones (Archaeological
Consulting Service Ltd.) and Jeremy Menzer (University of Arkansas)
[175]
Multidisciplinary Investigations of Prehistoric Dryland Agricultural Systems in Central Arizona: The US60 Silver King to Superior
Project
We examine dryland agricultural sites investigated during data recovery of the US60 Silver King to Superior project. Specifically, we
address how individual rock alignment and rock pile systems functioned as components of broader dryland farming strategies in the
uplands of Queen Creek, Arizona. Water flow in these agricultural systems is modeled in order to assess whether the various
features impounded, diverted, or impeded flow, offering insight into landscape modification behavior within the uplands of southern
Arizona. Questions of whether rock features functioned for irrigation or soil enrichment purposes are also discussed. Toward a
broader interpretation, we use multiple lines of evidence to address function(s), chronology, and relationships among sites.
Photogrammetry, GIS, and limited lidar are augmented by pollen and macrobotanical studies, phytolith analysis, ceramic and
chronometric data, and architectural variability. We offer some ideas about potential crop yields in regard to associated population
counts. We also compare this analysis with other recent work on dryland agricultural research in the area.
Franklin, Jay [36] see Franklin, Lauren
Franklin, Lauren (University of Arizona), Jay Franklin (EcoPlan Associates) and Jean-Philippe Rigaud (Université Bordeaux
1)
[36]
A Closer Look at Gravettian Technological Variation in Dordogne, France
We examine techno-typological attributes of Gravette points and truncated elements from four sites in the Dordogne region of
France. These two tool types are often recovered in direct association which bolsters conventional wisdom suggesting truncated
elements are merely recycled Gravettes, inadvertently broken during manufacture or use. However, morphological differences
between the two suggest truncated elements may be distinct, deliberately produced tools used as different armatures, likely part of a
composite hunting technology. We statistically demonstrate that Gravettian lithic technology is effectively far more varied and
nuanced than what is presented in either scenario; it is not nearly so simple. Further complicated by temporal and functional
diversity, the nature of Gravettian technological variation within the Dordogne is more accurately understood within the specific
context of each individual site and/or assemblage.
Franklin, Paris (Willamette Cultural Resources Associates)
[204]
Autoethnography as a Component of Archaeological Research Design
The social dynamics of people involved in archaeological processes are an important aspect of archaeological investigations that
are often overlooked. While archaeologists in positions of authority often have an idea of crew relationships and how archaeological
researchers interact with other groups (i.e., descendant populations, funders, and surrounding communities) this knowledge is all
but forgotten when a project ends. Castañeda argues that creating a record of the sociohistorical interactions of an archaeological
project is a valuable and wide ranging addition to the archaeological record (2006; 81). This paper presents the results of formal
interviews with a variety of archaeological professionals about whether sociohistorical records can be a useful component in the
archaeological record. This study seeks to understand why this method has not become common in archaeological research design
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    185
and to determine if archaeologists are willing to incorporate this method into future studies. Also explored is whether or not including
social data in the final results of an archaeological project will help future audiences better understand the conditions in which
archaeology was conducted. Finally, this paper discusses potential problems with and limitations of including autoethnography in the
archaeological record.
Franklin, Stephanie (National Park Service) and Brett Cockrell (National Park Service)
[186]
Saving 700-Year-Old Cliff Dwellings: Fire Archaeology in the Sonoran Desert
One of the biggest issues for the conservation and preservation of archaeological resources is fire. Due to many years of fire
suppression throughout the 1900’s, the intensity and frequency of wildfires has exponentially increased. This increase in fire and its
behavior has caused unique issues for cultural resource managers resulting in adaptive management plans. One aspect of fire
archaeology is the practice of wrapping wooden structures to protect them from fire without negatively impacting the structures.
Tonto National Monument is known for its two 700 year-old Salado cliff dwellings. Both dwellings have large amounts of original
wooden elements and thus make the structures susceptible to fire. In June of 2019 the Woodbury Fire threatened the cultural
resources in Tonto National Monument and a decision was made to back-burn the park in advance of the fire. This presented a
puzzling question, how to wrap two cliff dwellings in fire resistant material without securing the material directly into 700 year-old
wood? This conundrum was solved with an ingenuity, experience, and p-cord. Both cliff dwellings survived the Woodbury fire and
this poster describes how this was accomplished.
Fraser, Sharon [120] see Pal Chowdhury, Manasij
Frashuer, Anya (Arizona State University), Christopher Carr (Arizona State University) and Michael Glascock (University of
Missouri Research Reactor Center)
[63]
Ceramic Exchange and Community Organization of Middle Woodland Period Hopewell Groups in the Scioto Valley, Ohio
This poster examines ceramic exchange as a proxy for the social interaction aspect of community organization in Middle Woodland
Period Hopewell groups living in the Scioto River region of Ohio. The results of instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) and
electron microprobe analysis (EMA) are discussed as they relate to the interaction and influence expectations of two models
proposed: the more constricted dispersed sedentary community model and the fluid regional-use model. The characterization of clay
and temper resources that were available to the peoples and potters living in the region was conducted as a first step prior to
identification of non-local wares. Ceramic samples from 23 sites across the region dating to the Early to Fort Ancient Periods were
subjected to INAA and EMA and the resulting data were analyzed using principle components analysis (PCA) and hierarchical
cluster analysis. Once a preliminary characterization was addressed, the ceramics from Middle Woodland contexts were re-
assessed using PCA and cluster analysis to identify non-local wares. These potential non-local wares were then compared to the
clays and tempers characterized for different areas within the Scioto Region to determine potential provenience. The frequency and
scale of exchanged wares were then assessed based on model expectations.
Frederick, Charles
[40]
Latest Pleistocene to Middle Holocene Environmental Change along Terlingua Creek: Geological Context of the Lykes Duncan Site
Detailed analysis of the alluvial deposits at the Genevieve Lykes Duncan site provide insights into the broad arc of
paleoenvironmental change from the terminal Pleistocene to the Middle-Late Holocene in the Big Bend region of Texas. The site is
situated at the confluence of two streams (Terlingua Creek and Davenport Draw) and has clearly received sediment from both
during this period. Examination of the alluvial deposits exposed in the gully where the site was discovered revealed three major
depositional units, with the Paleoindian occupation situated within the oldest deposit. Dissection of the deposits within the center of
the site forms the basis of the paleoenvironmental interpretation.
Frederick, Charles [269] see Cesaretti, Rudolf
Frederick, Charles [198] see Griffith, Timothy
Frederick, Charles [194] see Lawrence, Ken
Frederick, Katelyn (Texas State University)
[169]
Hips Don’t Lie: A Validation Study of the Albanese Metric Sex Estimation Method for the Proximal Femur on a Modern North
American Population
Sex estimation is a key component of the biological profile used in skeletal studies for bioarchaeology and forensic anthropology.
Albanese (2008) introduced a new method of sex estimation that involves measurements between three newly defined landmarks
on the proximal femur that create a triangle, which reflects both the angle of the femoral neck and the concomitant adaptations from
the female pelvis. The original study generated logistic regression equations for sex estimation that are not population specific and
have achieved a 95–97% allocation accuracy when distinguishing between males and females. In this validation study, Albanese’s
method was applied to a sample from the Texas State University Donated Skeletal Collection (n = 100) and achieved an 89%
allocation accuracy. Of the eleven individuals that were misallocated, eight were female, three were male, and all were aged
between 53 and 91 years. An intra-observer error assessment (n = 20) was also conducted from the original sample and reported
an average error margin of less than 1%. Considering these results, this method of sex estimation has proven to be exceptionally
reliable thus far, and would benefit strongly from other studies to further validate or negate it as a universally applicable approach.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   186
Frederick, Kathryn (Michigan State University) and Susan Kooiman (Southern Illinois University Edwardsville)
[233]
Pits and Pots: The Agency of Women during the Terminal Late Woodland Period of the Upper Great Lakes
Upper Great Lakes research, to date, shows that in response to a changing environment, a dramatic shift occurs in the socio-
economic landscape during the Terminal Late Woodland period (AD 1000–1600). This shift is evidenced by an increase in
community size, increasingly restricted territories, demarcation of social boundaries, increased incorporation of cultigens into diet, a
focus to fall resources, and a proliferation of food storage. Additional evidence for this socio-economic change is supported by
recent analysis of ceramic cooking vessels and subterranean storage containers for the region. This paper argues that changes in
Late Woodland subsistence strategies were driven by the decision-making of women. Analysis of subterranean food storage
containers (their construction, location, and the food stuffs stored)and ceramic cookware (its construction, use, and contents)
supports the argument for a shift in focus to abundant fall resources (including nuts, berries, and wild rice) that could be collected in
surplus, with minimal labor costs. The tasks of food collection, processing, and cooking are traditionally accomplished by women,
leading to the conclusion that these primary markers of subsistence change were controlled by women. The traditional division of
labor, evidenced in ethnographic and ethnohistoric accounts, puts women as the agents of socio-economic change.
Freeman, Andrea (University of Calgary)
[140]
Twenty-Five Years of Geoarchaeological Research on Ancient Shorelines and Channel Margins
In 1995, Michael Faught and I organized a session for the SAA titled “Paleoshorelines and Channel Margins.” The session brought
together people working principally in eastern North America to discuss what we understood about the context of Paleoindian sites
and prospects in offshore, near shore, and stream adjacent contexts. Having seen the benefits of decades of studying stratigraphy
and chronology in the west, we thought that an examination of context would lead to new discoveries. This paper examines what we
have learned in the 25 years since that session. Looking broadly at geoarchaeological research of Paleoindian sites across North
America, the last quarter century has seen an expansion of contexts and the information that can be gathered from those contexts
(DNA, isotopic data, etc.), as well as the use of more effective mathematical and computer models. While standard stratigraphy and
chronology remain foundations for any study, the most profound discoveries have come from the application of laboratory-based
methods and new sites are found by breaking old traditions.
Freeman, Andrea (University of Calgary)
[219]
Moderator
[219]
Discussant
Freeman, Jacob (Utah State University), Darcy Bird (Washington State University), Erick Robinson (Utah State University),
José Capriles (Penn State University) and Judson Finley (Utah State University)
[26]
Studying the Long-Term Stability of Agricultural Societies to Inform Climate-Smart Agriculture
Over the next 30 years, food production must increase by 70% to feed nine billion people and, simultaneously, cope with climate
change. Thus, multilateral agencies, such as the World Bank, advocate policy shifts to “climate-smart agriculture.” Climate-smart
agriculture mitigates ecological degradation, enhances productivity and maintains the robustness of production to climate change.
Yet, the relationships between these “triple win” processes are not well understood. Important tradeoffs may exist in complex
systems between increases in productivity and the robustness of such systems to change. In this paper, we use radiocarbon
records to investigate the relationships among population growth, climate change, and population robustness in six case studies
over the last 4,000 years. We find that societies specialized in agriculture experienced more robust populations than societies that
engaged in more flexible, mixed foraging and farming. The more specialized agricultural societies also experienced less severe
negative changes in population than less specialized societies. However, societies with more engineered landscapes may have
experienced starker declines in well-being during periods of decline. Long-term tradeoffs may permeate the engineered landscapes
of agricultural societies, and contemporary policy should take such tradeoffs into account in the design of climate-smart agriculture.
Freeman, Jacob [179] see Mauldin, Raymond
Freeman, Jacob [26] see Robinson, Erick
Freeman, Jeremy (Standing Rock Sioux Tribe)
[44]
Discussant
Freidel, David (Washington University, St. Louis)
[93]
Moderator
Freidel, David (Washington University, St. Louis)
[209]
Discussant
Freidel, David (Washington University, St. Louis), Olivia Navarro-Farr (College of Wooster) and Mary Kate Kelly (MARI
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    187
Tulane University)
[223]
El Peru-Waka’, a Kaanul Vassal Kingdom in the Era of Dzibanché
El Peru-Waka’ was a strategic royal city in the conflicts between the Kaanul Regime and adversaries in Petén led by the kings of
Tikal. In the sixth century, when Dzibanché is documented to be the major capital of the Kannul kings, Wak dynasty King Chak Tok
Ich’aak married a Kaanul Regime woman, Ikoom Sak Wayis, fathered a son, and died two years after raising a stela, plausibly in
war. His queen and son raised a stela to him subsequently. This presentation reviews the evidence for Wak dynasty alliance with
Kaanul beginning in the sixth century and considers the implications of this projection of power from eastern Quintana Roo to
northwestern Petén.
Freidel, David [166] see Rich, Michelle
Freire, Shannon (Marquette University)
[80]
Grave Reckoning: Recovering Connections Between Medical Education and the Archaeological Record
This research was undertaken to explicate behavioral changes in the archaeological record of the Milwaukee County Poor Farm
Cemetery (MCPFC). Analysis of the twice-excavated Cemetery II (1882–1925) documents several types and varieties of
postmortem skeletal modification attributed to autopsy and medical dissection. These interments have been associated with the
local medical establishment, including medical and dental colleges, through historic documents and recovered material culture.
Following a complete reorganization and consolidation of Milwaukee’s medical colleges in 1913 into a single school of medicine and
a single school of dentistry, Marquette University became the sole institution of medical and dental education in Milwaukee during
the final twelve years of Cemetery II’s use. This may have coincided with a change in mortuary behavior as recent research has
identified a reduction in the complexity of burials in the northeastern section of the cemetery used between 1918 and 1925.
Critically, fewer anatomized individuals are represented archaeologically in this section than are documented historically. Marquette
University archives were utilized to provide historical data about contemporaneous anatomical teaching practices and the
subsequent disposition of remains. Several possibilities to explain the disconnect between archaeological data and historical
documentation have emerged and will be presented.
Freiwald, Carolyn (University of Mississippi), Kaedan O’Brien (University of Utah) and Sarah Clayton (University of
Wisconsin, Madison)
[133]
Diet and Mobility at Chicoloapan Viejo
Chicoloapan grew and prospered after the fall of Teotihuacan, but little is known about the people who lived there. We present
osteological information for five individuals recovered from a salvage context, along with a reconstruction of their diets and origins
placed in a regional context. Strontium, carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen isotope values provide baseline information for the
Chicoloapan population from birth to burial and give us a point of departure for future analysis of life in the Valley of Mexico after
Teotihuacan.
Freiwald, Carolyn [270] see Alsgaard, Asia
Freiwald, Carolyn [178] see Friedel, Rebecca
Freiwald, Carolyn [14] see Wrobel, Gabriel
French, Kirk (Pennsylvania State University)
[152]
Moderator
French, Kirk (Pennsylvania State University)
[181]
Moderator
French, Lewanne [22] see Fisher, Abigail
Freund, Kyle (Indian River State College), J. M. Adovasio, Allen Quinn and Frank Vento
[222]
Phase I and II Excavations at the Sexton Site (8IR01822), Indian River County, Florida
The Sexton Site (8IR01822) is situated on a slightly elevated limestone hammock in Indian River County, Florida. Extensive
geophysical prospection, shovel probing, and subsequent block excavations revealed the presence of a midden with a possibly
contiguous seasonal village or hamlet of probable Woodland age. The site was episodically visited/occupied into the Historic period.
The results of the fieldwork are summarized and compared to other previously studied localities in the region, in turn highlighting
how the Sexton Site can make an important contribution to understanding the prehistory of south Florida and beyond.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       188
Friberg, Christina (Indiana University, Bloomington), David Massey (Indiana University, Bloomington), Edward Herrmann
(Indiana University, Bloomington) and Quinn Lewis (Indiana University, Bloomington)
[175]
New Age Methods, Age Old Questions: lidar Point Clouds for Assessing Mississippian Moundbuilding Labor Investment
Angel Mounds State Historic Site, a Middle Mississippian fortified mound center along the Ohio River, is home to eleven man-made
earthworks which make up the largest known archaeological site in Indiana. Angel’s occupation coincides with the regional changes
in social organization that characterize Mississippian society. Many archaeologists have discussed mound volume as a proxy for
complexity, but calculation methods and interpretations are varied and outdated. Increased accessibility to drone-mounted remote
sensing technologies has provided archaeologists with unprecedented control over the frequency and spatial resolution of data
collection. This trend toward “personal” remote sensing enables the use of noninvasive, cost-effective survey methods in
challenging landscapes, and provides more precise and accurate measurements than traditional aerial methods. This paper
demonstrates the practicality of drone-mounted sensors for 3D modeling of earthworks at Angel. We calculate the volume of Mound
A using models based on drone- and aircraft-fixed Light Detection and Ranging (lidar) and compare the results to assess each
strategy’s viability in the field. These findings are extrapolated to assess labor investments for the mound’s construction and
implications for the degree of sociopolitical complexity among Angel’s earliest inhabitants. Finally, we discuss the application of
these methods for informing site management and preservation efforts.
Friedel, Rebecca (University of Texas, San Antonio), Bernadette Cap (University of Texas, San Antonio), Carolyn Freiwald
(University of Mississippi) and Jason Yaeger (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[178]
Paleoethnobotanical Remains from an Early Classic Maya Tomb at Buenavista del Cayo, Belize
In the tropics, paleoethnobotanists often face challenging preservation environments, making most of the macrobotanical specimens
that we analyze those that are preserved through processes of carbonization. This preservation issue is often framed as limiting the
questions we can ask and the interpretations we can make about ancient Maya relationships with the environment. Occasionally,
unusual preservation contexts reveal new and exciting possibilities for understanding ancient human-plant relationships. In 2018,
the excavation of an Early Classic Maya tomb at Buenavista del Cayo, Belize, recovered a variety of uniquely preserved,
uncarbonized macrobotanical remains, including hundreds of maize kernels that were likely originally part of whole ears buried with
the individual. The paleoethnobotanical analysis of the remarkably preserved contents of this tomb allow us to contribute new ideas
about the use of plant materials in Maya royal burials. Additionally, the plant remains found with this individual have the potential to
shed new light on ancient landraces as well as trade and migration throughout Mesoamerica.
Friedl, Lukas [36] see Ellis, Grace
Frieman, Catherine (Australian National University)
[207]
Discussant
Frieman, Catherine (Australian National University) and James Lewis (Independent researcher)
[234]
Identity and Inheritance: Being Cornish during the Roman Occupation of Britain
With the Roman invasion of Britain in the first centuries AD, we see a major shift in settlement patterns, social practices, and
economic structures. Indeed, within a few generations, much of Britain saw a widespread adoption of Roman material culture,
cosmology and practices which were blended with pre-existing ideas and ways of life into a uniquely Romano-British hybrid.
However, in Cornwall, Roman sites are few and Roman materials and ways of life seem to have been thin on the ground. Instead, to
an archaeological eye, it strongly appears that Cornish ways of life remained much as they were in the centuries before the Roman
invasion of Britain, right up until the sixth century BC. Settlements comprised circular and oval buildings, often enclosed by circular
banks and ditches, local technologies persisted, and no obvious shift in religious practice is visible. In this paper, I will explore the
continuity of Cornish identity, economic structure, and landscape organization during the first half of the first millennium BC. I argue
that, rather than being a backwards or unchanging way of life, this continuity reflects an ongoing and dynamic engagement with both
the past and with the present realities faced by Romano-Cornish people.
Friend, Sadie (Radford University), Emilie Wiedenmeyer (Texas State University) and Ashley McKeown (Texas State
University)
[215]
Evaluating the Applicability of the Coimbra Method on an Archaeological Sample from Sint Eustatius
To uncover details of past people’s day to day life, bioarchaeologists have attempted to reconstruct possible activity patterns by
examining changes that occur at musculoskeletal markers, called entheseal sites (ES). While there is general agreement about the
overall effect of confounding variables on entheses, there are discrepancies regarding the degree to which these variables affect
entheseal change (EC) and the true association between activity level and EC. The objectives of this study include (1) analyzing the
presence and severity of entheseal changes in the upper limbs of individuals excavated from an unmarked, presumably slave
cemetery from the eighteenth century on the coastline of Sint Eustatius, (2) evaluating the applicability of the Coimbra Method
(Henderson et al. 2013, 2016) to a small archaeological sample, and (3) assessing the possible scoring error of this EC method.
This study found that the majority of recorded EC occurred on M. biceps brachii and that males are more likely to exhibit EC. The
results of this study also suggest that this method faces challenges in repeatability, archaeological applicability, and inexperienced
observer use.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    189
Fries, Eric (UNLV)
[7]
The Desakota as a Model for Understanding Dense Urban-Agrarian Settlement among the Ancient Maya
Recently, large-scale surveys using lidar and other remote sensing technologies have revealed that Maya urban centers were much
larger in both settlement area and number of features than previously thought, while also incorporating various forms of large-scale
anthropogenic landscape modification for the purposes of intensive agricultural production. These findings challenge existing
models for understanding Maya urbanism. The concept of the “desakota”, used in urban geography to describe densely populated
urban/agrarian mixed-use areas in Southeast Asia, can be employed to understand these newly recognized attributes of Maya
settlement. Settlement data from the Aguacate region in western Belize is used here to demonstrate the applicability of the desakota
model to a Maya case. The pattern in this region consists of widely distributed, patchy settlement with numerous small monumental
sites and continuity with the outlying settlement of adjoining larger centers. This pattern may be better explained by the desakota
model than by descriptors such as “peri-urban zones”, “hinterland”, or “low-density urbanism,” which have been applied previously.
Fries, Eric (UNLV)
[155]
Discussant
Friese, Crystina (University of New Hampshire), Amy Michael (University of New Hampshire) and Meghan Howey
(University of New Hampshire)
[184]
Toward Repatriation and the Creation of an Object Biography: A Multi-factorial Analysis of a Human Finger Bone “Necklace”
While NAGPRA was passed almost 40 years ago, repatriation work is far from over. Among remaining challenges are items with no
provenience that were donated by non-professionals to museums and universities. The University of New Hampshire’s Archaeology
Collection retains a “finger bone necklace” from a 1940s/50s collector that is an example of such a challenge. His collection lacks
documentation and the little information known is speculative. Recently, UNH undertook an effort to repatriate this item which was
identified as a human bone “necklace” at the time of accession in the 1980s. While the object is not of prehistoric manufacture (the
proximal ends of the metacarpals and metatarsals are drilled with a mechanical bit), the true origin of the bones is unclear. Multi-
factorial analyses (e.g., pXRF, DNA, LA-ICPMS) were undertaken to investigate origin(s) of the individuals, manufacture of the
object, and postmortem processes. In this case, repatriation of the artifact is only possible through scientific analysis; indeed, the
remains may be of historic, non-Native origin. Targeted study allows for minimally invasive analyses resulting in repatriation or more
ethical curation. This research demonstrates that cross-disciplinary experts (e.g., indigenous partners, archaeologists, chemists,
museum specialists, bio-forensic anthropologists, etc.) must collaborate in repatriation work.
Fritz, Sherilyn [59] see Bruno, Maria C.
Fruhlinger, Jake (Idaho National Guard)
[52]
Progressive Methods in Building Tribal Relationships
Building long lasting meaningful relationships with Native American Tribes is key to successful consultation. It is widely known that
there are numerous Congressional intentions, as well as Secretarial and Executive Orders stating that public agencies are required
to consult with Native American Tribes on issues relating to cultural resources on public lands and/or involving impacts to rights
guaranteed by treaty. This presentation discusses ways and some of the tools agencies can use to develop much needed
relationships with Native American Tribes and the community as a whole.
[52]
Chair
Fry, Megan (University of Florida), John Krigbaum (Unviersity of Florida) and George Kamenov (University of Florida)
[240]
Social Differentiation and Identity in the Anglo-Saxon Kingdom of Lindsey
Lindsey is a poorly understood Anglo-Saxon Kingdom, which underwent many sociopolitical changes during its tenure. An
independent kingdom until AD 620, it experienced both a major religious conversion, as well as five shifts in its ruling elite during the
latter part of the seventh century. Although this unstable governance is well documented in the historical record, less is known about
how these changes affected its occupants directly. Six sites within the boundaries of Lindsey were surveyed for skeletal markers of
nutritional distress as well as determinants of social status. These data were paired with isotopic analyses in 36 individuals, to
demonstrate the physiological effects of social instability as they relate to status, age, and sex. Further, spatial and temporal
comparisons between Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms allows for broader discussions of inter-settlement relationships and identity.
Fry, Olivia [148] see Patton, Natalie
Frykholm, Soren (Proyecto Arqueológico del Conjunto Monumental de Atzompa), Nelly Robles García (Proyecto
Arqueológico del Conjunto Monumental de A) and Dante García (Proyecto Arqueológico del Conjunto Monumental de A)
[145]
Hallazgos de la excavación de una habitación residencial de la época IIIB/IV de la zona arqueológica de Atzompa, Oaxaca, México
Atzompa, un asentamiento satélite de las élites de la capital zapoteca, alcanzó su apogeo y población máxima durante la Época
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    190
IIIB-IV de Monte Albán (500 dC-900 dC). Al igual que en Monte Albán, el sitio parece haber sido abandonado en algún momento al
final de esa época. Desde 2007, el PACMA (Proyecto Arqueológico del Conjunto Monumental de Atzompa), dirigida por la Doctora
Nelly Robles García, ha estado excavando este sitio arqueológico, que cuenta con varios complejos de edificios alrededor de
plazas; un complejo funerario, y dos grandes unidades residenciales ya totalmente excavadas y ahora restauradas. Durante 2019
el PACMA realizó una excavación al lado del Edificio Funerario en el Cuarto 3. Este cuarto está adosado a la fachada norte del
Edificio (al extremo Oeste de la fachada norte) y colinda en su muro oeste con la Casa de los Altares. Dado esta ubicación, el
cuarto ocupa un lugar bastante central dentro del complejo residencial que lo rodea por los lados norte y oeste, y presentó
materiales importantes. Esta ponencia discute la probable función del recinto dentro del complejo Edificio Funerario/Casa de los
Altares.
Fuchs, Christopher (Washington College)
[122]
Moral Standing and Site Preservation
Defining a site is where all archaeological work begins, and depends on whether a site is considered active, a location where living
people are interacting with their environment, or static, a place fixed in time that no longer changes. Traditionally, archaeologists
view sites as static locations appropriate for investigation, including excavation, conservation, and other forms of analysis. However,
many descendant communities consider archaeological sites active places still in use and with important functions that continue to
the present. All manner of activity, from excavation to conservation and natural degradation, has effects on the archaeological
resources present on sites. Reexamining the way sites are determined to be active or static ultimately determines where
responsibility for archaeological resources lies, and who bears the duty to respect not only those who left them behind, but their
living descendants as well. Ethics surrounding decisions affecting site preservation and moral standing of past and future
generations must be carefully considered, in order to improve the archaeological study of these nonrenewable resources.
Fulbright, John [187] see Reid, Amy
Fulkerson, Tiffany (Washington State University) and Shannon Tushingham (Washington State University)
[72]
Making the Data Count: Analyzing Inequities and Challenging Epistemic Injustice in Archaeological Discourse
The recent resurgence of interest in diversity and equity issues in archaeological practice highlights persistent disparities in the
demographic composition of practitioners in various aspects of the discipline. Drawing from a database that we generated on the
gender and occupational affiliation of 5,010 authors of 2,445 articles in six regional and national publication venues, we demonstrate
that men and individuals in academic settings continue to dominate discourses in North American archaeology, particularly in the
more prestigious publication venues. We further document considerably higher representations of women and compliance
archaeologists in non-peer-reviewed publishing forums. We frame our results within the context of the “leaky pipeline” effect for
women, and the cost-benefit realities of publishing for people who occupy different professional sectors of archaeology. Insights into
the methodological difficulties of analyzing equity and diversity in the sciences, as well as problems with conventional
measurements of “success” in the modern professional era of North American archaeology, are provided. We conclude by offering
realistic and nontraditional strategies for reducing epistemic injustice in the contemporary landscape of knowledge dissemination.
Fulkerson, Tiffany (Washington State University)
[91]
Discussant
Fulminante, Francesca (Bristol University), Luce Prignano (Barcelona University, Spain), Sergi Lozano (Barcelona
University, Spain; IPHES) and Ignacio Morer (Barcelona University, Spain)
[48]
“All roads lead to Rome” but Where Did They Come From? Analyzing Regional Network Systems in Iron Age Central Italy
What is an ancient city? When does a settlement become a city? Why do some cities prevail and why do they eventually decline?
This paper discusses transportation networks to analyze interactions between the cities of central Italy (ca. 1150–500 BC) to offer a
novel perspective on this debate. Physical connectivity is essential for the inter-settlement cooperative processes—such as
information exchange, trade and defense—that influence the development of past societies and their growing complexity. So far,
however transportation routes have not been given sufficient attention with reference to debates around early urbanism. The
establishment of terrestrial routes requires a certain level of cooperation. In addition, since their maintenance requires significant
resources, they are affected by competing interests. In this way, transportation infrastructure can be regarded as a product of social
relations and of the interactions between societies and environment. To better understand emerging Latin and Etruscan polities and
the mechanisms underlying their variable success, this paper analyses fluvial and terrestrial communication systems of these two
regions by using a novel Network Science approach. The results shed new light on how they emerged and functioned, and also
suggest potentially why, in the end Rome prevailed.
Fulton, Deirdre
[51]
Faunal Remains from Medieval San Giuliano Plateau
A large number of faunal remains were uncovered during the four seasons of excavation (2016–2019) at the San Giuliano Plateau
(SGP), Italy. The collection consists of species that are typical to inland sites in the northern Mediterranean during the Medieval
period, specifically sheep, goat, and pig. As well, birds and cattle supplement the diet. These faunal remains were collected from the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    191
interior of a monumental building that sits on top of SGP as well as stone pits located to the west of the building, dating to the
eleventh through mid-thirteenth century CE. The pit excavations brought to light a distinctive distribution of faunal remains, including
a large number of partial or complete rats. Based on the lack of gnaw marks on other bones in the pits and the large number of
complete rat skeletons found in the pits, it is most likely that the rats were exterminated and then dumped into the pits. The number
of rats (MNI) and context in which they are found may indicate the practice of rat venary taking place at SGP.
Fulton, Deirdre [51] see Grimes, Vaughan
Fulton, James [51] see Grimes, Vaughan
Fulton, Kara (University of North Texas)
[140]
The Effect of Social Landscapes on Human Resilience at Actuncan, Belize
Understanding paleo-landscape transformations is inclusive of natural and social landscapes. Paleo-landscapes reflect a dynamic
convergence of physical processes and cultural meaning. Social landscapes are influenced by factors such as perceived
connections between people, ritual and everyday practices in which people engage together, and spaces where people conduct
activities. These factors contribute to the formation and maintenance of shared group identities. The nature of these identities can
affect how we approach challenges as well as how successful we are in the face of change. Given this context, this paper discusses
the effect of social landscapes on the ability of Classic Maya residents to cope with changing political environments at the settlement
of Actuncan, Belize. Social stratum, and likely associated identity, appears to be tied to people’s level of resilience to shifting power
structures. Understanding how social landscapes affect resilience has implications for how we approach archaeology now and in the
future.
Funk, Caroline [59] see West, Catherine F.
Furquim, Laura [161] see Wyatt, Andrew
Gabellone, Francesco (National Research Council, CNR), Maria Chiffi (Techné s.a.s.), Davide Tanasi (IDEX USF, Florida)
and Michael Decker (IDEX USF, Florida)
[104]
3D Mosaics: Integrated Technologies for Indirect Documentation, Conservation, and Engagement of the Roman Mosaics of Piazza
Armerina (Enna, Italy)
3D digital imaging for the study of archaeology and the global dissemination of knowledge is of growing relevance and has proven to
be extremely beneficial in particular on cases characterized by poor digital accessibility. With seven Unesco World Heritage sites,
Sicily has an extraordinary heritage perfectly representing the cultural achievements of many Mediterranean civilizations, but yet the
digital presence of such heritage is rather limited. The aim of this paper is to present some methodological insights to tackle issues
of 3D digitization of mosaic floors via digital photogrammetry on the basis of direct experience with the case study of the Roman
Villa del Casale at Piazza Armerina (Enna, Sicily, Italy). The virtualization of over 2,500 m2 of mosaic floord was carried out in the
frame of an international collaborative project undertaken by University of South Florida’s Institute for Digital Exploration—IDEx, in
partnership with the Regional Department for Cultural Heritage and Sicilian Identity and specifically with the Regional Hub of Piazza
Armerina, Aidone and Enna and the University of Catania.
Gabellone, Francesco [104] see Chiffi, Maria
Gaffney, Chris (University of Bradford), Tom Sparrow (University of Bradford), Alex Corkum (University of Bradford), Helen
McCreary (University of Bradford) and Chrys Harris (University of Bradford)
[107]
Prospecting and the Interpretation of Twentieth-Century Sport and Leisure: Events, Sites, and Landscapes
The archaeology of modern sites has become a significant aspect of the work carried out by some prospection groups. While many
surveys are to identify events linked to warfare or burials, there is great scope to investigate other elements of the very recent past.
In this paper a suite of sites that are linked by local folk memory will be discussed. In comparing and contrasting different sports and
leisure events we will also consider topophilia (a sense of identity and regard for a place) in explaining the loss or reinforcement of
the local understanding of space. This analysis is strengthened by the narrative of place and heritage that is now part of the
increasing value of sporting space that can be understood from both a cultural historical and a geographical perspective. The sites
will include a football (soccer) pitch, open-air swimming pool (Lido) and an industrial Exhibition held in 1904. The recent nature of
the sites challenge the way in which geophysical data is used to engage the public with their past, as well as providing unusual and
inherently digital ways to data for heritage management purposes.
Gaffney, Isabella (University of York), Helen Grant (University of Lancaster), Logan Kistler (Smithsonian), Jane Thomas-
Oates (University of York) and Oliver Craig (University of York)
[229]
Can Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometry Be Used to Demonstrate Drought Stress in Archaeological Maize?
The cultivation of maize (Zea mays. L) has occurred for nearly 10,000 years and it has recently become the most produced crop
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        192
globally. Many desiccated samples of maize were discovered preserved in Tularosa Cave in New Mexico which was occupied by a
Native American culture for 1000 years. Palaeoclimate data show the region underwent periods of drought during the cave’s
occupation. The aim of this study was to test whether δ18O and δ13C values from cellulose and bulk δ15N data demonstrate a
response to drought conditions, and to determine if Tularosa maize can serve as an indicator of historic agricultural conditions.
Modern maize (drought resistant and drought susceptible varieties) was grown under three experimental conditions (well-watered,
drought, and severe drought). The δ15N was measured in bulk samples of maize ears and δ13C was measured in cellulose extracted
from bulk tissues. Results show a depletion of the 13C isotope in cellulose from maize grown under drought stress when compared
with well-watered samples. Bulk nitrogen isotope ratio results demonstrated a trend of increasing δ15N with increasing drought
stress. Archaeological maize samples from Tularosa cave were similarly analysed. The archaeological samples showed a trend of
strikingly increased δ15N with warmer growing conditions.
Gaffney, Vincent (University of Bradford)
[238]
Discussant
Gaggioli, Amanda
[234]
Assemblages and Socio-Natural Forces of Infrastructure: The Case of Reservoirs in the Iron Age (ca. 1200–300 BCE) of South
India
The development, organization, and control of water infrastructure in India has caused increasingly complex social issues in modern
times. Current debates view water use and management from modernist perspectives and assume a nature-culture divide where
human agents act on a passive natural background. Through the case of Iron Age water reservoir features in South India, I
complicate modernist views of traditional water management by analyzing Iron Age reservoirs as human-nonhuman assemblages. I
treat culture and nature as combined terms and consider the actions of both humans and nature, such as agricultural and pastoral
practices, soil, geological topography, vegetation, animals, water, rain patterns, and climate, in the formation of what I designate as
the Iron Age South India reservoir assemblage. Furthermore, I discuss the consequences which these assemblages had on social
and environmental conditions. The persistence of Iron Age reservoir assemblages occurred alongside an increasing entanglement
and entrainment of socio-natural forces. Humans became entrapped in long-term investments of labor, which resulted in altered
forms of ritual practice and differentials in political power. This study reveals that reservoirs are not features resulting strictly from
socio-cultural decisions and interventions but are rather assemblages of socio-natural forces.
Gagnon, Celeste [174] see Sutter, Richard
Gagnon, Celeste [169] see Torres Morales, Genesis
Galaty, Michael L. [263] see Baci, Erina
Galindo, Mary (Galindo Environmental Consulting)
[113]
Discussant
Gallaga, Emiliano (EAHNM) and Manuel Reynaldo Parra (EAHNM, Chihuahua)
[101]
Ceramics from a Presidio: Preliminary Results from Presidio San Carlos, Chihuahua
On the summer of 2018, a total archaeological collection survey was made at the remains of the Presidio of San Carlos, near the
community of Manuel Benavides. Here we will present preliminary results on the ceramic analysis. The results include ceramic
distribution patterns in the area, forms and possible uses and activities of daily life revealed by the collected sherds, as well as a
proposal on the possibilities of this material as a marker of social status of those who occupied the presidio during this period of
occupation at the end of the eighteenth century.
[101]
Chair
Gallagher, Martin (University of North Texas)
[51]
Road Survey in the Environs of San Giuliano
This paper discusses the evidence for Etruscan and Roman roads in the territory of San Giuliano, and evolving strategies for control
of the surrounding landscape. Road survey conducted as part of the San Giuliano Archaeological Project (SGARP) has
problematized prevailing conceptions derived from literary sources and more limited archaeological knowledge about the ancient
political organization of Southern Etruria. Rock-cut Etruscan roads connected the site to key centers on the Tyrrhennian coast and in
the Tiber Valley, as well as to an important transcontinental route to the North. The identification of defensive works along these
roadways, designed to protect San Giuliano, suggest its independence until the late-fifth century BC. Likewise, connections with
intermediate sites reveal the importance of its immediate region, situated between the sea and the Tiber Valley within the modern
prefecture of Viterbo. A late fifth-century road directly connected the major coastal site of Cerveteri to San Giuliano, and was
partially re-utilized by the Roman Via Clodia in the third century BC. Combined with materially attested trade connections, and data
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      193
from the new excavations at San Giuliano, studying the features of Etruscan and Roman roads can improve our understanding of
political and economic history in South Etruria.
Gallareta Cervera, Tomás (Kenyon College)
[57]
 Documenting the Brigades: Oral History of Local Archaeology Experts in the Puuc Region, Yucatán, Mexico
Oral history is a method that contributes to the decolonization of contemporary social sciences. This is particularly important for
Maya archaeology where even though local communities are largely disconnected from their ancient past, Maya populations are
linked with their ancestral land and rural lifeways at the periphery of larger urban centers. In 2018 we started recollecting oral
histories from local Yucatán groups of agriculturalist-turned site custodians known as the Brigada Volante, and of agriculturalist-
turned ancient masonry experts known as the Brigada de Restauración. Trough their vast knowledge of the archaeological
landscape, use of local language, and ease of communication with the local population they are recognized as local custodians and
experts of the archaeological ruins. In this paper we discuss the preliminary results of our project “Voices Of The Puuc Angels: Rural
Life Among The Archaeological Ruins In The Yucatán Peninsula,” which, through video ethnography and multi-site interviews,
documented the different narratives that people from the Puuc Region in Yucatán, México, have about rural lifeways in Yucatán and
their relationship to the archaeological past.
[57]
Chair
Gallareta Negrón, Tomás [230] see Ringle, William
Galle, Jillian (Digital Archaeological Archive of Comparative Slavery) and Fraser Neiman (Thomas Jefferson Foundation)
[98]
Can Stylistic Elements Variation on Mass-Produced Ceramics Help Us Understand How Enslaved People Acquired Ceramics?
In 2000, inspired by Stephen Plog’s landmark work on stylistic variation on ceramics, the Digital Archaeological Archive of
Comparative Slavery (www.daacs.org) began recording individual stylistic elements on mass-produced refined ceramics recovered
from domestic sites of enslavement across North American and the Caribbean. In this paper we explore what the resulting data can
tell us about variation in modes of ceramic acquisition among enslaved households on a single plantation and across plantations.
We start with the assumption that at any given time, design and production processes at the factory determine stylistic element
frequencies for a specific vessel type, defined by the intersection of ceramic ware, vessel shape, and decorative technology. If that
is right, then stylistic element variation among assemblages that cannot be accounted for in terms of type variation may be sensitive
to variation in the networks, connecting factory to household, in which the ceramics were acquired. For enslaved people in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, these networks included cash-purchases from stores and peddlers, trade and barter with other
people, and gift or thefts from owners. We empirically evaluate this idea and its implications for the organization of these networks
and for inferring how enslaved households acquired ceramics.
Gallegos Gomora, Miriam Judith (Centro INAH Tabasco) and Ricardo Armijo Torres (Centro INAH Tabasco)
[126]
The Figurines: Evidence of Trade, Rituals, and Identities among the Peoples of the Gulf of Mexico Coast
Across 700 km of coastline, from southern Veracruz to the northern Yucatán Peninsula, the populations of many cities of the Late
Classic period made use of figurines, small and fragile objects of fired clay that mainly represented women, men and animals to
scale. In many case,these objects were also musical instruments. Investigation of the style and context of the figurines indicates that
several cities shared the use of the same type of representation, while others only appear in each place. Female figurines, for
example, are unique to each city, suggesting that they portrayed the ideal of the local woman with her characteristic attire, and thus
were a reflection of the social identity of each place. On the other hand, Instrumental Neutron Activation analysis –INAA- performed
by Ronald L. Bishop on a sample of figurines in the region, confirmed the existence of producer and consumer sites of these
objects. In this paper, we will discuss the existence of a route of exchange of goods and ritual practices along the coast of the Gulf
of Mexico, based on the results obtained by INAA and the studies of style and context of figurines located in sites belonging to this
route.
Gallivan, Martin (William & Mary) and Jessica Jenkins (University of Florida)
[251]
Deep History, Colonial Encounters, and Revitalization in the Algonquian Chesapeake
This paper explores the idea that the Powhatan paramount chief’s relocation to the town of Werowocomoco represented an act of
revitalization intended to renew the power of a ceremonial place. Studies of revitalization movements often trace a historical process
of social stress, cultural distortion, and reformulation of cultural patterns through revival or reaffirmation of selected features. The
archaeological record of Werowocomoco, the capital of the Powhatan chiefdom when colonists arrived in the Chesapeake, aligns
with elements of these models. Prior to the colonial era, two phases of earthwork construction at Werowocomoco mark the town as
a place of ceremony, followed by significant population decline at the settlement during the sixteenth century. European colonists
periodically visited the Chesapeake and established a missionary outpost near Werowocomoco during this period, likely introducing
deadly diseases into the region. Also during this century, paramount chief Wahunsenacawh moved his residence to
Werowocomoco—a town that may no longer have had any resident population—as he consolidated control over a regional polity.
Seeing Werowocomoco as the center place of a revitalization movement offers a new way of reconnecting Virginia Algonquians’
deep history and the events of the colonial encounter.
[251]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        194
Galloway, Tori (Indiana University), Tamara Thomsen (Wisconsin Historical Society), Caitlin Zant (Wisconsin Historical
Society) and Victoria Kiefer (Wisconsin Historical Society)
[192]
Scow Schooners around the World: An Archaeological Analysis of Scow Schooners and Their Surrounding Maritime Heritage
Scow schooners were vital to many small communities around Lake Michigan, connecting them with regional markets through the
lakeshoring trade. Despite its proliferation, or perhaps as a result of it, it is difficult to trace the scow’s introduction to the New World.
While conventional scow schooners appeared on the Great Lakes as early as 1820, the wide range in design and sparse
archaeological record for this vessel type makes classification difficult. Other North American regions, such as the Atlantic Coast,
Gulf Coast, and San Francisco Bay, mirrored the scow’s expansion on the Great Lakes. The scow expanded all the way to the
Pacific Islands, and if imitation is the highest form of flattery, much can be said by the fact that New Zealand scows were
descendants of those of the Great Lakes. In an effort to better understand the design of scow schooners on a global scale, an
archaeological analysis of vessel features and a historical understanding of maritime heritage regarding these vessels serves to
contribute toward an ongoing comparative analysis of this regional variation of scow schooners.
Galvan, Dagmar and Emily Engan
[186]
Role of a Fire Archaeologist
In this poster, we discuss the role of a fire-qualified archaeologist during a wildland fire. The beginning process, fieldwork,
technology, and outcomes are described. Emphasis is put on building relationships with the fuels and fire department of the Forest
Service to implement protection measures.
Galván Benítez, Miguel Ángel
[145]
El sistema de desagües del Juego de Pelota de Monte Albán
La recolección y almacenamiento de agua pluvial es una de las prácticas más antiguas en Mesoamérica. La investigación
arqueológica en diversos sitios ha permitido la identificación y documentación de depósitos subterráneos, depósitos a cielo abierto,
almacenamiento en recipientes y más común el sistema de desagües. En Monte Albán los estudios sobre el aprovechamiento del
agua de lluvias no ha sido extenso, sin embargo, el “Proyecto Emergente de Restauración por los efectos de los sismos del 7, 19 y
23 de septiembre del 2017 de la Zona Arqueológica de Monte Albán: El Juego de Pelota” ha permitido identificar, estudiar y
restaurar el sistema de desagües del Juego de Pelota. En la presente ponencia se exponen valiosos datos sobre la captación,
distribución y usos de las aguas pluviales en la parte noreste de la plaza principal, dando cuenta de cómo la planeación urbanística
de Monte Albán se enfocó por una parte, en resolver el problema del abastecimiento de agua y por el otro, evitar las posibles
inundaciones de los espacios públicos.
Gamache, Joel [165] see Graham, Carole
Gama-Vooz, Marisol (Gama-Vooz)
[101]
Across the Rio Grande: The Aerial Ore Tramway, a Case of Industrial Archaeology in the Big Bend Region
In the 1900s a group of adventurous entrepreneurs resumed mining activities that had been abandoned a decade prior in the Big
Bend region. The idea this time was to utilize new mining technologies. Overcoming long distances, rugged terrain, international,
and cultural borders, an expensive and new mineral transport system known as an aerial tramway which spanned six miles across
the U.S./Mexico Border was installed. The installation of the aerial tramway and its towers and cables became central to the
developmental boom in the Rio Grande/Rio Bravo region. It brought a decade of transformations to the landscape including the
mobilization of a new workforce, new communities, economic investment, and the bridging of the Sierra del Carmen of Mexico with
the Terminal Valley of the United States. However, only a few years after the second life of mining in the Big Bend region, it fell into
oblivion again. Today the wobbly towers of the aerial tramway stand in what is now Big Bend National Park as a reminder of the
industrial landscape that once thrived in this strikingly tough region.
Gamble, Lynn [72] see Herr, Sarah
Garbellano, John Michael
[56]
Changing Tides and Terrain: Dr. Mary Butler’s Hudson Valley Archaeological Survey
Consistent demonstration of patience and fortitude are several characteristics of the most revered pioneers in human history. These
qualities were seen in many individuals blazing new paths for others to follow. Directly or indirectly, those who created these paths
helped improve the overall state of humanity in the Americas. Knowingly or unknowingly, Dr. Mary Butler was an agent of change in
the discipline of anthropology. And she is worthy of the veneration that many great pioneers have received. This paper focuses on
the life and career of Dr. Butler and, more specifically, her archaeological survey of the Hudson Valley in New York. Her seminal
project was underrepresented and misrepresented by colleagues of her time, but by no means, forgotten. Dr. Mary Butler is an icon
of many firsts for women in anthropology. Her work has influenced the careers of many and has the potential to continue to do so for
years to come.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  195
Garber, James [239] see Bentley, Heath
García, Dante (Zona Arqueologica de Monte Albán), Nelly Robles García (INAH Oaxaca) and Axel Andrade Perez
[145]
Nuevos elementos en la iconografía zapoteca: Un friso en el tablero noreste de Casa Sur en el sitio arqueológico de Atzompa
En los sistemas de escritura precolombina de Mesoamérica, la zapoteca tiene un lugar especial en la diversidad de estudios
realizados en la búsqueda por descifrar estelas, pintura mural y vasijas cerámicas que han permitido conocer importantes
informaciones sobre las élites político-sociales, sus alianzas matrimoniales, rituales funerarios, culto y veneración a los ancestros,
así como las genealogías de diferentes ciudades del clásico tardío y postclásico temprano (650–1250 d.C.). En esta ponencia se
presentan los recientes descubrimientos y aportes sobre los sistemas de lectoescritura zapoteca ya que en las temporadas 2018–
2019 del “Proyecto Arqueológico del Conjunto Monumental de Atzompa” se descubrió un friso con bajorrelieves que decoran un
tablero tipo doble escapulario en la fachada principal de la residencia conocida como Casa Sur. Este tablero único en su tipo,
presenta una narrativa gráfico (sintagma)- lingüística (discursivo), que conserva el sistema pictográfico zapoteco, por lo cual, se
presenta aquí el hallazgo, los métodos empleados de registró y documentación arqueológica, así como una propuesta de lectura
semiótica contextual que permiten dar cuenta de la función de este recinto e importancia del mismo en la consolidación del poder
que mantuvo la élite político-social de este barrio de Monte Albán.
[145]
Chair
García, Dante [145] see Frykholm, Soren
Garcia, Lorena [161] see Silva, Fabiola
García Atiénzar , Gabriel [25] see Coltofean-Arizancu, Laura
García-Casco, Antonio [246] see Weber, Marion
Garcia-Herreros, Jorge and Jasmin Moxham
[202]
Search for the Cannons “The Twin Sisters”
The cannons known as “The Twin Sisters” were among the principal weapons used in the Battle of San Jacinto. After their crucial
role in this battle they became symbols of the victory of Texas over Mexico. During the Civil War, the cannons again saw service in
the Battle of Galveston. After the Civil War, the cannons disappeared. A story circulated that Dr. Henry North Graves had buried the
cannons in Harrisburg in order to prevent the Union from taking them. Since then multiple attempts have been made to find these
cannons. In 2011, a non-profit group was created to perform a comprehensive search for the famous cannons. This search was
based on a newly developed hypothesis as to the location of the cannons. To locate areas of interest, a cesium vapor
magnetometer survey was conducted. The gathered data was processed to delineate the cannons and other buried artifacts. This
paper describes the search that was conducted for the cannons and its findings.
Garcia-Putnam, Alex (University of Wyoming) and Maria Smith (University of Syracuse)
[119]
The Biocultural Consequences of Forced Labor at the Obraje de San Marcos de Chincheros, Ayacucho, Peru.
From a bioarchaeological study of indigenous laborers in Colonial highland Peru, we test the hypothesis that the mechanical
stresses associated with long-term forced textile manufacturing is patterned. We investigate this embodiment of forced labor through
analyses of human remains from the cemetery at the Obraje de San Marcos de Chincheros (ODC) (~AD 1570–1823), a textile
workshop town. Spanish policies regarding resource extraction and labor exploitation would have been firmly in place by this time,
and we hypothesize that their effects were embodied in the bones and tissues of those buried in the cemetery (Klaus et al. 2009;
Mumford 2012, Salas de Coloma 1998). Following standard osteological data collection practices (Buikstra and Ubelaker 1994;
Ortner 2019), we explore the demography and evidence for pathological conditions present in the skeletal sample from ODC. We
expect an elevated frequency and severity of degenerative joint disease in the upper limbs, especially in females, due to their
increased involvement in the textile industry (Graubart 2000; Klaus et al. 2009). Coupling the historical record, which is rich with
descriptions of labor and life at ODC with our osteological analysis, allows this research to go beyond description and speak more
fully to the embodiment of forced labor.
Garcia-Putnam, Alex [239] see Smith, Maria
Gardner, A. Dudley (Western Wyoming College)
[235]
A Look at the Formative in Northwestern Colorado: Similarities and Differences in the Cultural Assemblages within the Fremont in
the Colorado River Drainage Basin
Recent excavations in Northwest Colorado are indicating that between 1100 BP and 800 BP some Fremont Structures in
northwestern Colorado contained elements similar to sites found throughout the upper Colorado Plateau. Adobe rimmed hearths,
use of grass and cedar in roof construction, and the use of rock slab coverings on roofs are evident in northwest Colorado and
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   196
elsewhere. The question is why and to what degree does the northwestern Colorado Formative Period assemblages differ from
elsewhere? For instance, there seems to be a lack of beans and squash in the macro-floral record south of the White River in
northwestern Colorado. Yet granaries and other structures, are similar to those found through-out the upper Colorado Plateau. In
this presentation we will compare and contrast what we have found in excavation and surveys to the cultural assemblages exhibited
elsewhere. We will then provide a brief explanation for what appears to be a divergence from established Fremont cultural attributes
in northwest Colorado.
Gardner, William (Yale University), Brent Buenger (Western Archaeological Services) and Ja Burentogtokh (Yale
University)
[62]
Hunters vs. Herders: A Comparative Analysis of Material Distributions in Hunter-Gatherer and Mobile Pastoralists’ Dwelling Space
In the classical work “Man Makes Himself,” V. Gordon Childe comments that mobile pastoralists were unlikely to produce a notable
archaeological signature due to their use of nonpermanent structures constructed from perishable materials. This mentality gave
rise to a long-lasting assumption that mobile pastoralist’s households were virtually undetectable in the archaeological record.
Recent application of excavation techniques and analytical methods borrowed from hunter-gatherer archaeology have proven,
however, that meaningful archaeological evidence of mobile pastoralist nonpermanent residences can be ascertained. That said,
the study of mobile pastoralist dwellings is still in its infancy and in need of refinement. Specifically, we question if the use of
excavation procedures and analytical techniques developed for the study of hunter-gatherer dwelling space is appropriate for the
study of mobile pastoralist dwellings. To address this we compare the distribution of cultural material found in a mobile pastoralist
dwelling located in the forest-steppe region of Mongolia to that of Archaic period hunter-gatherer dwellings in the Green River Basin
of Wyoming. This exercise will assess if generalized descriptions of cultural material distributions from hunter-gatherer habitations
provide useful models for the study of mobile pastoralist nonpermanent dwellings.
Gardner-O’Kearny, William (Portland State University)
[147]
DSift: An Automated Data Exploration Software Package for Matlab
This poster presents an overview of DSift, a new statistical software package. DSift imports data from a user’s spreadsheet and
automatically calculates a suite of standard exploratory statistical measures and comparative tests. Normality, power, sample size,
and effect size statistics are also calculated. Bootstrap confidence intervals can be requested for descriptive measurements. Results
are compiled in formatted tables. A variety of descriptive graphs are also produced. Input data can be in a list of measurements or
artifact counts. If the dataset consists of measurement data, the user has the option of having DSift convert it to count data and
performing the statistical suite on the revised dataset. The user can specify a nominal variable (i.e., excavation unit, site,
component, etc.) for finer grained analysis. Data can be further subdivided and analyzed based a second grouping variable
(component by site for example). While most statistical software packages can calculate exploratory measurements, DSift has the
advantage of automating the processes as much as possible. DSift was originally constructed in the Matlab programming
environment and will be freely available from the Matlab Central file exchange site. Ports are planned for R and Python.
Gardullo, Paul [273] see Lubkemann, Stephen
Garnett, Heather
[79]
Shell, Abandonment, and the Jornada Mogollon
This poster examines the role shell plays in ritual abandonment in the Pueblos of the American Southwest. Ethnographic evidence
in the American Southwest suggests that shells held important powers useful for the players and other activities that would have
accompanied the ceremonial activities of site closure. I explore the life histories of shell materials in abandonment contexts across
the ancient pueblo world and then consider a case study of Cottonwood Spring Pueblo (LA 175). This is a multicomponent site
located on the western slopes of the San Andres Mountains of southern New Mexico. The site possesses four El Paso Phase (AD
1300–1450) pueblos. To date excavations in two of these villages reveal evidence of ritual closure that includes burning of the roofs
and the addition of various artifacts, including shell, to the burned layers and fill above them.
Garnett, Justin (University of Kansas)
[69]
Basketmaker II Atlatls as Combat Weapons: An Experimental Approach
While the bow and its role in combat are well understood, the atlatl is not so well characterized. The shift from atlatl to bow systems
would have effects on many domains of life, from food procurement to combat dynamics. While the role of atlatls in hunting is
becoming better understood through a resurgence in public interest in their use, the combat dynamics of atlatls are still relatively
unexplored. This research seeks to inform meaningful discussion regarding atlatls as weapons in human combat. This talk will cover
experiments in which replica atlatls and darts of the Basketmaker II period (an atlatl utilizing sociotechnical complex of the American
Southwest, ~4000–2000 BP) were utilized in simple but realistic mock combat by individuals dressed in personal protective
equipment. This research will offer insights and help inform a discussion related to the technological transition from atlatl to bow.
Garnica, Marlen and Eugenia Robinson (Tulane University)
[60]
New Interpretations of La Casa de las Golondrinas: Landscape, Archaeology and Themes of the Art
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  197
The rockshelter and rock art site La Casa de las Golondrinas in Guatemala is situated in a volcanic landscape with striking
geomorphic similarity to the setting of rock art sites in the American Southwest. A review of motifs document gendered naturalistic,
supernatural and cosmological themes with clear references to water, birth, creation, and transformation. Some of the naturalistic
images are near duplicates of images found in the American Southwest. Some images are Mesoamerican deities but others seem
to be mythological entities unknown in the elite Mesoamerican corpus. An archaeological cache of organic materials preserved in
the dry rockshelter is devoted to rain and cycles of time. La Casa de las Golondrinas was a large and important location for rock
paintings for at least 3,000 years but glyphs used in the Late Postclassic period (AD 1200–1524) politicized the site when Kaqchikel
people conquered the area in their efforts to expand their realm.
Garong, Ame [188] see Monaghan, John
Garrett, Zenobie (University of Oklahoma)
[95]
Discussant
Garrison, Ervan
[238]
Seismic Facies, or How Geophysics Help Shape Submerged Prehistoric Studies on the OCS
Seismic facies are a well-known and well-used interpretative output of the interpretation of geophysical data. The term indicates its
source—acoustical or seismic geophysics. The “facies” concept is a geological methodology for the classification of sedimentary
lithologies. The use of seismic facies represents an effort to create a methodological analogue in order to correlate geophysical data
with the geology where these data were obtained. Early efforts to characterize submerged landforms for potential prehistoric cultural
resources used this methodology to interpret shallow geophysical data taken by subbottom profilers and similar devices. This paper
will examine the efficacy of this approach and how it helps shape the search and characterization of submerged prehistoric cultural
resources on the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS).
Garrison, Ervan [18] see Hale, Nathan
Garrison, Thomas (Ithaca College), Dennis Baldwin (Ithaca College), Rafael Cambranes (Universidad de San Carlos) and
Anna Bishop (UCLA)
[206]
Lab Error, Looting, and Lidar: Ground-Truthing and Regional Chronology at El Zotz, Guatemala
The wealth of new settlement and environmental data provided by large-scale lidar surveys requires new field methodologies that
maximize the value of the technology while also recognizing its limits. Data from the 2016 Pacunam lidar Initiative (PLI) around the
Classic kingdom of El Zotz, Guatemala cover a range of microenvironments, distinguished by their geophysical characteristics and
associated vegetative patterns. The accuracy of lab identification of cultural features in the data—such as structures, quarries, and
reservoirs—was shown to be highly variable in environmentally-dependent contexts during ground-truthing campaigns in 2018 and
2019. This paper explores patterns in lab classification errors, and what their implications are for explaining broader settlement
trends in lidar data. Additionally, this study presents field and lab methods for collecting, processing, and visualizing regional
chronological data as a part of ground-truthing efforts as a first attempt to establish more accurate regional chronologies in the face
of thousands of new cultural features revealed by lidar surveys.
Garvey, Alana
[243]
An Analysis of Rock Art in Eastern Ancash, Peru
This study presents an analysis of pictographs from the archaeological site of Ushcugaga, located within the highlands of eastern
Ancash, Peru. Although the existence of rock art at this site— as well as others nearby— has been established, previous recording
has often been partial, with prior analyses focused on other features of the sites. Based on visual analyses including comparisons of
the pictographs’ content and style with other iconography from archaeological imagery across Peru, it is proposed that the rock art
at Ushcugaga was created over a long span of time, beginning in the second millennium BC and lasting until approximately 1200
AD.
Garvey, Raven (University of Michigan)
[139]
Discussant
Garvey, Raven (University of Michigan)
[171]
Unacceptable Risk: Why Patagonians Didn’t Farm
Patagonia is one of relatively few world regions beyond the Arctic/Subarctic where farming never took root. This is intriguing
because, at least in the north, Patagonians lived alongside and interacted with farmers for at least 2,000 years. Nevertheless, we
seldom ask why Patagonians didn’t farm, perhaps because of the region’s reputation as an arid, windswept wasteland:
environmental severity seems explanation enough. Alternatively, considering Patagonia’s sparse archaeological record, we might
reason that, possible or not, agriculture was simply unnecessary because populations remained small throughout the Holocene,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   198
never reaching a point at which farming would have been worth the effort. In this paper, I demonstrate that, in fact, parts of the
region are amenable to dryland farming and that foraging efficiency was declining in late prehistory. Neither too-costly farming nor
too-beneficial foraging is sufficient to explain the commitment to hunting and gathering. I argue, further, that foraging and farming
require very different risk-management strategies, and that farming risks at the time of potential transition in Patagonia were simply
unacceptable despite the potential benefits of farming.
Garvin, Arianna (University of California, San Diego), Matthew Sitek (University of California, San Diego), Jade d’Alpoim
Guedes (University of Caifornia, San Diego), Julianna Santillan Goode (University of California, San Diego) and Paul
Goldstein (University of California, San Diego)
[267]
Archaeobotanical Findings from the Tiwanaku Site of Cerro San Antonio, Locumba Valley, Perú
I present the results of an archaeobotanical analysis of samples excavated from multiple household units at the large Tiwanaku
residential site of Cerro San Antonio, Locumba, Peru. The Tiwanaku civilization (ca. AD 500–1100) originated in the Bolivian
altiplano of the south-central Andes, and expanded into arid lowland regions like the Locumba Valley in southern Perú. Andean
rivers flowing west toward the Peruvian coastal region create productive oases in the western valleys that are suitable for growing
lowland crops that cannot be grown in the Tiwanaku core region. An exchange model and a settler diaspora model are considered
to explain the Tiwanaku presence in the Locumba Valley. An exchange model might argue that Locumba Valley residents and
Tiwanaku people maintained contact via existing llama caravan trade routes, while a settler diaspora model suggests that Tiwanaku
people colonized the Locumba Valley and preserved their highland identities. Preliminary findings suggest a low count of maize but
a high frequency of kiwicha, a highland cultivar. The presence of highland cultivars in the Locumba Valley presents an opportunity to
explore Tiwanaku core-periphery exchange, the maintenance of highland identity, and the local climate of the Middle Horizon
Locumba Valley.
Garvin, Arianna [61] see Santillan Goode, Julianna
Garzon-Oechsle, Andres [257] see Martinez, Valentina
Gasco, Janine (CSU-Dominguez Hills)
[237]
Hector Neff’s Contributions to Research on Late Postclassic and Colonial Soconusco Ceramics
My archaeological research on Postclassic and Spanish Colonial Soconusco has been conducted using a variety of theoretical and
methodological approaches, all of which were intended to keep it real, although conclusions were sometimes tentative or
speculative. Hector’s work has been inspirational because, as Sachiko notes in the session abstract, it always involves using strong
empirical evidence to test hypotheses. Over the past 14 years, I have relied heavily on Hector’s assistance and his advice as I have
turned to compositional analysis for Late Postclassic and Colonial ceramics in an effort to better understand what empirical evidence
can tell us about patterns of ceramic production and exchange. From our first collaborative project in 2006 that used LA-ICP-MS, to
subsequent projects using NAA, for which Hector gave me sound advice, the results of these studies have advanced our
understanding of ceramic production and exchange in Late Postclassic and Colonial Soconusco.
Gassaway, Linn (USFS Lassen National Forest)
[117]
Discussant
Gates St-Pierre, Christian (Université de Montréal), Jean-Christophe Ouellet (Université de Montréal) and Claude
Chapdelaine (Université de Montréal)
[12]
To Live in a Longhouse: A Case Study from Iroquoian Village Sites in Southern Quebec
Archaeologists have been largely interested in documenting the architecture, variability, evolution, and even the symbolism of
Iroquoian longhouses for several decades in the Northeast, often using the village or the region as the preferred scale of analysis.
However, the study of daily life inside these longhouses has not received the same attention, for example as regard to the
organization of labour or the emergence of inequalities, among other social dimensions. This presentation will adopt a different,
smaller scale of analysis to address these issues through a series of inter- and intra-longhouse comparisons from Late Woodland
Iroquoian village sites located in St-Anicet, southern Quebec.
Gauthier, Nicolas (University of Arizona)
[95]
Discussant
Gavériaux, Fanny (Sapienza University of Rome), Laura Motta (Kelsey Museum of Archaeology, University of Michigan)
and Laura Sadori (Sapienza University of Rome)
[234]
Urbanization, Intensification, and Stable Isotope Analysis: Discriminating Agricultural Practices and Climatic Instability in Central
Italy during the Early First Millennium BCE
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     199
The climatic instability that occurred during the late Holocene could have influenced the socio-economic processes which led to the
emergence of the first urban centers in Central Italy. From the ninth–fourth centuries BCE, rapid social changes, that have been
associated with increasing political and economic complexity, demographic growth, intensified agriculture, and a significant shift in
settlement patterns, dramatically restructured life across the peninsula. However, the specific character of some of these processes,
in particular changes in farming practices and intensification of production has been difficult to explore thus far due to the lack of
direct data. In addition, the relation between agricultural systems, anthropic impact on the landscape and environmental instability is
problematic to disentangle due to the low chronological resolution of climatic studies. This project investigates the relations between
the use of vegetal resources, agricultural practices, and climatic variations during the eighth to sixth centuries BCE through carbon
and nitrogen stable isotope analysis (δ13C and δ15N) on carbonized cereals and woods remains. Recent excavations at three proto-
urban centers along the Thyrrenian coast (Gabii, Tarquinia and Rome) offer a unique opportunity for archaeobotanical sampling.
Preliminary results on emmer, barley, and oak wood retrieved from securely dated contexts will be presented.
Gay, Brandon (UC San Diego)
[95]
Discussant
Gay, Brandon (UC San Diego) and Paul Goldstein (UC San Diego)
[260]
Walls, Hilltops, and Defense: Exploring Fortification at the Late Intermediate Period Site of Cinto Alto (C8) in Locumba, Peru
The Late Intermediate Period (LIP) (AD 1000–1400) is commonly regarded as a period of factionalism and violence following the
decline of Middle Horizon regional polities, such as the Tiwanaku. The present study interrogates these characterizations and asks
whether conflict shaped site formation at the LIP site of Cinto Alto (C8) in Locumba, Peru. Extensive surface survey, aerial imagery,
and surface collections completed by the Proyecto Arqueológico de Locumba (PAL) between 2015 and 2019 suggest that Cinto
Alto’s walls and moats leave much of the site without protection. This differs from classic interpretation of heavily fortified hilltop
settlements seen elsewhere in Peru. This paper proposes two hypotheses to explain this pattern: that walls at C8 were meant to
physically divide the community, or the walls were defensive structures of some nature. The paper summarizes recent 2019
research at Cinto Alto to be further explored in upcoming dissertation research.
Gaylord, Donald (Washington and Lee University) and Eric Herrera (Washington and Lee University)
[119]
The First Alamo: The Remains of the San Francisco Solano Mission Complex
The Gateway Mission and Presidio complex located in present day Guerrero, Coah., Mexico represented the northernmost outpost
of the Camino Real before the Spanish settled Texas. The complex consisted of three missions: San Juan Bautista (January, 1700),
San Francisco Solano (March, 1700), and San Bernardo (1702). Together with the Presidio del Rio Grande (1703), they became
known as “The Gateway of Spanish Texas.” San Juan Bautista and San Bernardo operated for over a century before being
secularized, and the Presidio became the city hall used today. San Francisco Solano however, was razed after only 14 years. It was
later re-established under the name San Antonio de Valero, better known as the Alamo, currently a World Heritage Site. While the
history of the other two missions and the presidio are well-known, San Francisco Solano remains obscure. The location of the
mission was forgotten, and its documentation was removed to other archives. This study is the first to locate the mission and
translate its documents into English. We will illuminate details the site and its Spanish and Indigenous residents during its short but
impactful existence, which will serve as the foundation for a UNESCO Emergency Funding request for historic site preservation.
Gayo, Eugenia (Center for Climate and Resilience Research (CR)2), Manuel Rojas, Marcela Sepulveda (Universidad de
Tarapacá) and Antonio Maldonado (Centro de Estudios Avanzados en Zonas Áridas)
[74]
Gathering, Processing, and Use of Plant Resources during the Archaic in the Atacama Desert Highlands: The Case of the “Alero El
Bajo” Site
The Atacama Desert highlands (>2,000 masl) have provided key information for the understanding of cultural dynamics of Andean
populations that inhabited continuously the South-Central Andes since the latest Pleistocene. Our knowledge about cultural patterns
for the Archaic period is, however, constrained by the preservation of materials (i.e plant remains) beyond the record of lithic
artifacts, zooarchaeological vestiges or rock art. Actually, settlement patterns and/or features for archaeological Archaic sites have
been traditionally inferred from these kinds of evidences. To overcome such limitations, we developed methodological frameworks
to recover plant remains in Archaic sites at the upper Azapa basin (18°30’S, >3,000 masl). Practically all of the 105 archaeological
sites identified in the upper Azapa basin lack macro-botanical remains. Exceptionally, in the cave “Alero El Bajo” –located alongside
an ephemeral canyon- we recovered in excavation over 1,500 excellent well-preserved plant remains. Our results show evidence for
the use of local species such as Cumulopuntia spp and selective gathering of Chenopodium spp. These finding offer the unique
opportunity to reconstruct practices regarding the acquisition, management, use/consumption of plant resources throughout the
Archaic, and certainly complement our notion about life strategies for hunter-gatherers from the South-Central Andes.
[74]
Chair
Gayo, Eugenia [171] see McRostie, Virginia
Gayo, Eugenia [74] see Ugalde, Paula
Gazis, Michalis [196] see Proulx, Benoit
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   200
Ge, Wei [45] see Zhai, Shaodong
Gearty, Erin (Carlsbad Caverns National Park) and Julie McGilvray (Guadalupe Mountains National Park)
[165]
Exploring the Designed Landscape within Carlsbad Cavern: Lidar Mapping of the Historic Cave Trail System at Carlsbad Caverns
National Park
Carlsbad Caverns National Park is completing a Cultural Landscapes Inventory and associated National Register of Historic Places
nomination for the primary tourist walkways within Carlsbad Cavern. This project includes an inventory and analysis of all associated
cultural features and early design strategies within the cave, impacts to and relationships with cave natural systems, and significant
viewsheds along the developed infrastructure within the cave. The Center for Advanced Spatial Technologies from the University of
Arkansas used lidar to complete 3D surveying and digital mapping of 3.5 miles of paved trails within Carlsbad Cavern. The process
of gathering and processing the data resulted in unique challenges that are not typically experienced above-ground, and will be
invaluable to future 3D mapping projects in challenging environments, such as those with a cave. The lidar is being used as an
analysis tool to explore the complex interaction of the built historic infrastructure with the natural cave environment. The possible
applications of the lidar data, however, are wide and varied. They include strategies to increase public awareness, knowledge,
support, and access to the cave, methods to make important management decisions within the cave, and instruments that can help
balance public access with resource protection.
Geib, Phil (University of Nebraska, Lincoln)
[69]
Basketmaker Atlatl Duels as Ritual Conflict: Interpreting Ancient Rock Imagery
Skeletal remains document violent conflict during the Basketmaker II period of the American Southwest. There is evidence for this
on both an individual and intergroup level. The latter is documented by massacre assemblages that represent one end of a
continuum in lethal social interaction. Atlatls and darts were some of the weapons used in such encounters, with dart-sized
projectiles found embedded in or between skeletal elements. Basketmaker rock imagery further documents violence using atlatls
and darts. Analysis of the imagery suggests contexts that seem interpretable as atlatl duels, an activity that perhaps provided a
means of conflict resolution to prevent the upscaling of social tensions.
Geiger, Elspeth (University of Michigan) and Emma Creamer (University of Michigan)
[119]
Fur, Seed, and Need: New Subsistence Data from an Early Historic Occupation on Drummond Island
Located on Drummond Island in Michigan, the Cloudman site is a multicomponent site including important “protohistoric” (AD 1400–
1650) and Early Historic Anishinaabe occupations (Post AD 1650). Recent research on these occupations has revealed a more
complicated depositional history than was previously thought. New faunal and macrobotanical data from the most recent
excavations will be shared with the aim to further the discussion of these time periods and the social interactions taking place. This
poster will present data from the 2019 field season and will discuss future directions for the analysis.
Gelliot, Eric [189] see Costa, Philippe
Gemberling, Bailey (Bloomsburg University)
[7]
Living under the Canopy: Using Lidar and Archaeology to Reconstruct the Settlement History of a Classic Maya Kingdom
Until recently, conceptions of lowland Classic Maya landscapes were hampered by the difficulty of navigating the dense jungles of
Central America. Recent lidar surveys in Belize and Guatemala have finally overcome these limitations and have provided first time
images of entire regions of the lowland landscape. El Perú-Waka’, a Classic Maya (250–900 CE) city in western Petén, Guatemala,
is one of these locations. By combining the spatial data gathered from lidar ground-truthing, and ceramic data obtained from an
extensive test pitting program, this poster will present the settlement history of the ancient city and hinterlands. This allows for
comparison of the occupational trajectories of periphery settlements and the urban core of El Perú-Waka’. It also informs the spatial
variation in local and regional ceramic traditions.
General, Zachariah [252] see Powell, Evelyn
Gentil, Bianca (Pennsylvania State University)
[133]
Defining the Context of the Epiclassic: Measuring Population and Settlement Dynamics in the Puebla-Tlaxcala Valley, Mexico
Shared characteristics between settlements create the archaeological classification of the ‘Epiclassic’ in Central Mexico. These
characteristics include: rise in militarism, an increase in long-distance networks, the upswing in regional centers vying for power, and
a boost in art, architecture, and stylistic composition. Puebla-Tlaxcala experienced these changes that spread across Central
Mexico during the Epiclassic. The material culture throughout the landscape becomes more localized and heterogeneous—
especially since the Puebla-Tlaxcala valley provides intersecting paths of trade between the Basin, Gulf, Mixtec, and Maya regions.
García Cook’s survey data has been used to analyze settlement distribution in the region, which leads to a narrative of population
pressure competing for power, influence, and resources—as depicted in the scene in Cacaxtla. Though conflict was likely present,
recent surveys show that assumed population density is not exactly accounted for in most of Puebla-Tlaxcala. Epiclassic
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  201
concentrations center between the settlements of Cholula and Cacaxtla and some occupation at the site of Tepeticpac and at the
site of La Loma de Santa Margarita in the north end of the valley. This shortage of population density may help us understand the
lack of known occupation in the region during the following Early Postclassic period.
George, Amy (Tulane University) and Gabrielle Vail (UNC Chapel Hill)
[138]
Representing Place in Mesoamerican Postclassic and Early Colonial Period Sources
Postclassic indigenous scribes represented place iconographically, by toponyms, or some combination thereof, according to a
quadripartite structure of the world in which moving through space was synonymous with moving through time. The world quarters
were aligned with specific colors, deities, and sometimes items from the natural world, such as trees and other plants. The central
space was delineated as the place of origin and of ritual action, and was often marked by a structure (i.e., a house, temple, or altar).
With the introduction of European cartographic traditions in the early colonial period, indigenous scribes continued to map space
according to human relationships to the landscape, churches replacing temples as the nexus of communities. Community origin was
marked by representations of rulers or founders tied to specific geographic places, such as caves, and prehispanic conventions
(toponyms, footprints ideographically marking roads) occurred alongside European ones (e.g., a stylized sun marking the east or a
church as an ideograph for a community). This presentation uses sixteenth century maps, such as the Relación Geográfica map of
Teozacoalco (1580), to explore how communities understood—and repositioned—themselves within the colonial landscape,
creating representations of space that were as syncretic as the communities they mapped.
George, Miranda (University of Calgary), Elizabeth Paris (University of Calgary) and Roberto López Bravo (UNICACH)
[150]
Size and Morphology of Canid Skeletal Remains from Moxviquil, Chiapas, Mexico
The site of Moxviquil is located in the Jovel Valley of highland Chiapas, and contains a funerary cave from which human and faunal
osteological remains have been recovered. The site’s occupation spans the Late Classic (AD 600–900) to Early Postclassic (AD
900–1250) periods. Approximately one-third of the remains belong to the species Canis familiaris, represented primarily by dental
elements. Canid teeth were used to identify the presence of both small coated dogs, or Techichi, and medium-sized hairless
Xoloitzcuintli dogs, an ancient breed that was common to both Aztec and Maya cultures. Many of the canid teeth in this assemblage
presented unique morphological features that are diagnostic of the Xoloizcuintli. Measurements were taken on the height, breadth,
and width of the crown (where possible) on all Canis familiaris teeth from the assemblage, and compared to specimens from
complete canid crania in order to determine the average body size of each individual in the sample. The results were used to
interpret the size and breed of the dogs represented in the sample. Maxillary first molar morphologies were used to identify both
normal and abnormal cusp patterns suggesting that both Techichi and Xoloitzcuintli dogs were present at the site.
George, Nicole (University of Nevada, Reno)
[195]
Raw Material Selection among Concave Base Projectile Point Makers in Hawksy Walksy Valley
Ongoing research at Hawksy Walksy Valley has uncovered one of the largest assemblages of obsidian concave base points in the
northeastern Great Basin. The chronological relationship between this technology and other terminal Pleistocene/early Holocene
artifact types (e.g., fluted points) remains an ongoing debate. This relationship may represent sequential late Pleistocene
technologies, coeval technologies used by different populations, or different components within the same tool kit. To explore the
latter possibility, we geochemically sourced the concave base points from Hawsky Walksy Valley and collected source provenance
data on fluted points in adjacent areas. We compared the data to determine if there were significantly different toolstone conveyance
patterns, with the expectation that there should be no difference if concave base and fluted points were part of the same tool kit. The
results of this study contribute to our understanding of how raw material availability factored into patterns of land use and the
possible relationship between concave base and fluted point technologies in the northeastern Great Basin.
George, Nicole [195] see Sturtz, Sara
George, Richard (Pennsylvania State University), Douglas Kennett (University of California, Santa Barbara), Stanley Serafin
(University of South Wales, Sydney) and Brendan Culleton (Pennsylvania State University)
[237]
Strontium Isotopic Evidence Reveals High Levels of In-Migration during the Formation, Apogee, and Decline of the Postclassic City
of Mayapán
The ancient capital of Mayapán was the final highly nucleated urban settlement in the northern Yucatán during the twelfth–fifteenth
centuries prior to Spanish contact. However, the extent of the migration structure remains unknown. After the disintegration of
Terminal Classic regional centers, Mayapán emerged as the dominant polity and economic entity in the Maya region. It is believed
that the city was established by ethnopolitical rivals and served as the regional seat of governance and commerce, connecting
confederated towns and territories across the Yucatán until its abandonment in the context of warfare, civil conflicts and factional
competition. Increased urban development during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries indicate that people were drawn to the fortified
cityscape from communities across peninsular Yucatán, and as far as central Mexico and Honduras. We examined the process of
urbanization using strontium isotope ratios from human enamel (N=58) to explore the population structure. Although we did not
identify migrants from outside the Maya lowlands, the results suggest regional immigration remained a key component of the
population structure. These findings suggest that the urban composition of the population consisted of a high percentage of first-
generation immigrants, and they demonstrate the cosmopolitan nature of this important Postclassic-period center.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    202
Gerard-Little, Perri [184] see Wescott, Konnie
Gerrard, Richard [228] see Patton, Katherine
Getz, Sara [80] see Simmons, Wilson
Ghezzi, Ivan
[174]
Chankillo as a Fortification and Post-Chavin Warfare in Casma, Peru
Chankillo is a large ceremonial center in the Casma valley, northern coast of Peru, built in 250 BC to worship the Sun. It contains,
besides the earliest astronomical observatory known to date in the Americas, an impressive hilltop fort. Previously, the dominant
view on the function of this building was as a setting for ritual battles. However, research aimed at evaluating whether it is really a
fortification revealed evidence for its attack, destruction, forced abandonment, and burial. The hilltop building was a Fortified
Temple, built to protect the sacred space and symbols of the site, not the population at large, from religious wars fought to destroy
rival huacas. Many aspects of this fortification, especially the violent desecration of its temple, suggest socially distant fighting
parties of a different religious ideology, not the complementary groups expected in ritual tinku battles. Rather than competition over
scarce resources in a circumscribed environment, the breakdown of social relationships and the emergence of rival ideologies after
the collapse of Chavin civilization seem to have been the driving forces behind the onset of warfare in the post- Chavin world.
Giardina, Miguel [15] see Morgan, Christopher
Giardina, Miguel [243] see Neme, Gustavo
Gibbs, Anna (Baylor University)
[51]
A Study of Medieval Intrasite Find Distribution on the San Giuliano Plateau
The San Giuliano Archaeological Research Project (SGARP) excavates a site in Lazio, Italy known as San Giuliano, which has an
occupation history spanning from the Bronze Age to the medieval period. The project aims to understand the long-term transitions
and habitation patterns of the societies that occupied the region. The medieval component of the San Giuliano site is a local
manifestation of the widespread, but still poorly understood “incastellamento” process (the relocation of large parts of the medieval
Italian population into defensible, fortified sites between AD 700 and 1200). My paper presents a GIS analysis of artifact location
and attributes within the medieval fortification excavation atop the San Giuliano plateau. I employ ArcGIS to run statistical analyses
of artifact distribution patterns and their associated features within the medieval castle zone. These analyses reveal artifact densities
and patterning related to site use and refuse deposition across the site. The interrelationship of finds and archaeological features
reveal key transitions in the use of space atop the fortified plateau. GIS analysis of the finds ultimately provides an integrated view of
the spatial and social dynamics of an Italian castle, and contributes to our understanding the wider process of incastellamento.
Gibbs, Hannah (University College London)
[231]
Changes in Interaction with the Local Environment: Historical, National, and International Influence in Belize
This research seeks to ascertain the extent to which an archaeological site can be implicated in changes for the local community.
Based on interviews, observation, and participatory mapping exercises conducted in San Jose Succotz, Belize, in May and June
2019, and follow up fieldwork in the UK, this project investigates if there are changes in the way people can interact with the local
environment, and examines different perspectives on what causes these changes. San Jose Succotz is a Maya village situated
across the river Xunantunich, an Ancient Maya site which includes the second tallest structure in Belize. The research documents
the interaction of individuals and the local population with the environment now and in comparison to the recent past. The project
aims to see if there are specific areas or locations where changes in access to the local environment have affected the community.
The study presents three topics implicated in the local changes; historical change, national change, and international change, and
provides insight into how the changes manifest in the daily lives of the village’s population. The project explores a detailed
perspective on the global issues of environmental degradation and globalization, interconnected with the presence of the
archaeological site, Xunantunich.
Gil, Adolfo [15] see Morgan, Christopher
Gil, Adolfo [243] see Neme, Gustavo
Giles, Bretton (Kansas State University)
[166]
Mississippian Cosmos as Artificial Memory Systems
This presentation examines the characteristics of Mississippian cosmological schema and how they correspond to the construction
of artificial memory systems. I point out that the Classical ‘art of memory’ involves the construction of (spatialized) memory loci that
are populated with striking and unusual images. As Frances Yates notes, these memory loci can be either real or imaginary places,
but the they need to be sequentially arranged so that they can visited in order and one can move either backward or forward from
each locus. These memory spaces are often colloquially referred to as ‘memory palaces,’ but other spatial configurations can be
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   203
memorized. For instance, some medieval and renaissance scholars employed the spheres of the universe or places in paradise and
hell as artificial memory systems. In this vein, I contend that the structure of Southeastern and Plains Native American cosmos fit
these characteristics of artificial memory systems because they are organized into stacked layers. They are also populated with
striking and unusual images (e.g., heroes, gods and composite monsters), which were associated with particular layers. I therefore
argue the portrayal of Mississippian cosmological imagery could have materialization an artificial memory system, employed to
remember important social prescribed information.
[166]
Chair
Gillam, J. Christopher (Winthrop University), Nicolas Zwyns (UC-Davis), Masami Izuho (Tokyo Metropolitan University),
Biambaa Gunchinsuren (Institute of Archaeology, Mongolia) and Brent Woodfill (Winthrop University)
[175]
Falconing the Paleolithic: High-Resolution Aerial Mapping of Northern Mongolian Paleolithic Landscapes
In recent years, pedestrian surveys of the Tolbor River and neighboring tributaries of the Selenge River Basin in northern Mongolia
have yielded 95 Upper Paleolithic open-air sites, with excavations at six of these sites documenting the 45,000 years of human
occupation in the region. Beginning in 2011, ongoing efforts to discover and characterize the greater Paleolithic landscape began
with GPS-mapping of new and previously documented sites and GIS database development with base layers developed from
Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) 30 m and 90 m resolution Digital Elevation Models (DEMs). In 2019, the first attempt at
high-resolution aerial drone mapping of select excavated sites was a boundless success that will lead to a greater understanding of
the cultural landscapes, complex geomorphology and site formation processes of the region’s mountain forest-steppe environment.
Gillaspie, Amy (Community College of Denver; History Colorado) and Gene Wheaton (Community College of Denver)
[231]
Denver’s Early History: Uncovering Colorado History at the Wootton Site
The Wootton Site is located in Denver, Colorado, on the present-day Auraria Campus, which is home to University of Colorado
Denver, Metropolitan State University of Denver, and Community College of Denver (CCD). Denver was long the home to
indigenous populations prior to the settlement of miners in 1858. The Wootton family was the second white family to settle in the
town of Auraria, directly adjacent to and on the Southwest side of Denver. It was here that “Uncle Dick” Wootton established two
buildings at the site, a general store and a saloon. The Rocky Mountain News, the first newspaper in Denver, was first published
from the second story of the general store in April 1859. And it was next door at the saloon and bowling alley that a convention to
form the State Government of Colorado met, also in April of 1859. A flood eradicated these buildings and many others in 1864, and
rebuilding efforts never occurred. This talk will report findings from the first field season (August to December 2019) and will discuss
the historic importance of the site, including the field school Dr. Wheaton leads at CCD.
Gillispie, Thomas (University of Alaska Museum of the North), Charles Holmes (University of Alaska, Fairbanks), Ben
Potter (University of Alaska, Fairbanks), Angela Younie (Far Western Anthropological Research Group) and Evelynn
Majere (Healy Lake Tribal Council)
[82]
Late Glacial Age Crescentic Bifaces from East-Central Beringia
New paleogeographic data regarding Late Glacial retraction of the Cordilleran and Laurentide ice sheets has clarified debate about
potential routes and timing for human migration into the Americas. These studies allow for terminal Pleistocene dispersal from
Northeast Asia via both Pacific Rim (PR) and interior Beringia–Canadian (IFC) routes. Previously, crescentic bifaces found with
stemmed projectile points on California coastal islands have been interpreted as an indicator for an exclusively PR migration. Here
we report on crescents found with Eastern Beringian Tradition assemblages. These were excavated at stratified sites in east-central
Alaska, with an age range circa 13,100–11,200 calBP, as determined by over fifteen radiocarbon dates. Associated artifacts include
triangular and indent base projectile points, but stemmed points are absent. In contrast, the range for radiocarbon dated crescents
from California and the Western United States is circa 12,580–8,000 calBP. Based on the radiocarbon chronology, Beringian
crescents may antedate California island crescents by up to 1,000 years and the earliest examples from Paleoindian or Western
Stemmed sites by circa 300 years. The northern IFC discoveries therefore demonstrate that crescentic bifaces currently provide no
support for an exclusive PR migration.
Gillot, Celine (University of Montreal, Canada)
[20]
Quarrying Stone, Carving Knowledge: Landscape Familiarity, Raw Materials Selectivity, and Extraction Technology at Río Bec
(Campeche, Mexico)
Scars left on the bedrock, open-pit quarries and piles of waste stone are all part of the cultural landscape surrounding many
buildings raised in ancient Maya archaeological sites. This “stonescape,” now barely visible, is more than just the physical setting in
which people lived and performed their daily activities. It is also a key place to investigate how these people, their natural
environment and resources, as well as their technical skills and knowledge were mutually engaged with, and embedded within, each
other. This paper explores this dynamic interplay in the process of quarrying stone. Using geoarcheological data collected through a
study of extraction sites found around and beneath the buildings of Río Bec, I will discuss several issues regarding the familiarity of
Rio Bec’s inhabitants with their karst landscape, the preferential selection of specific limestone outcrops, the variability of the
materials available, and the different methods employed to extract them. Such issues were critical for the people engaged in
quarrying activities. They offer an alternative avenue for approaching these activities not only through the quarry and stone workers’
lens, but also through the skills and knowledge involved.
[20]
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     204
Chair
Gillreath-Brown, Andrew (Washington State University), Kyle Bocinsky (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center) and Tim
Kohler (Washington State University)
[125]
Food Risk and Maize Production: Experiments in Combining Low-Frequency and High-Frequency Temperature Signals in the
Southwestern United States
The timing and rate at which dryland maize farming spread and intensified throughout the southwestern United States was highly
variable. Although maize first appears around 2260–1990 BC in Arizona and New Mexico, maize dependence does not increase
substantially to the north (e.g., southeastern Utah) until the Basketmaker II period (ca. 500 BC–AD 500). Moreover, maize farming
does not intensify in southwestern Colorado until around AD 600. The timing of the spread of maize into southern Utah and
Colorado is likely linked to genetic traits that allowed maize to adapt to temperate zone temperatures and growing seasons. Thus,
temperature has likely had a major impact on maize expansion. In this paper, we try to better understand the impacts of climate,
particularly temperature, on past crop production in the southwestern United States. Past researchers have attempted to consider
the low-frequency temperature signal along with the high-frequency temperature and precipitation signals. We reconstruct low-
frequency temperature using pollen data and the Modern Analog Technique, which can then be combined with high-frequency
reconstructions from tree rings using wavelet modulation. We discuss our progress and how our preliminary results change views on
the role of production shortfalls in major transitions in Ancestral Pueblo prehistory.
Gilmore, Eric [148] see Patton, Natalie
Gilmore, Kevin (HDR), Jonathan Hedlund (ERO Resources Corporation) and Bonnie Clark (University of Denver,
Department of Anthropology)
[6]
Through a Glass, Darkly: Shedding Light on Late Prehistoric Obsidian Conveyance and Apachean Ethnogenesis on the Plains.
Obsidian was technologically and symbolically important to the prehistoric inhabitants of western North America, and analysis of the
assemblage of obsidian from the Bayou Gulch site (5DA265) in Colorado suggests both uses were important to the site’s Late
Prehistoric Period inhabitants. Chemical analysis identified New Mexico, Idaho, and Colorado sources, and the symbolic importance
of obsidian is suggested by the presence of a small unmodified obsidian nodule. These data from Bayou Gulch fit a pattern of
changes in obsidian quantity and source area over time on the Plains. Sometime after ca. AD 1000, there is a ten-fold increase of
material conveyed from northwestern sources (Idaho and Wyoming) to the Plains which could be associated with the arrival of
proto-Apache Promontory culture groups in the eastern Great Basin and the Western Plains ca. AD 1200. Strong social ties among
these kin groups supported exchange networks to the west and south. After ca. AD 1450 material from northwestern sources
becomes scarce, and this decrease could correspond to the in-migration of Numic groups, resulting in decreased access to
northwestern sources and the attenuation of contact between geographically separated groups of Apacheans, ultimately leading to
ethnogenesis of the modern Eastern and Western Apachean branches.
Gilmore, Kevin [78] see Slaughter, Michelle
Gilstrap, William (Massachusetts Institute of Technology)
[196]
Pottery Technology and Cultural Transfer along Anatolia’s Great Caravan Route
Excavations at the site of Kanligeçit in Eastern Thrace revealed material remains of Early Bronze (EB) III (ca. 2350–2250)
reminiscent of contemporary and slightly earlier sites in western and central Anatolia. The presence of monumental architecture
similar to Troy II coincides with the first appearance of wheelmade pottery—Anatolian Red-Slipped tankards and depas cups—
suggest strong eastern influence. These pottery forms were followed by wheelmade plainwares and shapes such as high-necked
jars that first arrived in Cilicia from the south before being transferred along trade routes to central Anatolian sites like Küllüoba.
Strong Anatolian traits, particularly wheelmade pottery, indicate to some that EB III Kanligeçit was an Anatolian colony. Others
consider it a product of cultural and technological diffusion assisted through expansion of existing trade routes from Syro-Cilicia
across central Anatolia. This phenomenon is similar to that observed in the EB II Aegean in which Anatolian architectural features
and drinking sets (e.g., the Lefkandi I–Kastri group) become widespread. This paper examines production technology of both Red-
slipped and plainware from contemporary phases at Kanligeçit and Küllüoba, offering insight into Kanligeçit potters adoption of the
wheel and providing insight into the nature of this cultural shift.
Gilstrap, William [39] see Crawford, Dawn
Gingerich, Joseph (Ohio University), Timothy Cleland (Smithsonian Musuem Conservation Institute), Gwenaelle Kavich
(Smithsonian Musuem Conservation Institute), Linda Scott Cummings (PaleoResearch Institue) and William Childress
(Archaeological Society of Virginia)
[180]
Is That Really Late Pleistocene Blood? A Case Study from the Clovis Assemblages at Smith Mountain, VA
Many recent studies have been published that report the recovery of proteins and residues on stone tools. This avenue of research
could provide important insights about hunter-gatherer activities. The most common type of analysis has been detection blood
residue. Because many immunological approaches to detect blood residue have been called into question, we suggest a multi-
faceted approach to protein residue studies. Here, we present a case study on a late Pleistocene artifact from Smith Mountain,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   205
Virginia, USA. This study discusses the results of immunological analyses, FTIR, mass spectrometry, and SEM analyses on a ca.
13,000-year-old Clovis point from eastern North America.
Giomi, Evan (University of Arizona) and Barbara Mills (University of Arizona)
[26]
Evaluating Social Boundaries in Coalescent and Colonial Societies through Network Analysis: Social Transformation on the Rio
Grande between AD 1300 and 1700
Archaeologists recognize globally that one of the primary consequences of coalescence and colonialism is increasing social
complexity. This takes the form of more heterogeneous social formations, as well as more multilayered interactions at a regional
scale. Archaeologists increasingly evaluate these interactions as complex systems emerging from a network of relationships
between individual settlements, rather than as interaction between and within regions and subregions. In the U.S. Southwest,
coalescence and colonialism particularly contributed to increasing social complexity after AD 1300 and network analysis has
previously proven useful in analyzing the complex systems of regional interaction that resulted from this greater social complexity.
This project makes use of the cyberSW database of ceramics to extend network analysis to the eastern Pueblo area. One
consequence of increasing social complexity is the transformation of social boundaries, sometimes hardening and sometimes
softening distinctions between groups. This project uses network methods to characterize boundaries between social groups by
looking at the degree of embeddedness of sub-areas within the larger regional system. Change in the nature of these boundaries is
evaluated over time, in the period from AD 1300 to AD 1700.
Giovas, Christina [271] see Fitzpatrick, Scott
Giraldo, Santiago (Global Heritage Fund and Fundación ProSierra)
[246]
Discussant
Giulia, Ricci (1. Post-Doc, UMR 7041, ArScAn-AnTET, Université Paris Nanterre, Paris, France), Val Aurore (Abteilung für
Ältere Urgeschichte und Quartärökolo) and Porraz Guillaume (CNRS, UMR 7269, Laboratoire méditerranéen de préhi)
[11]
The Technological Sequence of Heuningneskrans (Limpopo, South Africa) around the Time of the Last Glacial Maximum
The southern African region comprises a mosaic of biomes influenced by various physical and atmospheric parameters. Pleistocene
hunter-gatherer societies would have exploited those biomes differently, which would have contributed to generate different lithic
assemblages and traditions. The opposition between the coast and the veld is often regarded as one main dialectic that contributes
to explain the technological variability across the landscape. Other oppositions have also been proposed, relating for instance to the
distribution of raw materials. In this paper, we focus on a recently excavated lithic assemblage from Heuningneskrans in Limpopo
Province (South Africa) and initiate a discussion on the Robberg techno-typological expressions in South Africa with regard to (1)
space (inland and coast), (2) time (around the Last Glacial Maximum) and (3) geo-resources distribution (raw materials).
Glascock, Michael D. (University of Missouri) and Rodrigo Loyola (Universite Paris Ouest Nanterre La Defense)
[237]
Once Upon a Time: Obsidian Circulation during the Early Peopling of the Atacama Desert
Early humans to South America encountered wide diversity of ecosystems, including the Atacama Desert. Due to its extreme aridity,
the Atacama Desert is generally considered a marginal cultural area inhabited by a handful of scattered hunter-gatherer groups.
Very little is known about the level of contact between groups living in the Atacama and the neighboring area of northwest
Argentina. To investigate the extent of interaction networks of hunter-gatherer groups in the region, an obsidian artifact investigation
was conducted. Several hundred artifacts from archaeological sites occupied during the Early Archaic (13,000–11,000 BP), Middle
Archaic (11,000–5500 BP), Late Archaic (5500–4500 BP), and Early Formative (3500–2500 BP) periods were analyzed by X-ray
fluorescence (XRF), and a subset of undetermined artifacts were studied by neutron activation analysis (NAA). A combination of
local and long-distance sources were identified, as well as several currently unknown sources. Temporal differences in source
usage indicate that interaction networks expanded over time. The evidence supports that hunter-gather groups maintained long-
distance contacts with one another as a key strategy for survival in one of the most extreme environments on earth.
Glascock, Michael [133] see Andrews, Bradford
Glascock, Michael [39] see Breault, Sarah
Glascock, Michael [150] see Crider, Destiny
Glascock, Michael [63] see Frashuer, Anya
Glascock, Michael [267] see Hester, Thomas
Glascock, Michael [196] see Iñañez, Javier
Glascock, Michael [5] see MacDonald, Brandi
Glover, Jeffrey (Georgia State University) and Dominique Rissolo (University of California, San Diego)
[33]
Assessing Terrestrial and Aquatic Trade Routes in the Maya Area: A View from the Yucatán’s North Coast
This paper provides an overview of the development and reconfiguration of precolumbian trade routes in the Maya area from the
Preclassic to the Postclassic periods. During this long expanse of time, the Maya took advantage of overland, riverine, and coastal
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   206
trade routes to varying degrees. The political turmoil that occurred in the southern Maya lowlands during the late eighth and ninth
centuries AD, often referred to as the “Collapse”, led to the disintegration of existing trade routes and created new opportunities for
the expansion of coastal trade. The emphasis on these coastal trade routes is evidenced in a multitude of ways in the
archaeological record, most famously in the murals found in the Temple of the Warriors at Chichen Itza and in the material culture of
this influential center. We investigate the archaeological evidence of this dramatic shift from the perspective of the archaeological
project we direct, the Proyecto Costa Escondida, which investigates the lives of precolumbian Maya inhabitants along the Yucatán
Peninsula’s north coast.
Glover, Jeffrey [271] see Bryant, Jeff
Glover, Lauren [28] see Allard, Francis
Glowacki, Donna [149] see Hovezak, Tim
Glumac, Bosiljka (Smith College), Carlos Peraza Lope (Centro INAH, Yucatán, Mérida), Marilyn Masson (University at
Albany) and Bradley Russell (College of St. Rose, Albany, NY)
[20]
Geoarchaeological Perspectives on Ground Stone Sources of Precolumbian Maya Household Architecture and Assemblages in
Northwest Yucatán, Mexico
Limestone and its weathering products, as the only abundant stone resources in flat karst lowlands of northwest Yucatán, were
extensively utilized by inhabitants of this region during the Terminal Classic and Postclassic Periods in the general vicinity of the
archaeological site of Mayapán. For architectural use, coarse coquina limestone was readily available for dwelling and houselot
walls. Coquina was often selected for grinding and abrading tools and disc-shaped beehive lids. Fine-grained calcarenite limestone
was carved into sculptures and was selected for finer grinding or polishing implements. Less common was piedra dura or well-
indurated muddy limestone found as subrounded pseudoclasts in extensively weathered limestone (sascab), excavated from
shallow pits (sascaberas), and calcrete or caliche crust offered naturally flat surfaces for certain implements. This paper reviews
limestone tool source diversity over time at a large sample of residential groups of varying social status; most types of ground stone
were available locally, given diversity evident within the same or nearby outcrops.
Gnivecki, Perry L. [59] see Beamer, Dawn
Godard, Robert [203] see Cannon, Molly
Godhardt, Ava (Western Colorado University), Lauri Thompson (Center for Archaeological and Tropical Studies), Julie Saul
(Programme for Belize Archaeological Project) and David Hyde (Western Colorado University)
[178]
Contemporaneous or Close at Death? Two Late Classic Burials from the Medicinal Trail Community, Northwestern Belize.
Excavation of Group A at the Medicinal Trail Hinterland Community archaeological site in northwestern Belize, near the major polity
of La Milpa, uncovered the remains of two individuals in cobble fill, interred semi-flexed. The upper individual was placed head to the
east and feet to the west, while the lower individual was placed head to the west and feet to the east. Though there was, in some
areas, fill located between the individuals, suggesting they may have been interred at different times, both show a high degree of
skeletal articulation. Articulated vertebral columns, as well as pelvis and lower limb bones suggest contemporaneity of the burials, or
at least very little time between interments. Though fragmentary, the burials, designated A-8-a and A-8-b, consist of well-preserved
and diagnostic skeletal remains including cranial elements, and dentition, as well as post-cranial components. The level of
preservation of the two individuals is remarkably better than previous burials at this site. This poster discusses the excavation
process used, the osteobiography of each individual, their significance with regards to Maya mortuary practices, and the possible
causes for the well-preserved remains. Additionally, an assessment of the timing of the interment of the two individuals will be
provided.
Goebel, Ted (Texa A&M University)
[81]
Late Pleistocene Stone-Tool Technology at McDonald Creek, Alaska
Ongoing excavations at the McDonald Creek site, located in the Tanana Flats of central Alaska, have produced a large assemblage
of stone debitage numbering in the thousands, as well as a small but expressive assemblage of retouched stone artifacts, including
bifaces and unifaces. These come from two stratigraphically separate components, an earlier one dating to about 13,900–13,500
calendar years ago, and a later one dating to about 12,800–12,500 calendar years ago. In this poster we describe the assemblage,
component by component, and we interpret aspects of raw-material procurement, production technology, and tool morphology and
function. Based on these findings, we consider the significance of McDonald Creek’s late Pleistocene occupations in the broader
behavioral and cultural contexts of central Alaskan prehistory and paleoecology.
Goepfert, Nicolas [174] see Chamussy, Vincent
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 207
Golden, Charles [126] see Jimenez, Socorro
Golden, Charles [54] see Roche Recinos, Alejandra
Golden, Charles [265] see Scherer, Andrew
Golden, Charles [202] see Schroder, Whittaker
Golden, Patrick [24] see Rabinowitz, Adam
Goldmann, Lukas (Deutsches Archäologisches Institut)
[107]
The Use of GIS and GeoServer for Landscape-Scale Geophysical Surveys: The Case Study of Mont Lassois
Since 2013 the German Archaeological Institute (DAI) has been conducting large-scale geomagnetic surveys in the vicinity of the
Hallstatt period “princely seat” at Mont Lassois as part of the international, interdisciplinary research project “Vix et son
environnement”. Covering over 13 km² the DAI survey revealed numerous new sites as well as various details of known structures.
In addition, excavations, aerial surveys, laser scans and different geophysical methods, contributed by other parties of the project,
have revealed other features and additional information, resulting in large amounts of data which exceed the capacity of any single
researcher. This talk aims to demonstrate the potential of WebGIS solutions to facilitate data integration and collaboration between
different project parties. On the example of the Mont Lassois survey project on the idai.geoserver it is shown how this approach
allows to combine a great amount of different data, adding up to an increasingly detailed picture of the landscape use of different
prehistoric and historic periods.
Goldmann, Lukas [107] see Ruby, Bret
Goldner, Jonathan (University of Oxford)
[25]
Listening to Wood: Material Engagements with the Sound of Trees
My research studies how skilled agents use sound as a mnemonic device. Drawing on a case studies in Algonquin birchbark canoe
building, I explore the multiple meanings of sound from the phenomenological aspects of aurality—the subjective perception of
hearing and listening—and from the acoustic features of landscape arising from its formal material properties. I work through a
Material Engagement Theory framework to develop an anthropological study of sound that aligns closely with Schafer’s (1993)
concept of the “soundscape,” to consider how the sonic environment is understood by those who live in it; and with Feld’s (1996,
2005, 2015) notion of “acoustemology,” which treats “sound as a capacity to know and as a habit of knowing” (1996:xxvii). As
Malafouris points out: “Understanding how external resources matter (causally and ontologically) for memory in their own specific
ways emerges as a major challenge for cognitive archaeology and for material-culture studies.” (2013:83). The ethnography
documents important cultural differences in ways of listening and confirms an inseparable cognitive relation between the mind,
geophysical icons and ecoacoustical properties. Ultimately, I propose the possibility that the human mind may possess sensory
pathways that could be harnessed to recover long-lost wisdoms through sonic resonance.
Goldsmith, Dora [192] see Silverstein, Jay
Goldstein, Lynne (Michigan State University, Retired) and John Kelly (Washington University, Retired)
[56]
Harriet Smith, Educator and Archaeologist
Harriet Smith worked at the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago for much of her long career. She was in the Education
Department, and focused primarily on teaching high school students about archaeology and other disciplines. However, this simple
statement does not do justice to Harriet’s contributions to and impact on archaeology. She was the first professional woman to direct
archaeological excavations at Cahokia, she worked elsewhere in the Midwest, and she conceived and directed a summer program
focused on Anthropology for High School Students, initially funded by the NSF. This paper examines her contributions to Cahokia
archaeology, as well as her unique contributions to educating and training several generations of archaeologists.
Goldstein, Lynne (Michigan State University, Retired)
[96]
Discussant
Goldstein, Lynne [72] see Mills, Barbara
Goldstein, Paul (UC San Diego)
[105]
Contextualizing Tiwanaku Geoglyphs and Petroglyphs in Time, Space and Settlement History, Moquegua and Locumba Valleys:
Trail of the Art; Art of the Trail
This paper contextualizes recent systematic survey discoveries of Tiwanaku environmental art and their relation to Tiwanaku
colonial settlement history. Most treatment of environmental art in the south central Andes has been largely iconographic in
orientation. Conversely, settlement pattern and household archaeologies tends to treat environmental art as epiphenomenal
adornments on the landscape. Beyond difference of approach, the empirical problem of securely assigning petroglyphs and
geoglyphs to specific temporal and cultural affiliations in a multicomponent settlement landscape has stood in the way of synthesis.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 208
Further, geoglyphs and petroglyphs could be palimpsests, accruing over centuries, making it impossible to assign authorship.
Recent systematic survey data from the Locumba and Moquegua valleys may bridge these phenomenological and settlement
pattern archaeologies with discovery of single component sites associated with environmental art. The paper will include 2019
discoveries of the Locumba Archaeological Project that include an isolated single component Tiwanaku site with environmental art.
Linking geoglyphs and petroglyphs to larger settlement patterns of Tiwanaku habitation sites and trade routes will enrich
understanding of the spatial and temporal context of colonization and exchange.
[105]
Chair
Goldstein, Paul [267] see Garvin, Arianna
Goldstein, Paul [260] see Gay, Brandon
Goldstein, Paul [61] see Santillan Goode, Julianna
Golitko, Mark (University of Notre Dame)
[29]
What Do Archaeological Networks Reveal? Comparing New Guinean Material Culture with Ethnographic Network Structure
Network analysis has become increasingly common within archaeological practice during the last decade, yet little consensus exists
as to what networks based on material culture actually reveal about ancient social life. Archaeologists have variably interpreted
communities or cliques derived from stylistic, technological, or provenience data as communities of practice, ethnic markers, or
catnets. However, archaeological network practitioners have yet to offer a compelling linkage between material networks and
anthropological and archaeological understandings of process and structure. I report on the results of a comparison of twentieth-
century ethnographic material from the island of New Guinea with the structure of inter-community ties as documented by over a
century of intensive ethnographic research. The results show that underlying patterns of interaction do significantly structure
material cultural patterning, but that the relationship is complex and does not allow for easy network reconstruction based on
archaeological material. Nor does material culture clearly code ethnic or linguistic structure. This leaves open the question of what
cultural and social significance shared material culture may index, and suggests that more sophisticated network inference
algorithms may be required to construct meaningful networks from archaeological data.
Gomani-Chindebvu, Elizabeth [38] see Radican, Kelsey
Gomez Mejia, Juliana [21] see Dalton, Jordan
Gonçalves, Célia (ICArEHB, Universidade do Algarve), Claudia Umbelino (CIAS, Universidade de Coimbra), João
Cascalheira (ICArEHB, Universidade do Algarve), Lino André (ICArEHB, Universidade do Algarve) and Nuno Bicho
(ICArEHB, Universidade do Algarve)
[34]
Recent Evidence on the Human Burial Practices at the Mesolithic Shell Midden of Cabeço da Amoreira (Muge, Portugal)
The Muge shell middens have provided, in more than 150 years of research, one of the most numerous and well-preserved
collections of Mesolithic human remains in Europe. Unfortunately, despite the high number of burials found during the initial
campaigns, very little information is currently available about their provenance and association with archaeological materials.
Starting in 2008, a series of new excavation campaigns have been carried out at Cabeço da Amoreira, allowing to recover, so far, a
total of five human burials, from different stratigraphic contexts within the mound. This poster presents new data regarding the
spatio-temporal variability of these burials. The application of modern techniques allowed to recover unprecedented information on
each context, and to establish a more complete reconstruction of the burial practices at the site.
Gonçalves, Célia [250] see Bicho, Nuno
Gonçalves, Célia [34] see Cascalheira, João
Gonciar, Andre [169] see Bews, Elizabeth
Gonzal, Edith [252] see Perdikaris, Sophia
Gonzales, Mikayla (University of New Mexico), Amy Thompson (University of New Mexico) and Keith Prufer (University of
New Mexico)
[7]
Geospatially Modeling Neighborhoods Using Least Cost Paths at the Classic Period Maya Center Uxbenká
Social communities of the past can be modeled in many different ways and undoubtedly our interpretations of these models are
influenced by the methods in which we use. We evaluate three methods of modeling social communities by comparing a Least Cost
Path Analysis (LCP), with previously conducted Nearest Neighbor Analysis (NNA) and R Cluster Analysis, to examine
neighborhoods at the Classic Period (AD 250–800) Maya center, Uxbenká. Uxbenká is a medium sized polity located in Southern
Belize. Using 136 settlements over a 21 km2 area, we use a LCP to model transportation routes from Uxbenká’s central market to
hinterland households using the slope of the terrain. The data is then compiled to evaluate how commonly used paths may be
indicators of social communities. Considering that individuals traveling on the same path have more person to person interactions
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   209
with one another causing them to form closer relations. Therefore, the LCPs may reflect smaller social units such as neighborhoods.
These results indicate that the LCPs, NNA, and R Cluster Analyses produce generally similar yet, slightly different, geospatial
neighborhoods. This study emphasizes the importance of using multiple methods to examine social communities of the past.
Gonzáles Lombardi, Andrea (Universidad de Ingeniería y Tecnología)
[224]
Piura la Vieja: A Tallan Center under Succesive Imperial Regimes (1000 aC–1578 dC)
The goal of this research is to continue archaeological investigations at the Inca and early Spanish settlement of Miguel de Piura.
Formally established by the Spaniards in 1532 dC, the town of Miguel de Piura was the major Tallan center and became a provincial
during the Inca occupation of the Northern Andes. While historians have long noted the importance that the town held in the early
Spanish history of Peru, little archaeological work has been conducted to undestand the history of the site under succesive imperial
regimes. This project proves an opportunity to archaeologically examine the lives of those who lived at town and its functioning
during the Inca empire and the early decades of Spanish expansion into Peru. By doing so, this project will also examine a range of
theoretical issues that explore how the Inca and the Spaniards attempted to incorporate newly conquered regions into their growing
empire and the responses of local inhabitants to imperial practices.
Gonzalez, Juan (University of Texas Rio Grande Valley), Roseann Bacha-Garza (University of Texas Rio Grande Valley),
Christopher Miller (University of Texas Rio Grande Valley) and Russell Skowronek
[6]
Projectile Points on the Periphery: Augmented Reality Poster for Research and Education on the Lower Rio Grande
Projectile points are the primary surviving evidence for the presence of native peoples in the Lower Rio Grande Valley (Cameron,
Hidalgo, Starr, Zapata and Webb counties of South Texas, and the states of Nuevo Leon and Tamaulipas in Mexico) during the past
10,000 years. The projectile point poster of the LRGV displays a selection of over 80 of the most representative points organized
chronologically by archaeological time period from Paleoindian to Historic times. The poster features points made of stone, shell,
glass and metal, and highlights the decrease in point size from large darts that were used with atlatl, to small arrow heads that were
used with the bow and arrow. All points are reproduced to scale to facilitate comparison. The most innovate feature of this product,
is that it incorporates state of the art augmented reality highlighting 2D and 3D images of most points as well as animations, videos,
material descriptions, collections and maps. It is intended as an educational tool for K-17 students, the general public and the
amateur archaeologist to promote awareness of the importance of preserving and reporting cultural materials.
Gonzalez, Juan [126] see Skowronek, Russell
Gonzalez, Nancy [101] see Howe, Mark
González Guzman, Zitlalli Teresa (Centro de Estudios Antropológicos, UNAM)
[121]
Piedras Tacitas: Un estudio de Morteros en los Berros, Durango
En los Berros, Durango, esparcidos por el cerro se encuentra una gran cantidad de rocas con orificios que varían en forma,
tamaño, cantidad y profundidad. Estas manifestaciones culturales han sido llamadas por los arqueólogos morteros o piedras tacitas
y se ha planteado que tenían una función votiva, de molienda e incluso de uso astronómico. Pero, ¿para qué las utilizaban los
habitantes de los Berros? En el presente cartel abordare los primeros resultados de este estudio, obtenidos a través del análisis de
sus características y ubicación, con el afán de ofrecer respuestas preliminares a esta pregunta.
Gonzalez Herrera, Ulises [173] see Naegele, Kathrin
González Lauck, Rebecca [191] see Sánchez Torres, Edgar Octavio
González López, Ángel [227] see Shiratori, Yuko
González-Hernández, Galia [10] see Beramendi-Orosco, Laura
González-Hernández, Galia [10] see Soler-Arechalde, Ana
Goodale, Nathan (Hamilton College) and Colin Quinn (Hamilton College)
[253]
Inter-analyst Reliability and Replicability of Curation Indices
One of the most productive recent advancements in the study of lithic technological organization has been a greater understanding
of stone tool use-life history. Measures of curation, or indices to detect the amount of realized to maximum utility, are a subject that
William Andrefsky Jr. directly contributed to in a number of ways. Archaeologists have employed curation indices to better
understand human interaction and utilization of stone as a tool resource. Using curation indices, researchers have been able to
discuss the implications of raw material quality and availability, how stone tools are embedded in past human lifeways and
procurement practices, and the socioeconomic relationship between human behavior and the activities they engage in. The utility of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        210
these interpretations, however, are built upon an assumption that the measurements that underpin these indices are both reliable
and replicable. In this paper, we test three reduction indices for reliability and replicability on an inter-analyst level. Results indicate
that while some indices are more reliable, their replicability is variable. Based on these results, we suggest some best practices for
developing new, and applying existing, curation indices.
[253]
Chair
Goodale, Nathan [5] see Pike, Sabrina
Goodby, Robert (Franklin Pierce University)
[12]
Household Size and Organization at the Tenant Swamp Paleoindian Site
Four well-defined Paleoindian house floors radiocarbon dated to 12,600 BP were excavated at the Tenant Swamp site in Keene,
New Hampshire. Believed to be a winter occupation during the Younger Dryas, these dwellings were oval in shape and organized in
defined zones with a central hearth, a defined work area, and an “empty” space along the outer wall of the dwelling that likely served
as a sleeping area. Household size is estimated from the size of the sleeping area, and household economics are inferred from
faunal remains and use-wear analysis of flaked stone tools. In contrast with other regional Paleoindian sites, there is little evidence
at Tenant Swamp for hunting or fluted-point manufacture, but ample evidence for hide processing, woodworking, and other
activities. The households at Tenant Swamp are contrasted with each other to assess variation in household size and activities, and
comparisons are made with other well-defined Paleoindian dwellings in the northeast, notably from the Vail and Bull Brook sites.
Goodmaster, Christopher
[16]
Hueco Tanks: Survey, Documentation, and Analysis of Rock Art Imagery in the Jornada Mogollon Region
Hueco Tanks is a cluster of low volcanic mountains located at the eastern margin of the Hueco Bolson, a high-altitude desert basin
near the Texas-New Mexico border in eastern El Paso County, Texas. The site is within the Jornada Mogollon archaeological region
and has been a location of human use and occupation for at least 10,000 years. Most notably, the site contains hundreds of painted
rock art imagery panels representing the iconographic styles of the region. The site has been visited on numerous occasions by rock
art enthusiasts and photographers, avocational members of regional archaeological societies, art historians, ethnographers, and
professional archaeologists. This presentation will focus on recent survey, documentation, and analysis efforts regarding the rock art
imagery at Hueco Tanks. These recent efforts indicate that, additional panels and elements remain to be discovered within the
rugged desert terrain. In addition, modern digital and geospatial methods of recording and analysis can contribute to the
documentation and analysis of this major corpus of regional iconographic imagery.
Goodsell, Joanne [256] see Kraus, Geneva
Goodwin, Rebecca [64] see Hodgetts, Lisa
Gorczyk, John (Cornell University)
[22]
Caprines in the Cattle Zone: Reconciling Faunal Data at Two Scales during the Early Neolithic in the Sofia Basin, Bulgaria
Animal husbandry was a major adaptive mechanism facilitating the spread of farming communities throughout southeastern Europe.
Recent big-data syntheses have contributed greatly to our understanding of the environmental and social processes of neolithization
in the region. While faunal reports often form an integral component of these studies, issues of data standardization and analytical
choices understandably prevent achieving the resolution needed to investigate human behavior and decision-making at the site
level. This can lead to a mischaracterization of human- animal relationships at the smaller scale on which they are enacted. The
early Neolithic (ca. 6100–5800 BCE) site of Slatina in Bulgaria’s Sofia Basin provides a useful example. From a regional
perspective, Slatina appears to be in the more temperate zone of increased reliance on cattle husbandry. The zooarchaeological
and isotopic data presented here offer a zoomed-in look at herding, landscape use, and consumptive practices based on a mixed
management strategy primarily focused on caprines. This study highlights the potential of faunal data to weigh in on prehistoric
phenomena at multiple scales while stressing the central role zooarchaeology should play at the interpretive level by providing
useful proxies on human behavior at the smaller scale of a site and its environs.
Gordon, Falicia (University of Alabama), Linda Derry (Old Cahwaba Archaeological Park) and Eric Sipes (Alabama
Historical Commission)
[193]
Uncovering Alabama First Statehouse: A Successful Partnership at Old Cahawba Archaeological Park in Dallas County, Alabama
Over the summers of 2016 and 2017, two divisions within The University of Alabama Museums Department helped create
successful outreach programs in Dallas County, Alabama with the support of some strategic partners, namely the Alabama
Historical Commission, among others. The Office of Archaeological Research was contracted by the Alabama Historical
Commission to conduct a multi-focal archaeological program due in part to the focus on the 200 anniversary celebration of
statehood at Old Cahawba Archaeological Park. Multiple geophysical surveys were conducted to find the footprint of Alabama First
State House, which was commissioned to be constructed by Alabama’s first governor William Wyatt Bibb in 1819. This geophysical
project lead to excavations of the footprint of the state house by the Office of Archaeological Research in 2016 and the Alabama
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         211
Museum of Natural History Expedition in 2017. Public archaeology was incorporated into the research designs resulting in Public
Archaeology and Artifacts Days, which included lectures and hands-on learning. Portions of the summer projects were also filmed
by the Emmy award winning crew of Discovering Alabama for an episode on Alabama’s state capitals.
Gore, Angela (Center for the Study of the First Americans, Texas A&M University)
[30]
Mapping the Lithic Landscape: Alluvial Adventures and Geochemical Characterization in the Nenana Valley, Alaska
The Eastern Beringian record is crucial to understanding human dispersal and adaptive behaviors of the first humans in Alaska.
Investigating how prehistoric humans provisioned themselves upon the landscape is significant in answering questions of human
adaptation and landscape use in response to cultural and environmental change. Portable x-ray fluorescence (pXRF) studies are
useful for exploring human behavior and toolstone procurement strategies, however, sourcing studies on non-obsidian volcanics
such as basalts, dacites, rhyolites, and andesites are in their infancy in Beringian archaeology. These materials comprise a
significant amount of the lithic record of interior Alaska, offering potential insight into the adaptive behaviors of ancient Alaskans as
they colonized and learned the landscapes around them. This paper presents the results of my dissertation research seeking to map
the distribution of knappable toolstones on the landscape to compare to geochemical (pXRF) analyses of volcanic artifacts from
eighteen Late Pleistocene and Holocene cultural components in the Nenana Valley, Alaska to address toolstone provisioning
strategies of the past. These results underscore the importance of comparing both primary (outcrop) and secondary (alluvium)
sources of toolstone to artifact collections from the valley to explore how prehistoric Alaskans procured and used local and extra-
local toolstones through time.
Gorenflo, L. J. [102] see Nichols, Deborah
Goring, Daniel, Tammy Buonasera, Jelmer Eerkens and Meredith Carlson
[83]
Learning Strategies and Ground Stone Tools: Understanding Cultural Transmission through Experimental Archaeology
Tool use and morphology are transmitted culturally among humans. Tool use is affected by social learning, individual learning (trial-
and-error), and a range of cultural transmission biases. Ethnographic and experimental studies of cultural transmission regarding
tool use are limited. This study contributes to that body of knowledge by examining different learning strategies in the use of ground
stone tools. We analyze longitudinal data on grinding efficiency from experimental processing of a small wild seed resource (Indian
ricegrass; Achnatherum hymenoides) and a large seed/ nut (black oak acorns; Quercus kelloggii), using several types of mortars
and grinding slabs. Control groups include observational social learners and individual trial-and-error learners. We gauge both the
efficiency of different milling tools and the learning curve associated with each tool type. We apply these data to theory connecting
the costs and benefits of different types of learning with different social contexts of use.
Goring, Daniel [83] see Carlson, Meredith
Gorman, Alicia (UC Santa Barbara) and Christian Cancho Ruiz (Museo de Sitio Arturo Jiménez Borja-Puruchuco)
[21]
(Re)constructing the Social Structure of Society at Cerro Tortolita through Its Ceramic Assemblage
In this study, I use the ceramic assemblage at Cerro Tortolita as a means of addressing issues related to social differentiation. Cerro
Tortolita is an Early Intermediate Period site occupied from about 250–450 AD in the Upper Ica Valley on the south coast of Peru. It
includes a large ceremonial component as well as a sizable residential area, and its Early Nasca style ceramics suggest that it was
a participant in a pilgrimage and ceremonial network based at the neighboring site of Cahuachi in the Nasca Valley. In a previous
study of the ceramic assemblage from the Ceremonial Zone of Cerro Tortolita I found evidence of feasting in restricted-access
ceremonial contexts as well as in a large public plaza. Recent excavations in the Primary Residential Zone of the site now permit a
comparison of assemblages between the two zones to further study the social structure at the site. Ceramics provide an important
line of evidence in determining whether religious authority was a) restricted to the Ceremonial Zone and b) correlated with other
types of power, such as political and/or economic. Through focusing on commoner contexts this study includes them as actors in the
construction of their own societies.
[21]
Chair
Gorman, Alicia [21] see Cancho Ruiz, Christian
Gorogianni, Eugenia (University of Akron)
[263]
The Elusive Household: Household and Wealth in Ayia Irini, Kea
The household has been a topic of considerable anthropological interest since membership in a residential unit is often held as one of
the prerequisites for belonging to the wider political, religious and cultural groupings. Therefore, if one is to understand the contribution
and dynamic of a settlement in the broader regional network, one has to begin with an appreciation of the households within it. This
paper focuses on the settlement of Ayia Irini on the island of Kea (Aegean, Greece) and puts the spotlight on the households dating
from the end of the Middle Bronze Age to Late Bronze II. Aided by GIS and ethnographic analogies, a delineation of various households
is proposed based on a combination of various types of archaeological evidence, such as hearths, concentrations of cooking
paraphernalia, and storage facilities. Households are analyzed in order to assess their position within the socio-economic landscape of
the site and trace patterns of social interaction (from cooperation and peaceful coexistence to competition and conflict).
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  212
Gosner, Linda [35] see Smith, Alexander
Goudge, Charlotte (University of Bristol)
[146]
Chair
Goudge, Charlotte [146] see Bord, Arik
Gover, Carlton (University of Colorado Boulder & Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma) and Emily Van Alst (University of Indiana,
Bloomington)
[41]
Seventh-Generation Indigenous Archaeology in the Twenty-First Century
Indigenous archaeology in the twenty-first century is fast becoming a diverse and important paradigm within archaeology. The
mission of this topic is to explore the various methods, theories, and practices utilized by contemporary indigenous tribal citizens
engaged in unique practices in North American archaeology. This paper seeks to explore potential directions of indigenous
archaeology and its coalescence with other contemporary archaeological paradigms.
[41]
Chair
Gozner, Amanda, Peter Ungar and Erik Otarola-Castillo
[147]
Analysis of Microwear Dental Morphology
Dental microwear morphology can be used to show the effects that different subsistence strategies and dietary lifestyles may have
upon dentition. This study analyzes the morphology of dental microwear between different foragers and farmers to identify
statistically different shaped microwear modifications. Using 3D images of microwear dental modifications from hunter-gatherers and
farming societies, individual modifications were isolated to discriminate between microwear morphology. The overall 3D shape of
the isolated modifications were then compared. These data are used to show differences in the modification’s morphologies and
exhibit statistical differences. Using this approach allows future use of morphometrics with Bayesian methods to compare
unidentifiable or questionable microwear modifications.
Graf, Kelly, Nathan Shelley (CSFA, Texas A&M University) and Julie Esdale (CEMML, Colorado State University)
[81]
Stratigraphy, Chronology, and Site Formation at the McDonald Creek Site, Interior Alaska
The McDonald Creek site is a deeply buried, multicomponent site located about 30 miles south-southwest of Fairbanks, Alaska, in
the Tanana Flats. We began testing this site in 2013 and commenced full-scale excavations in 2016. In this poster, we will present
site stratigraphy, preliminary results of basic descriptive sediment analyses, and radiocarbon dating. McDonald Creek preserves
three cultural components found in well-stratified eolian depositional contexts. Component 1 dates to ~13.8 ka. Component 2 dates
to ~12.7 ka, and component 3 dates to ~5 ka. Due to the nature of deposition and minimal postdepositional disturbances, clear
cultural features were found preserved in component deposits. We will address natural formation as well as paleoecological
conditions gleaned from our preliminary analyses of the site’s sediments.
[81]
Chair
Graf, Kelly E. [81] see Forget Brisson, Laurence
Graf, Kelly [81] see Henry, Aureade
Graham, Anna (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) and Megan Kassabaum (University of Pennsylvania)
[222]
Exploring Non-Artifactual Evidence for Mound Construction and Use: A Case Study from Southwest Mississippi (AD 1200–1350)
The tradition of moundbuilding in the southern Lower Mississippi Valley extends back nearly 6000 years. Unsurprisingly, over that
long history, the activities and building practices that surrounded these earthen constructions varied. In this paper we explore
questions of how mounds were built and used based on our recent excavations at Lessley, an early Plaquemine period (AD 1200–
1350) mound site located in southwestern Mississippi. Excavations in the summer of 2019 focused on the mound flanks and summit
and encountered several construction phases as well as pre-mound deposits. Excavation units at the base of the mound revealed
the use of purposefully constructed berms during the early phases of mound construction and suggested that large, leaning posts
may have also been used to support the earthen fill during the construction process. Excavations on the summit revealed an
incipient A-Horizon on the penultimate mound surface suggesting a more protracted history of mound construction than was
revealed by previous investigations. We consider these findings in the context of site use over time as well as within broader
regional patterns related to mound construction and use. In addition, we draw attention to the importance of considering the
construction process as a potential explanation for archaeological features.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  213
Graham, Carole (Mesa Verde National Park), Sheldon Baker (Mesa Verde National Park) and Joel Gamache (Mesa Verde
National Park)
[165]
Razor Blades, Toys, and Footers—Documentation of the Historical Mesa Verde Company’s Cabin Concession Area (5MV4450),
Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado
Archeologists at Mesa Verde National Park recently had the opportunity to document historical site 5MV4450, the Mesa Verde
Company’s cabin and tent cabin concession area, located in the Headquarters Loop on Chapin Mesa. The cabin concession area
was constructed and used from just before WWII through the early Cold War years (circa 1939–1960s). Although no standing
architecture remains, structure footprints, utilities, and hundreds of artifacts—including soda bottles, toiletry items, and toys—were
documented. Mapped using Esri’s Collector app, with real-time data correction in the field, archeologists were able to make
immediate, accurate comparisons of structural remains and other features with those depicted on historical maps and plans.
Investigations at 5MV4450 allow a glimpse into the vacation lives of Mesa Verde visitors during the mid-twentieth century, creating a
detailed snapshot of a particular time and place in the history of tourism and the development of visitor services by the National Park
Service.
Granados, Rosario (Blanton Museum of Art), Astrid Runggaldier (Department of Art and Art History), Catherine Popovici
(Department of Art and Art History) and Kendyll Gross (Department of Art and Art History)
[109]
Knowledge to Share: A Reflection on the Collaboration between the Blanton Museum of Art and the UT Art and Art History
Collection
The last half century has seen great strides in creating laws and changing the way in which Latin American archaeological materials
circulated internationally, becoming part of private collections or public institutions. While contemporary regulations spell out
practical and ethical protocols for today, there are more indeterminate standards for engaging with existing collections that are the
result of older collecting criteria. This presentation outlines the approach regarding the contemporary ethics of exhibition and display
undertaken by an interdisciplinary team from the University of Texas at Austin during the installation of two rotations of selected
objects from UT’s Art and Art History Collection at the Blanton Museum of Art. For these 18 month-long displays a museum curator,
a faculty member, and two graduate students engaged in fruitful collaboration, reflecting on the historical approaches to collecting
practices but also on the nuances of curating an exhibition space, where art historical and archaeological perspectives were
combined. By bringing together these separate realms, we successfully created a unique pedagogical opportunity for students
beyond the classroom, while also sharing knowledge with broader constituencies that hitherto had limited access to objects from the
ancient Americas on campus and in Austin at large.
Grant, Christopher [129] see Kennedy, J Ryan
Grant, Helen [229] see Gaffney, Isabella
Grant, Sharon (Field Museum of Natural History)
[218]
Discussant
Grant, Vernelda [184] see Castleberry, Cala
Gratuze, Bernard [30] see Sánchez de la Torre, Marta
Grauer, Kacey
[272]
Politicizing Post-humanism: Elite and Commoner Household Excavations at the Ancient Maya City of Aventura, Belize
Post-humanism importantly considers active roles of non-humans entities in society. However, it is crucial that power relationships
between people do not fall by the wayside when studying past societies. In this paper, I approach geological features at the ancient
Maya city of Aventura, Belize from a perspective that intertwines post-humanism and political ecology. Pocket bajos are geological
features that provided important resources to the people living at Aventura, and their role in activities such as ancestor veneration
suggests they were active members in community-building. However, these features were not drivers of inequality. Aventura was a
socioeconomically diverse city and households of various statuses were able to access pocket bajos. This paper presents data from
survey, excavation, and phytolith analysis from recent research at Aventura and juxtaposes two households—one elite and one
commoner—on the edges of pocket bajos. Interestingly, the commoner household was more deeply connected to the pocket bajo
than the elite: it has a longer and more consistent history of engagement. I argue that although the landscape was indeed an active
part of ancient Maya society, power relationships between humans is what (re)produced inequality between humans at Aventura.
[272]
Chair
Grauman, Kristen [175] see Payntar, Nicole
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   214
Graumlich, Emma (Florida State University)
[66]
Paleoenvironmental Analysis through Gastropods at the Page-Ladson (8JE591) Inundated Terrestrial Site, Northwest Florida, USA
Excavations at the Page-Ladson site located in the Aucilla River in northwestern Florida have revealed extensive inundated
sediment sequences dating from approximately 16,000 to 8,500 years ago. These sediments contain artifacts that span from the
Pre-Clovis period (14,500 years old), through the Clovis period (13,200 years old), and into the Early Archaic period (11,200 years
old). In addition to the stone tools and megafaunal bones that inform about the lifeways of pre-Clovis peoples, the sediments house
environmental indicators that contribute to our understanding of the regional paleoenvironment. One such indicator is preserved
gastropod shells. Gastropods, a large taxonomic class within the phylum Mollusca, are one of the most valuable proxies for
reconstructing past environments. This is due to their commonness at archaeological sites and the organism’s sensitivity to even the
smallest of environmental changes. Through the sampling and analysis of gastropods at the Page-Ladson site, this study hopes to
increase our understanding of the local environment that the site’s inhabitants would have experienced, to help explicate the tempo
of late Pleistocene and early Holocene environmental changes at the site, and, when combined with the extensive
paleoenvironmental proxy records from the site, demonstrate the utility of gastropods for paleoenvironmental reconstruction.
Grávalos, M. Elizabeth (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[174]
What Is Huarás? A Ceramic Compositional Approach to the Post-Chavín “White-on-Red” Style in Highland Ancash, Peru
Sandwiched between the well-known Chavín and Recuay ceramic styles of highland Ancash, “Huarás White-on-Red” pottery (ca.
200 BCE–200 CE) has received little academic inquiry. Archaeologists have recovered Huarás burnished redware vessels with
painted white geometric motifs in post-Chavín layers at numerous sites across highland Ancash, including Chavín de Huántar.
Huarás is notable in its complete divergence from earlier incised styles that portrayed anthropomorphic and zoomorphic imagery
associated with the Chavín religious tradition. While we know that people consumed Huarás pottery across a broad region, we do
not know the techniques and raw materials they used to produce it. This paper explores the enigmatic Huarás style through the lens
of compositional analyses of ceramic pastes. I present preliminary interpretations of petrographic thin-section analysis and laser-
ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) of White-on-Red pottery and contemporaneous utilitarian
wares from the site of Jecosh in the southern Callejón de Huaylas valley. I compare these data with a sub-sample of White-on-Red
pottery from two other sites in the Callejón de Huaylas with established Huarás occupations: Hualcayán and Queyash Alto. This
work contributes to the conversation on post-Chavín political economy in the North Central Andes through an evaluation of ceramic
production and consumption.
Grave, Peter [168] see Stark, Miriam
Gravel-Miguel, Claudine [38] see Cabadas, Horacio
Graves, Michael
[255]
The Power of Inference in Archaeology: Making Sense of Alan Sullivan
How archaeologists create and employ inference has been central to the intellectual contributions of Alan Sullivan over the past 40
years. He did not invent this topic but iconoclast that he is, Sullivan has made the examination of the philosophical, methodological,
and substantive aspects of inferring past events and processes a lifetime achievement. Along the way he, his colleagues and
students have advanced our understanding of Southwestern prehistory based on lithic reduction sequences, the information value of
surface archaeology, including “lithic scatters,” site-based evidence for ceramic manufacture, fire-based shifting cultivation, and the
design of archaeological surveys. Linking these topics, Sullivan emphasized the identification of variability in the archaeological
record and the means for apportioning it among various factors and dimensions of human experience.
Graves, Michael [262] see Moore, Summer
Graves, Michael [252] see Peck, Katherine
Graves, Timothy (Versar Inc.) and Myles Miller (Versar Inc.)
[136]
Beyond the Communal Structure: Engagements with the Landscapes of Southern and Southeastern New Mexico
Over the past decade, excavations have clarified the nature of social and ritual practice in the communal structures of Jornada
pithouse and pueblo settlements. Equally significant is the evidence accumulated during a decade of survey and remote sensing
projects that reveals a broader geographic dimension of social and ritual engagements with sacred and ideational landscapes
surrounding the village. The engagements with sacred landscapes involved different forms of placemaking, some of which were
materialized through the creation of shrines, pilgrimage trails, and rock art. Shrines include cave shrines, shrines below rock art
panels, and open-air shrines, the latter often associated with sacred peaks and viewsheds. Rock art is often found in shrine caves,
expressing symbolic and metaphorical links to concepts of ancestors, emergence, and rain-making. An integrated analysis of survey
data, GIS data processing, and remote sensing defined a trail leading from a large plaza pueblo to a shrine cave in the surrounding
mountains–an archaeologically defined pilgrimage route that confirms certain caves served as pilgrimage destinations. These
examples reveal how thoughts and actions performed within communal structures were translated and materialized beyond the
confines of the village, and how such practices served to integrate Jornada society.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   215
Graves, William (University of Arizona)
[142]
Power, Identity, and La Présence Plains
I use Stuart Hall’s concept of Présence to explore the intersection of power and identity among the Jumanos pueblos, a group of
Late Prehispanic and Early Colonial period pueblos in New Mexico occupied from AD 1300 to the 1670s. Présences are sets of
relations, meanings, and material symbols that are variously combined to create identities. The Jumanos pueblos shared a group
identity for hundreds of years that was constructed with reference to different présences, including cultural traditions and social
relations with the southern Plains. This engagement with a Présence Plains also provided a critical avenue for prestige
enhancement and the creation of inequalities among the Jumanos pueblos: bison acquisition. The distribution of bison remains is
not equal among different sites and the residents of one village, Gran Quivira, appear to have enjoyed greater access to socially
valuable bison and the prestige that came from such access. Bison was procured through exchange with Plains groups, in part
through the hosting of trade fairs, and directly through hunting. Through such engagements with a Présence Plains, both power and
identity were created, experience, and transformed, and the Jumanos pueblos provide an ideal context to explore the complex
relationship between these two social phenomena.
Gray, D. Ryan (University of New Orleans) and Harald Stadler (University of Innsbruck)
[188]
Building International Partnerships for Aviation Archaeology: Case Studies from Central Europe
In 2017, the University of New Orleans Department of Anthropology and Sociology entered into a partnership with the Defense
POW/MIA Accounting Agency to conduct archaeological field schools at WWII era aircraft crash sites in Europe, in order to further
DPAA’s mission of making the fullest possible accounting of missing-in-action U.S. personnel. The partnership builds upon the
university’s existing international education resources and its long-standing relationship with the University of Innsbruck in Austria to
introduce students to the DPAA’s forensic archaeological methods and to aviation archaeology as a field. The first of the two field
schools conducted so far, the excavation of a P-51 crash site associated with the loss of a Tuskegee Airman, Captain Lawrence
Dickson, highlights the possibilities for the scientific documentation of aircraft crash sites, while the second demonstrates the scale
and complexity of larger loss sites.
Gray, Michelle
[273]
African and Afro-Caribbean Cultural Identity, Vessel Function, and Interisland Connectedness in Eighteenth- through Nineteenth-
Century St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands
As part of the Slave Wrecks Project, excavations at Christiansted National Historic Site on St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands, have
resulted in the collection of thousands of artifacts associated with the Danish West India and Guinea Warehouse Complex. Within
this assemblage hundreds of sherds of Afro-Caribbean colonoware, or Afro-Cruzan ware, have been identified. Former analysis of
the colonoware established a typology as well as suggested local manufacture. In this presentation I discuss the methods used to
reevaluate the typology and function of Afro-Cruzan wares as a product and symbol of the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade. This study
includes provenance analysis to determine whether or not these wares were produced locally on St. Croix or elsewhere to identify
potential spheres of interaction, and if the same sources of material were used in prehistoric times. Additionally, insight into potential
influence these wares had on the evolution of African and Afro-Caribbean foodways will be presented. It is proposed that Afro-
Cruzan ware represents cultural and economic perseverance, despite colonial oppressive conditions. Thus, this research highlights
enslaved and free Africans’ lives as they sought to maintain autonomy through daily tasks expressed through ceramic traditions.
Greco, Annie [264] see Mollerud, Katy
Green, Adam (University of Cambridge), Darryl Wilkinson (University of Cambridge) and Toby Wilkinson (University of
Cambridge)
[33]
The Impacts of Triadic Processes on the Diverse Social Trajectories of Ancient Civilizations
The degree to which an ancient civilization’s socio-transportation system was terrestrial, aquatic-linear or aquatic-radial impacts
many aspects of its social structures. These variables are incorporated within the triadic model, along with a novel approach for
classifying and analyzing them. Transportation systems were tempered by available technologies and surrounding environments,
which had major impacts on urban provisioning, exchange and economic specialization, and political administration. In this paper,
we explore the implications of the triadic model in the ancient Andes, South Asia and Mesopotamia using computational techniques.
We find that with changes in scale, ancient civilizations could advantage of different triadic configurations, encompassing different
transportation systems or transforming one system into to another. We also find that terrestrial system placed limits on the spatial
extent of political and economic interaction, reducing settlement size and lowering the broader impact of urbanization. Aquatic
systems, on the other hand, place a much higher limit on transportation away from points of production, contributing to urban growth
and economic specialization. In these and other ways, triadic processes appear to have impacted urbanization and political
organization in regular ways that nonetheless produced a diverse range of social processes in ancient civilizations.
[33]
Chair
Green, Adam [272] see Bates, Jennifer
Green, Adam [48] see Petrie, Cameron
Green, Adam [33] see Wilkinson, Toby
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   216
Green, Amie (University of Missouri) and Kate Trusler (University of Missouri)
[212]
What about a Sponge on a Stick? Insights into Public Perspective on Pompeian Sanitation and Water
Along with its huge influx of annual visitors, Pompeii’s ongoing research and excavations are constantly revealing new information
about the city and its inhabitants. After conducting research on Pompeii’s sanitation and water systems, the authors discovered
discrepancies in the information that was being conveyed to tourists, or in some cases, a lack of discussion on certain water system
features. Only recently have archaeologists turned more attention to subjects such as water and sanitation systems, and most of
this information remains elusive to the public. In an effort to discover how the general public perceives the topic of water and
sanitation systems in Pompeii, twenty-five short and informal interviews were conducted during a four-week period. Also,
observations were made of English tour guides in order to understand what information was revealed to tourists about Pompeii’s
water and sanitation systems—or if they were even identified at all. This paper addresses the public’s perception on more mundane,
but no less important, topics of Pompeii’s archaeology and concludes that a general lack of knowledge on the topic only serves to
create gaps in people’s understanding of the past. Finally, we intend to suggest ideas for increasing public knowledge on this topic.
Green, Kirsten [169] see Izzo, Victoria
Green, Kirsten [178] see Messinger, Emma
Green, Margerie (Archaeological Consulting Services Ltd.) and Shereen Lerner (Mesa College)
[98]
Collaborative and Interdisciplinary: The Steve Plog Method of Archaeology
We first met Steve Plog when we worked on the Chevelon Archaeological Research Project with his brother, Fred, and then we
worked more directly with Steve on the Black Mesa Archaeological Project. Looking back over our careers, it is clear that, as is the
case with many professors, Steve provided important training we needed to learn and develop as archaeologists, although in his
case, it was never in the context of an actual class. Steve encouraged us to work cooperatively with other archaeologists as we
learned not only about Southwestern archaeology, but also how to conduct fieldwork using a well-developed research design and
site recording framework. He introduced us to the conduct of interdisciplinary archaeological research, an approach we continued to
employ throughout our careers. With hindsight, we more fully appreciate the extent to which Steve provided us with real-world
opportunities for formulating research designs, accessing data, conducting research, publishing, presenting, and growing as
professionals. Our current presentation will highlight how our experience with Steve helped guide our professional careers, which in
one case included the development of a successful contract archaeology consulting firm, and in the other, involved teaching
undergraduate students about the importance of the past.
Green, Olivia (Texas State University), Ashley McKeown (Texas State University) and Nicholas Herrmann (Texas State
University)
[215]
Comparing Patterns of Skeletal Pathology in Enslaved Africans from an Eighteenth-Century Cemetery on St. Eustatius
This research investigates the patterns of skeletal pathology of 15 enslaved individuals in an eighteenth-century cemetery on St.
Eustatius. Nine different pathology markers were analyzed from the 15 individuals of St. Eustatius and compared to individuals from
the Newton Plantation Cemetery on Barbados and the New York African Burial Ground to see if the trade-based economy of Statia
affected slave health and quality of life. Frequencies of each marker was calculated. Schmorl’s nodes and vertebral osteophytes
were most frequent in the St. Eustatius individuals. In addition, rates of enthesopathy and periostitis were significantly lower on St.
Eustatius than compared to the other sites. The remaining pathological markers had relatively comparable frequencies. Despite
comparable frequencies, the degree of each marker measured at the Newton Plantation Cemetery and the NYABG were more
severe as compared to the St. Eustatius sample. This difference in severity of pathological conditions indicates the island’s trade-
based economy may have affected the enslaved population by reducing physical strain on their bodies in comparison to
contemporaneous enslaved populations. This comparative study is important in adjusting biased historical accounts of slavery on St.
Eustatius and in understanding the stresses associated with slavery.
Greene, Janaka (Texas State University)
[66]
The Capshaw Site (41DF22), a Late Paleoindian Site in the Texas Panhandle
The Capshaw site (41DF22) is a Late Paleoindian Cody Cultural Complex lithic scatter camp site located in Deaf Smith County, TX.
The Southern High Plains region is an area which is well documented for containing Paleoindian sites that shaped archaeologists’
understanding of Paleoindian peoples’ behavior and activities on the landscape. However, the Cody Complex remains relatively
poorly understood. The site appears to be a single or limited occupation site that may represent a residential camp. Lithic analyses
were carried out on all artifacts recovered from the site, and use-wear analyses were conducted to help understand site-use that
occurred at Capshaw. Investigations into the site intend to shed light on both the importance of knowledge gleaned from lithic
scatter sites and to better understand the kinds of activities and behavior which occur at camp sites occupied by Late Paleoindian
peoples within the Southern High Plains region. Camp sites are less visible compared to kill and butcher/processing sites and the
Capshaw site stands to contribute to the overall understanding of Paleoindian social organization by providing a new perspective on
a newly discovered site.
Greenwald, Alexandra (University of Utah)
[15]
Women’s Time Allocation Trade-offs in an Intensive Foraging Economy Led to Future-Discounting Reproductive Behavior
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    217
Population growth during the Medieval Climatic Anomaly (MCA) (1100–600 BP) and into the Late Period (~600–180 BP) in Central
California drove increased intensification and reliance on low-ranking, low-risk food sources, primarily acorn and small seeds inland,
and shellfish and small schooling fish on the bayshore. These foods rely disproportionately on the labor input of women to gather
and process. This focus on foods reliant on intensive female labor, combined with well-documented declines in reproductive-aged
women’s foraging efficiency associated with the care of breastfeeding offspring, created high foraging opportunity costs for women.
This time-allocation trade-off between foraging and direct parental investment may have incentivized earlier weaning ages during
the Late Period. A high risk of shortfall led to future-discounting reproductive behavior such that, in an effort provide sufficient
foraging returns at the household level, women inadvertently decreased their inter-birth intervals and increased their fertility,
producing greater strain on the household economy. Therefore, although high extrinsic mortality conditions associated with the MCA
abated around 600 BP, the shift in life history strategies to a risk-averse quantity over quality approach during the MCA precipitated
a cycle of population growth and intensification that extended into the Late Period, driven by women’s time-allocation trade-offs.
Greenwald, Alexandra [61] see Martinez, Marcos
Greenwald, David (Jornada Research Institute)
[136]
Tularosa Canyon Great Kivas: Implications of Their Orientations with Respect to Solstice and Equinox Alignments
Recent investigations at the Creekside Village and Twin Kivas irrigation communities have noted associations of kiva orientations
with solstice sunrise and equinox shadow castings that require consideration that these public architectural features were placed on
the landscape to specifically mark yearly events, in addition to their broader social, political and ritual uses. This paper examines
and discusses structure associations with solar events on the surrounding landscape, observations that have been made over the
past five years. Such associations may be definable in association with other great kivas from across the Southwest from which
implications may be drawn through general observations and viewshed analyses.
Greer, John [56] see Greer, Mavis
Greer, Mavis (Greer Archeology) and John Greer (Greer Archeology)
[56]
Dr. Lynn Fredlund, Archaeologist of the Northwestern Plains
Lynn Fredlund was a product of the 1960s, the decade before women exploded onto the archeological scene on the Northern
Plains. She was one of the earliest archeologists to earn her living as a contract archeologist, and one of the first in the region to
earn a PhD while actively pursuing a career that involved intensive fieldwork followed by intensive, time-sensitive report writing. Her
work on large-scale survey projects in Montana brought her to the forefront of lithic studies, and her work with rock art recording and
analysis was ahead of the boom in these studies that began in the 1990s. Records of the region, mostly available in reports and site
forms, reflect her career of data accumulation on Plains cultures, but she also reached the public and peers with publications. She
was an ordinary archeologist who gathered an extraordinary amount of information on Plains archeology.
Greer, Sean [261] see Bullion, Elissa
Gregorio de Souza, Jonas (Universitat Pompeu Fabra)
[4]
Modeling Late Holocene Diasporas in South America: Spatial Analyses of the Radiocarbon Record and Simulation Approaches
During the late Holocene, lowland South America was home to remarkable cultural expansions marking the introduction of ceramic
technology, more permanent settlements, and polyculture agroforestry throughout the neotropics. Some expansions (e.g., Saladoid-
Barrancoid, Incised-Punctate, Tupiguarani) have been associated with widespread language families, rivalling similar cases of
farming-language dispersals in other continents. Nevertheless, well-informed models of the timing, pace and routes of
archaeological expansions in lowland South America, as well as the underlying mechanisms (demographic growth, diffusion,
independent adoption) remain underexplored. In this paper, I present spatial analyses based on a radiocarbon database with over
2500 records pertaining to late Holocene lowland South American archaeological traditions. I focus on (1) geostatistical approaches
to identify potential origins and rates of dispersal; and (2) computational models simulating dispersals under different population
densities, growth rates, fission dynamics, among other variables, with the aim of finding the parameters that best fit the empirical
radiocarbon record.
Gregory, Andrea (MCX CMAC, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers)
[132]
Discussant
[132]
Chair
Gregory, Andrea [132] see Buller, Justin
Gregory, Andrea [132] see Joseph, J.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     218
Gregory, Teresa (Statistical Research Inc.)
[52]
Arizona’s Plan for Tracking, Organizing, and Storing Federally Protected Cultural Resource Management Data to Ensure Mission
Readiness
The Arizona Army National Guard (AZARNG) is developing a system to more effectively manage cultural resource data. Agency
archaeologists and CRM firms conduct surveys and excavations as required under Section 110 and/or Section 106, produce
reports, and gather geographic information systems (GIS) data that will benefit from proper tracking, organizing and storing for
efficient retrieval. The current data will be completed with a field collection application (Survey 123) to facilitate the seamless flow of
data into a single comprehensive geodatabase (GDB). The GDB will store information on cultural resources, natural resources,
environmental, remediation, and infrastructure. A GIS Viewer (based on ESRI ArcGIS Pro) will provide easy, controlled access to
these data for archaeologists and AZARNG project managers. ESRI Workflow Manager will be used to track the overall project
workflow. Arizona has been planning and building this system for several years and will be using it by the end of 2019. Proper
training is required for AZARNG personnel and quality control/quality assurance will be overseen by trained professionals. A full-
time GIS manager will be required upon completion. Documents will be stored in a central archive with a catalog kiosk. The ultimate
goal is improved mission readiness.
Gregory, Timothy [36] see Kardulias, Paul Nick
Grell, Jessyka and Nicholas Herrmann
[215]
An Analysis of an Unmarked Cemetery Geophysical Methods in Sint Eustatius
This study assesses the extent of an unmarked cemetery associated with the Lazaretto (1866–1923) on the Dutch Caribbean island
of Sint Eustatius (Statia) using geophysical methods. The Lazaretto was a poor house and leprosy hospital established to serve
patients from Statia and nearby Saba. Ground penetrating radar (GPR) and fluxgate gradiometer was employed to scan the area
around the old hospital. Prior excavations west of the Lazaretto building by Gilmore (2004) identified a series of five burials in two
rows. The 2019 survey grids are combined with GPR data collected in 2017 to produce a composite block that encompasses the
2004 excavations and previously uninvestigated areas. The combined GPR and shallow surface gradiometer data indicate a series
of distinct burial anomalies that align with the burials excavated in 2004 and suggest additional interments within the unmarked
cemetery. In addition to verifying the position of known burials and identifying more graves, the data is processed for the relative
depths and orientation of the graves relative to the burials excavated in 2004.
Grenda, Donn (Statistical Research Inc.) and Karen Swope (Statistical Research Inc.)
[247]
Redlands Chinatown and Barrio Archaeological Project: Overview, Challenges, and Opportunities
This paper introduces Statistical Research, Inc.’s (SRI) downtown Redlands archaeological project that focused on Chinatown and a
Mexican barrio located along the railroad tracks. SRI excavated nearly 6 acres and recovered hundreds of features (e.g., trash pits,
privies, foundations) representing the 1880s through the 1960s. Much of Redlands’ history focuses on wealthy easterners that
founded the City, owned the businesses, and built mansions in the hills. This project provided a unique window into ethnic
communities that supplied the workforce for the railroads, orange groves, packinghouses, and associated industries that drove the
Redlands economy prior to WWII. The residential communities were horizontally stratified due to the expanding industrial district
that, over time, pushed the housing areas out of downtown. The papers in this session examine how different ethnic groups adapted
to discrimination, changing attitudes, and variable economic conditions from the founding of Redlands through its shift away from
agriculture toward a more suburban residential community.
Grenda, Robert, Scott Sunell (Statistical Research Inc.) and Richard Ciolek-Torello (Statistical Research Inc.)
[247]
Privies, Pits, and Ovens in Downtown Redlands
The Downtown Redlands Archaeological Project encompasses over 2.5 hectares of land distributed in four parcels at the historic
center of Redlands, California. These parcels contain large portions of what were once the Chinatown and Mexican barrio areas of
Redlands. Our investigations have resulted in the excavation of hundreds of archaeological features dating from the 1880s to the
1950s. While some of the features are surface trash scatters, the vast majority are discrete trash pits (domestic and industrial),
many of which contain stratified deposits. The former type are widely distributed throughout the project area, while the latter are
associated with the packing house and pipe works formerly located along what is now Eureka Street. In addition, over a dozen much
deeper privy pits, as well as a few building foundations, outdoor ovens, and other features, have been excavated. Together the
domestic features have yielded a wealth of information about the historical development of Redlands and, in particular, the lives and
activities of the Chinese, Mexican, and other residents of this area. In this presentation, we describe the range of features identified
and summarize key preliminary findings from artifact analyses concerning chronology, activities, diet, social status, and ethnicity of
the area residents.
Grier, Colin (Washington State University)
[23]
Persistence and Continuity in the Holocene History of the Northwest Coast of North America
The term Archaic has had limited currency on the Northwest Coast despite being utilized in the 1999 master chronology advanced
by Ames and Maschner. Subsuming diverse local monikers, they define it as “the time period between the late Pleistocene and the
rise of more permanent settlement, resource intensification, and changes in social organization.” This implies Archaic peoples can
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                          219
be characterized by what they lack—the complexity attributed to later Northwest Coast peoples. More recent perspectives and data
from the Northwest Coast emphasize continuity rather than transformations toward complexity, stemming from data that illustrate
persistence of place, temporally extensive villages, long-term landscape management practices, and investments in monumentality.
Given this, I consider how we might productively remobilize the concept of an Archaic on the Northwest Coast, following similar
projects recently undertaken in other regions with complex hunter-gatherer-fisher groups. I also reevaluate the idea of the Archaic
as somehow pre-agricultural, in that Northwest Coast peoples clearly embraced a range of socioecological practices typically
deemed agricultural. In these respects, reevaluating the Archaic is about downplaying periodization and differences in favor of
contemplating a more seamless and continuous past.
Grieve, Jeffrey [64] see Hodgetts, Lisa
Griffith, Cameron (Texas Tech University)
[137]
Speleoarchaeological Reconnaissance in the Periphery of Copán
In 1896–1897, George Byron Gordon investigated a series of caves in the Sesesmil River Valley of Honduras, north of the city
center of Copán. Gordon’s expedition is understood to be the first archaeological exploration of caves in the region, yielding
numerous artifacts as well as evidence for a plethora of different mortuary practices. Since Gordon’s day there have been at least
five different official scientific investigations of caves in the vicinity of Copán, in addition to numerous unofficial visits/explorations,
including looting activity and resource procurement. In July 2018, as part of the Proyecto Arqueológico Río Amarillo, Copán, a
handful of caves around Copán were revisited yet again. This reconnaissance and reassessment endeavor yielded additional
information about the use of subterranean space by ancient Copáneros, and shed new light on the artistic phenomenon known as
Monumental Modified Speleothem Sculpture (MMSS). In this presentation I present some of these recent findings, which enhance
our burgeoning knowledge base for this still relatively obscure ancient Maya art genre.
Griffith, Timothy, Charles Frederick (Geoarchaeological Consultant) and Joel Butler
[198]
Geoarchaeology at the Headwaters on the Comal River, New Braunfels, Texas
Situated at the head of the largest Spring system in Texas and fifth largest in the United States, it is not surprising that 41CM204
has a long and complex occupational history. Situated on Blieders Creek close to where it emerges from bedrock confinement into
the Guadalupe River Valley, the site is thought to have experienced deposition from both streams during the Holocene. This paper
presents information on the stratigraphic framework of the site deposits and how sedimentation rate has conditioned the
presentation of the occupational sequence.
Griffith, Timothy [194] see Lassen, Robert
Griffith, Timothy [176] see Seikel, Katherine
Griffiths, Seren (University of Central Lancashire)
[146]
Cataclysmic Events, Long-Term Processes, and Human Responses: Identifying Causal Relationships in Holocene Human-
Environment Interaction
Human societies are always to some degree resilient to environmental change. However, cataclysmic weather events, and the
results of long-term processes of climate change undoubtedly contribute negatively to human survival. Central to understanding the
impacts of such events and processes must be robust and precise chronologies of both indicators of human activity and
paleoenvironmental events and processes of change. The extent of environmental impact on human survival has been a significant
theme in the development of archaeological thought, however, recently, with significant advances in our abilities to produce robust
chronologies (such as chronological modeling using OxCal) and to recover and interpret paleoenvironmental proxies (such as
submarine sequences, and plant and animal aDNA studies), we have the potential to significantly revise our interpretations. This
paper will present a range of case studies from Holocene Europe, including sea-level change, proxies for human populations, and
palaeoenvironmental “events” to discuss the challenges in narrative construction using these new methods.
Griffy, Henry [226] see McCorriston, Joy
Grillo, Katherine [171] see Hildebrand, Elisabeth
Grimes, Vaughan (Memorial University), Deirdre Fulton (Baylor University), James Fulton (Baylor University), Davide Zori
(Baylor University) and Colleen Zori (Baylor University)
[51]
Preliminary Isotope Evidence for Animal Husbandry and Transhumance during the Medieval Period at the San Giuliano Acropolis,
Italy
The San Giuliano Archaeological Research Project (SGARP) offers an excellent opportunity to investigate potential diachronic
changes in human-animal interactions from the Roman to Late Medieval periods in central Italy. Here we report on our initial faunal
and plant isotope data (δ13C, δ15N, δ18O, and 87Sr/86Sr) from the medieval acropolis on the San Giuliano plateau and the
development of a local ‘isoscape’. Combining these data with existing baseline isotope models for Italy, we explore issues of animal
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    220
transhumance, human land use, and subsistence patterns during the medieval period at San Giuliano. These results will be
discussed in context with other archaeological evidence from the SGARP to better understand the human-animal experience at this
site.
Grinnan, Joseph [18] see Delgado, James
Griswold, William [188] see Humphreys, Stephen
Grizzle, Meghan (Denver Museum of Nature & Science)
[185]
Jones-Miller Bison Kill Site: What the Hell (Gap) is Happening Now?
Robert B. Jones, Jr., discovered the Jones-Miller Bison Kill Site (5YM8) in 1972; Dennis Stanford of the Smithsonian Institution led
the excavation of the site in subsequent years. The site contains the bones of more than 300 Bison antiquus. It dates to roughly
8,000 BCE and is the only site in Colorado associated with the Hell Gap complex. The Denver Museum of Nature & Science
(DMNS) recently took possession of the Jones-Miller Site collection after it had been loaned to the Smithsonian Institution for over
four decades. DMNS staff are now actively engaged in organizing and cataloguing the collection and making it available to visiting
researchers. The long-term goal is to publish a comprehensive report on the project and collection.
Grooms, Michael (University of New Mexico) and Norm Easton (Yukon College)
[198]
Geoarchaeology at the Little John Site (KdVo-6), Yukon Territory, Canada.
The Little John Site (KdVo-6), Yukon Territory, Canada, contains the presence of both Chindadn/Nenana and Denali artifacts in
unique stratified contexts. The site contains loess/paleosol stratigraphic sequences spanning the past 14,000 years. Sediment and
soil, XRD, INAA/ICP-MS, and thin section analysis have illuminated the chronology, environment, and depositional history of the
site’s unique geologic context and archaeological materials.
Grooms, Michael [202] see Sattler, Robert
Grooms, Seth (Washington University, St. Louis)
[146]
Mound Building at Jaketown: Sacred Ballast on a Volatile Landscape
Mound building began almost 7,000 years ago in the Lower Mississippi Valley (LMV), and it represents the oldest earthworks in
North America. This Native mound building tradition manifests itself at the Jaketown site in west-central Mississippi in the form of
dozens of mounds. At Jaketown, mound building began during the Late Archaic period and the era of Poverty Point culture, and it
continued through the late precontact period. There were pauses in mound building at Jaketown over roughly 4,000 years of Native
occupation. The most conspicuous hiatus lasted about 500 years, and it was likely caused by a catastrophic flood triggered by
global climatic changes. However, Native people continued to build mounds at Jaketown. This paper is a case study of the
resilience of mound building at Jaketown in the face of detrimental climatic changes.
Gross, Kendyll [109] see Granados, Rosario
Grouard, Sandrine [252] see Perdikaris, Sophia
Grubb, Muriel (East Carolina University) and Charles Ewen (East Carolina University)
[3]
The Archaeology of the Social Safety Net at the Pitt County Poor Farm
The Pitt County Poor Farm, also known as the Pitt County Home, was established in the early nineteenth century to feed and house
the local poor population of Pitt County, North Carolina, prior to the establishment of the federal welfare system. The farm was
continuously occupied and reorganized several times before it was closed in 1965. Three seasons of archaeological work on the site
have expanded the interpretation of what life in rural eastern North Carolina was like for this underprivileged, disenfranchised
population. The findings from Pitt County can be compared to other contemporary poor farm and farmstead sites throughout the
country to find similarities and differences in the living conditions of the poor during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Gruber, Janna [193] see Beach, Sonya
Gruber, Thomas [193] see Beach, Sonya
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    221
Gruhn, Ruth (University of Alberta)
[170]
Critical Remarks about Present Conceptions of the Initial Peopling of the Americas
This long-term advocate of a pre-Clovis arrival into the Americas, although gratified by the collapse of the Clovis-first model, finds
presently popular models of an initial entry only a few thousand years before the development of the Clovis phenomenon to be
unsatisfactory, as evidence accumulates for an initial entry before the Last Glacial Maximum. It is time for yet another major change
in our conception of the timing and character of the earliest peopling, and this paper will offer some ideas to consider.
Grund, Denay (University of Nevada, Reno)
[203]
Diachronic Variability in Obsidian Use in Hawsky Walksy Valley, Oregon
Hawksy Walksy Valley is a small pluvial lake basin in southeastern Oregon. It contains a rich record of human occupation spanning
the past 13,000 years. For the past two summers, crews from the University of Nevada, Reno’s Great Basin Paleoindian Research
Unit (GBPRU) recorded thousands of obsidian tools in the basin, including hundreds of projectile points that collectively represent
the entire chronological sequence for the region. In this paper, I present the results of a pXRF analysis of those artifacts to
understand when and from where visitors to Hawksy Walksy Valley obtained toolstone. I then compare the results to recent similar
studies from adjacent valleys to situate Hawksy Walksy Valley within the broader context of northern Great Basin prehistory.
Grussing, Valerie
[116]
Moderator
Gruver, Steph (University of Florida), Kurt Rademaker (Michigan State University) and Matthieu Carré (La Universidad
Peruana Cayetano Heredia)
[67]
Andean Hunter-Gatherers Occupational Patterns and Responses to Environmental Changes
Quebrada Jaguay 280 (QJ-280) is one of the earliest maritime archaeological sites in Peru. Located on the southern coast, QJ-280
was inhabited by hunter-gatherers from ~12,000–8,000 cal yr BP, from the Terminal Pleistocene to the Middle Holocene.
Excavations conducted in the 1990’s and 2017 recovered high volumes of marine faunal remains, particularly those of the mollusk,
Mesodesma donacium. The ubiquitous species accounted for ~99% of the sites shell assemblage. An isotopic examination of the M.
donacium remains allowed for a reconstruction of the occupational seasonality of QJ-280 as well as of the paleoenvironmental
conditions experienced by its inhabitants. Results of the isotopic analysis indicated that QJ-280 was seasonally occupied during the
austral summer, primarily during the months of February and March. Data suggests that the lengths of habitation potentially doubled
from the Terminal Pleistocene to the Early Holocene, from four to eight weeks. The paleoenvironmental reconstruction led to the
identification of a Terminal Pleistocene-aged El Niño event that was directly associated with an anomalous October occupation. The
isotopic examination of M. donacium remains from QJ-280 suggest that early hunter-gatherers likely modified their occupational
patterns to adapt to long-term climate change and periods of environmental instability.
Gu, Wanfa [45] see Zhai, Shaodong
Guderjan, Thomas (University of Texas, Tyler), Joshua Kwoka (University of Buffalo) and Colleen Hanratty (University of
Texas, Tyler)
[230]
Lidar Reveals Stone Boundary Markers Surrounding Ancient Maya Houselots and Neighborhoods in Belize
The study of Maya household archaeology has always been hindered by insecurity in our knowledge of houselots’ spatial
boundaries. Recently, aerial lidar has revealed a complex of linear stone features bounding houselots at the Maya site of Xnoha.
Xnoha’s central precinct includes a large pyramid-plaza complex with a nearby hilltop acropolis complex and royal Early Classic
stucco masks on two buildings. The central precinct of Xnoha is surrounded by four large hilltop neighborhoods with houselots
bounded by linear stone markers. We discuss the importance of this discovery to studies of Maya households and neighborhoods.
[230]
Discussant
Guderjan, Thomas [230] see Kwoka, Joshua
Guðmundsdóttir, Lísabet (University of Iceland)
[50]
Driftwood, a Lifeline in the Arctic: Production of Artifacts from Driftwood in NW Iceland and Norse Greenland
Iceland was settled by the Norse in the late ninth century and Greenland was settled from Iceland around 1000 AD. Although these
countries are quite dissimilar in landscape and geology, they have a similar flora in which the only forest forming tree is birch. Birch
alone could not sustain the wood demands of these Norse colonies for prolonged periods of time, but Icelanders and Greenlanders
had another wood resource available to them—driftwood. This wood originates in the boreal forests of Russia/Siberia and North
America, where trees fall from eroding riverbanks into rivers that carry the driftwood into the Arctic Ocean. In Iceland, one of the
most driftwood-rich areas is Strandir in the northwestern fjords. Here, in the recent past, there was a strong woodworking tradition
with a level of craft specialization that produced highly sought-after artifacts, furniture and boats. Not as much is known about the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    222
woodworking tradition in Norse Greenland, but recent archaeological research on wooden objects suggests that here, too, driftwood
was a very important resource exploited by skilled craftspeople. In this presentation I will discuss literary sources about wood
utilization in Strandir and how they can be compared to the archaeological material from Norse Greenland.
Guebard, Matthew [135] see Kessler, Nicholas
Guengerich, Anna [6] see Pratt, Lauren
Guérin, Guillaume [36] see Holliday, Trenton
Guernsey, Julia (University of Texas, Austin)
[191]
Discussant
Guerra, Rafael [178] see Ellis, Olivia
Guillaume, Porraz [11] see Giulia, Ricci
Guimarães Melo, Lana Gabriela [161] see Rocha, Bruna
Guinard, Michel (Societas Archaeologica Upsaliensis)
[250]
Excavations and Surveys at Caimane Cave and in the Gaza Region, Mozambique
Compared to the neighboring countries archaeological projects are rare in Mozambique. Not much is known of the local chronology,
neither during Stone Age or Iron Age, in the area. The Caimane cave, situated in the south-west of Mozambique, has since the early
eighties been excavated several times. The collected material from the cave have a chronological span ranging from the Iron Age to
MSA. Sadly, no results from these projects has been published. This paper will present some preliminary results from the former
excavations and also results from the season 2019. During the field season 2019 not only a new part of the cave was in focus but
also surveying for open air sites in the adjacent area. The preliminary results from the Caimane project will be put into context with
extensive surveys conducted in the Gaza province in Mozambique during 2015. Here material was systematically collected around
water holes (or pans) and along river banks, in addition with some digging of test pits.
Guiry, Eric (Trent University), Stéphane Noël (Service de la culture, du patrimoine et des relati), John Fowler (Saint Mary’s
University) and Susan deFrance (University of Florida)
[76]
Quantifying the Role of Salt Marshes in Animal Husbandry: Stable Carbon and Sulfur Isotope Insights
Coastal environments, and salt marshes in particular, have played a major role in shaping human culture at a global scale,
particularly with respect to providing richer pasture and fodder for livestock. Here we explore the stable carbon, sulfur, and nitrogen
isotopic compositions of livestock (n = 219) bone collagen as a means of quantifying the extent to which salt marshes were used to
raise cattle and sheep in coastal regions of seventeenth-to-eighteenth-century maritime Canada and southern Louisiana, USA.
Animals (and humans) that rely heavily on salt marsh resources should have distinctive stable carbon and sulfur isotopic
compositions due to the distinctive biology of key salt marsh grasses, particularly Spartina spp. (i.e., C4 photosynthetic pathway;
ability to use sulfide). Results provide the first quantitative insights into the importance of salt marshes in some of North America’s
earliest colonial agricultural systems. Because successful animal husbandry is a key variable in understanding how and why early
New World settlements succeeded or failed, our findings provide a novel way of thinking about colonial subsistence and economic
strategies. This approach to exploring the importance of coastal marsh use could also be applicable to much earlier archaeological
contexts and in other areas of the world.
Gulley, William [142] see Stewart, Caitlin
Gullì, Domenica [196] see Levi, Sara
Gunchinsuren, Biambaa [175] see Gillam, J. Christopher
Gunn, Christopher (Kentucky Heritage Council)
[178]
Slate Ware Development in the Northern Maya Lowlands during the Late and Terminal Classic Periods
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    223
Slate wares are the predominant slipped ceramics of the later Classic period of the northern Maya Lowlands. Initial application of the
type-variety classificatory scheme to northern ceramics divided slate wares into the Terminal Classic Cehpech complex and Early
Postclassic Sotuta complex. All non-Sotuta slate ware variability was, thus, subsumed within a single cultural-temporal category.
Uncritical application of the Cehpech concept to other ceramic complexes diminished the development of northern chronological
sequences and significantly diminished a primary means through which to perceive cultural process. This is especially problematic
for understanding the later prehistory of the Puuc Region, as its florescence and decline was thought to be encapsulated in a single
cultural-historical unit. This research presents the results of a detailed analysis of slate ware composition and form traits from the
eastern Puuc site of Kiuic. The stratigraphic relationship among slate ware traits and supporting evidence from the site’s
architectural sequence and chronometric data shows that slate ware use spans the Late and Terminal Classic periods (600–1000
AD). At Kiuic, slate wares form parts of at least two ceramic complexes. These results are synthesized with contemporaneous
regional ceramic data to highlight local and regional trends in slate ware development.
Gunn, Joel (University of North Carolina-Greensboro)
[90]
Discussant
Gunn, Joel [168] see Folan, William
Guralnick, Robert [27] see LeFebvre, Michelle
Gush, Matthew (Photographer)
[77]
Visual Storytelling for a Modern Age
In a visually obsessed world, many archaeologists have squandered the potential for effectively sharing the story of their research.
This presentation focuses on the importance of integrating a content creator and utilizing modern image creation techniques to more
effectively communicate the story of archaeology, while freeing the archaeologist to focus on their work. By utilizing cutting-edge
technologies, such as drone imaging, and social media, such as Instagram, there are immense opportunities to create content in an
engaging fashion, and share it with a limitless online audience. This engagement helps build understanding, excitement and
awareness with the public, solidify community support, and assists with prospective funding opportunities.
Gusick, Amy (Natural History Museum of Los Angeles)
[238]
Chair
Gusick, Amy [100] see Napolitano, Matthew
Gustas, Robert (University of Victoria) and Iain McKechnie (University of Victoria)
[271]
Past Kelp Habitats and the Peopling of the Americas
The history of early peoples in the Americas is a topic of perpetual interest to many archaeologists. Understanding how coastal
environments have changed over the last +15,000 years provides insight into where and how early peoples lived in newly emerging
landscapes. Using an existing abiotic Geographic Information System (GIS) model we have created preliminary predictions about
the locations of modern and late Pleistocene kelp forests at five different locations on the Northwest Coast of British Columbia.
These study areas include Barkley Sound on Vancouver Island, Quadra Island, Juan Perez Sound on Haida Gwaii, Calvert Island,
and the Dundas Islands. Comparison of these locations shows substantial differences in the size and range of modern and past kelp
forests. The study areas with greater sea level change over the last 15,000 years show more change in forest location in
comparison to modern forests. In contrast mainland coastal sites show consistent habitat extent between time periods. Additionally,
coast wide the total area of kelp forests has significantly changed resulting in significant reorganization of offshore subsistence
resources. Better understandings of the history of these marine resources can help archaeologists to understand the lifeways of
coastal peoples in the Americas.
Gutierrez, Gerardo [150] see Jurado, Erik
Gutiérrez, Maria [72] see Herr, Sarah
Guzman Piedrasanta, Melvin Rodrigo (University of Central Florida)
[155]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  224
Gyucha, Attila (Field Museum of Natural History), William Parkinson (Field Museum of Natural History), Richard Yerkes
(Ohio State University), Danielle Riebe (University of Illinois, Chicago) and William Ridge (University of Illinois, Chicago)
[199]
Investigating the Evolution of Large Prehistoric Settlements: A Case Study from Szeghalom-Kovácshalom
Archaeologists studying the evolution of large settlements face significant methodological challenges related to the size and
complex occupational history of the sites. Although noninvasive field techniques are routinely applied these days, investigations into
the spatial and temporal development of large sites still rely heavily on information that can only be collected through lengthy and
expensive excavations. In this paper, we discuss a cost- and time-efficient field approach to study the diachronic development of
large settlements through a case study of a large Late Neolithic village in Southeast Hungary. At Szeghalom-Kovácshalom,
extensive magnetic surveys produced a palimpsest of archaeological features, including about 170 buildings that reflect the
development of the settlement over several hundred years. We paired the magnetic data with minimally destructive, targeted
excavations and coring of more than 20 structures across the site to explore the nature, time, and length of their occupation through
stratigraphic analysis and absolute dating. In a very short time and with a small professional crew, we gained a refined
understanding of the evolution of the Szeghalom-Kovácshalom village. The results also have fundamentally influenced our
understanding of regional-scale demographic processes that led to the formation of similar nucleated centers during the Late
Neolithic.
Haas, Jennifer
[74]
Woodland Tradition Plant Use and Foodways in the Western Great Lakes: A View from Southeastern Wisconsin
This paper reports a multi-proxy approach to Woodland foodways, integrating plant macrobotanical studies, faunal analyses,
ceramic morphological and use wear analyses, and absorbed residue analyses. By using the concept of foodways, diet and
subsistence are contextualized within a broader framework of cooking and food preparation practices. Datasets from southeastern
Wisconsin and the surrounding region highlight diachronic trends of wild resource procurement, processing, and consumption. In
southeastern Wisconsin, foodway data suggest that Early and Middle Woodland populations were seasonally mobile foragers reliant
on a variety of wild plants and animals with limited use of domestic cultigens. Late Woodland contexts have yielded evidence of
domestic and tropical cultigens, as well as nuts and wild seeds. Recent analysis of Finch site (47JE0902) data have yielded a
wealth of information regarding Woodland Tradition foodways owing to the recovery of well-preserved plant macrobotanical and
animal remains, as well as associated ceramics. Results suggest that culinary traditions of Early and Middle Woodland groups in
southeastern Wisconsin were broadly similar, although a greater emphasis on mast crop exploitation is evident during Middle
Woodland times. Maize does not appear to be present prior to the late tenth century but becomes ubiquitous in Late Woodland
times.
Haas, Randall [180] see Chen, Jennifer
Haas, Randy [233] see Noe, Sarah
Habu, Junko (University of California, Berkeley), Yumiko Ito (Cultural Properties Protection Division), Anna Nielsen
(University of California, Berkeley) and Sandra Oseguera Sotomayor
[235]
Contributions of Mountain Food Resources to Jomon Subsistence and Landscape Practices
This paper evaluates the importance of mountain food resources among prehistoric hunter-gatherers of the Early and Middle Jomon
periods in the northern Tohoku region, Japan (ca. 6000–4500 cal BP). Recent molecular and isotopic investigations of pottery
highlight the possible importance of marine food at several Incipient, Initial and Early Jomon sites. Results of archaeobotanical
analyses and stable isotopic analyses of human skeletal remains, however, indicate that residents of Early-Final Jomon sites in
northeastern Honshu, including northern Tohoku, were likely heavily reliant on starchy foods from the forest, including chestnuts,
acorns and buckeyes. To further investigate these issues, this paper examines archaeological data from two Early-Middle Jomon
sites, Goshizawa Matsumori in Aomori Prefecture and the Goshono site in Iwate Prefecture, and interprets the results in the context
of continuity and change in landscape practices in this region. Methodologically, the paper emphasizes the significance of floating
soil samples from non-waterlogged Jomon sites. Potential contributions of ethnographic and ethnoarchaeological studies in this
region to Jomon archaeology, including those on the resilience of food systems, craft production and seasonal subsistence cycles,
are also discussed.
Hackenberger, Steven [8] see Brown, James
Hadden, Carla (Center for Applied Isotope Studies, UGA) and Suzanne Pilaar Birch (University of Georgia)
[27]
Trends in Research Funding for Women in Zooarchaeology
A 2014 survey revealed that women outnumber men in the field of zooarchaeology, and that a higher proportion of women are
based in technician or research-only positions that tend to dedicate more time to faunal analysis but are also associated with lower
pay rates and perceived status. Here, we describe gendered trends in the number, size, and type of awards granted for
zooarchaeological research over time based on data from the National Science Foundation award database. We found that NSF
funding for women in zooarchaeology reached an all-time high in 2019, but in most years, men receive more and larger awards than
women. Based on the findings of the SAA Task Force on Gender Disparities in Archaeological Grant Submissions, differences in
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    225
(re)submission rates between men and women likely contribute to the under-representation of women PIs in zooarchaeology. The
underlying causes of gender disparities in zooarchaeology are complex, and the funding gap represents both an opportunity and an
obstacle for women in the discipline. Text analysis of successful proposals reveals patterns in the kinds of projects that are being
funded by various NSF programs. We hope women in zooarchaeology will use this information to identify funding opportunities for
their own research.
Hadley, Alison (Texas A&M International University)
[264]
Pawnee Myths and the Materiality of Childhood
This paper explores the use of myths as a tool for identifying and interpreting artifacts. Excavations conducted at a late eighteenth
century Pawnee village site (14RP1) in north-central Kansas uncovered multiple clay, quadruped figurines. These artifacts closely
resemble those that have been found at historic village sites across the Plains, including the Pike-Pawnee Village or Hill site
(25WT1), the Longest site (34JF1), Like-A-Fishhook Village (32ML2), and the Leavenworth site (39CO9). Figurines are not recorded
in the significant body of ethnographic and ethnohistoric literature on historic Pawnee lifeways. Interpretations of the Pawnee
figurines were aided by Pawnee mythology, particularly boy hero myths, such as “The Boy and the Mud Pony”. The myth reveals the
use of horse figurines as children’s toys. Myths and folktales are useful in archaeological interpretation because embedded in these
stories of the supernatural are facts about the world. Other boy hero myths were analyzed for additional insight into the
archaeological context of children.
Haffner, Jacob (University of Oklahoma), Hannah Mattson (University of New Mexico), Laura-Isobel McCall (University of
Oklahoma) and Cecil Lewis Jr. (University of Oklahoma)
[244]
Archaeological Metabolomics: Residue Analysis and Mass Spectrometry
Residue analysis studies in archaeology often utilize mass spectrometry (MS) to characterize biomarkers within samples.
Biomarkers are natural molecules whose presence in residues provide information about past human activity and geographic origin.
An example is nicotine, whose identification would suggest an artifact was involved with processing and/or use of tobacco. These
MS-based methods are increasingly common for archaeological analyses of organic residue, but they were developed for and are
commonplace in fields like metabolomics and proteomics. However, such methods in archaeological studies are often outsourced to
collaborators who specialize in MS research. This frequently results in methods that are vague, lack detail necessary for
reproducibility, and minimally discuss data processing. Our exploration discovered only four residue-based archaeological
publications met the standards expected from MS-based publications. We believe this is an understandable oversight as
archaeologists, ancient biomolecule researchers, and MS specialists do not regularly discuss their fields’ norms, perspectives, and
methods. Moreover, we are discovering the compelling informative power of non-DNA biomolecules, but their significance has not
yet been fully conveyed to other fields. We hope this poster serves as a step toward communicating standards between
archaeology, ancient biomolecule studies, and MS research and further integrate information between fields.
Hagan, Elizabeth [36] see Durham, Jordan
Haichao, Li (Department of Archaeology, Sichuan University)
[45]
Preliminary Study of the Bronze Production in the Western Zhou Dynasty
This work involved archaeological study as well as scientific analysis to rebuild the bronze production system in the Western Zhou
Dynasty. A systematic archaeological classification based on typology, motifs, inscriptions, casting techniques was established first.
Yejiashan cemetery is used as an example here. The bronzes were classified into two categories: high quality ones (mostly Central
Plains style) and low quality ones (mostly local style). Systematic scientific study was then carried out. Based on the ‘Copper
Groups’ method proposed in the ‘Oxford system’, ‘high quality’ bronzes were produced with different materials from the ‘low quality’
ones. Moreover, the ‘high quality’ bronze in Jin marquis cemetery and Zhouyuan site were also made from the same material used
in Yejiashan ‘high quality’ bronze. It suggests that most ‘high quality’ bronzes from different vassal states might originate from the
same workshops. On the other hand, the ‘low quality’ local style bronzes in Yejiashan were made locally. Similar examples can be
seen in other vassal states. The uniform production and distribution of ‘high quality’ bronzes and local production of ‘low quality’
bronzes were the two aspects of the Western Zhou Dynasty. This can be further supported by other archaeological evidences.
Halcrow, Sian (University of Otago, New Zealand)
[91]
Discussant
Halcrow, Sian [199] see Adams, Alisha
Hale, Nathan, Jessica Cook Hale (Emory University), Katherine Woo (University of Sydney), Jonathan Benjamin (Flinders
University) and Ervan Garrison (University of Georgia)
[18]
The Geoarchaeology and Taphonomy of Submerged Shellfish Middens in Apalachee Bay, Florida, USA
Ongoing work at Econfina Channel in Apalachee Bay, Florida, continues to reveal new submerged shellfish midden deposits. This is
especially evident after the passage of tropical storm systems. The site preservation and exposures leading to discovery are
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      226
therefore comparable to other submerged archaeological sites around the world. However, shellfish middens may be especially
resilient during and after submergence. A new study examines these characteristics. We consider submerged taphonomy and
preservation in the context of marine conditions during and after submergence and suggest how these impact site formation and
preservation in various environmental contexts.
Haley, Cambria (Wichita State University) and Crystal Dozier (Wichita State University)
[198]
An Assessment and New Survey of Boxed Springs (41UR30)
This presentation will cover the history of archaeological work at the Boxed Spring site (41UR30), a presumed Early Caddo mound
site in east Texas. The site has a long history of avocational investigation, with the first professional archaeological survey
completed in 2010 on the eastern half of the site. A preliminary survey was done by Wichita State University on the western half of
the site in 2019. The results of this new survey and further studies of the site will be discussed.
Halffman, Carrin [202] see Sattler, Robert
Hall, Maximilian [187] see Reid, Amy
Hall, Molly [170] see Horn, Marty
Hall, Sarah (Arizona State University), Claudia Rojas Sepulveda (Department of Anthropology) and Kelly Knudson (Center
for Bioarchaeological Research)
[134]
Life, After Life: Embodied Structural Violence in a Historic Skeletal Assemblage from Bogota, Colombia
Historic-era skeletal samples often reflect vulnerable populations and provide a unique opportunity to explore marginalized identities
in the bioarchaeological record within a historically known context. This study uses historic, osteological, and biogeochemical data
from a nineteenth and early twentieth century skeletal assemblage (MNI = 20) from the pauper section of Cementerio Central in
Bogotá, Colombia to discuss the marginalized social identities of the individuals within the assemblage. Embodiment and
postmortem agency frame this discussion to emphasize that living tissues reflect environmental stimuli within a given cultural
context, and that cultural context persists after death. Skeletally, this can appear as evidence of stress, trauma, and migration, and
can be reflected in mortuary treatment and taphonomic processes. Here, we recognize that social identity and biocultural context
form a feedback loop, as each affects the other, both in life and in death. This context at Cementerio Central is historically
documented, therefore structural violence theory can be used to understand the institutional forces that contributed to migration and
poor health in life and to mortuary treatment and taphonomic damage in death.
Halligan, Jessi (Florida State University)
[219]
Discussant
Halligan, Jessi (Florida State University)
[238]
Where Is the Waterline? Integrating Terrestrial and Underwater Investigations in the Aucilla River, Florida
Over the past decade, research in the Aucilla River of northwestern Florida has focused upon understanding the geoarchaeological
context of numerous formerly terrestrial, now inundated sinkhole spring sites and the landscapes surrounding them. Dozens of
terminal Pleistocene and early Holocene-aged diagnostic artifacts have been recovered from this river, some in association with
drowned terrestrial soils and intact dateable stratigraphy. Currently terrestrial sites of the same age have thus far proven undateable
and are often conflated and deflated. The wealth of paleoenvironmental proxy data recovered from the drowned landscapes can
help to explicate where, why, and how some sites have preserved while others have not and suggest how people were adjusting to
their changing environments over the more than 14,000 years they have been occupying the Aucilla River basin.
Halling, Christine (Louisiana Department of Justice) and Ryan Seidemann (Louisiana Department of Justice)
[80]
Unidentified Oddity of the Petrous Portion of the Temporal Bone: A Case Study from a Historic Cemetery in Louisiana
While there are several commonly tracked non-metric and pathological features of the temporal bone, rarely are they found on the
internal petrous portion. In this case study, the bilateral presentation of perforations located on the internal, superior aspect of the
petrous portion of the temporal bone are discussed. The lesions are laterally placed near to the squama of the temporal bone rather
than to the medial portion of the petrous. The perforations appear to manifest as wide porous lesions, each approximately 5mm x
15mm in size, superior to the auditory canal. Several conditions will be considered in completing the differential diagnosis including
otitis media, cholesteatoma, brain herniation, and other osteolytic processes. There are no other obvious pathological conditions
afflicting this individual. With an undetermined skeletal defect such as this, tremendous value is placed on the experience of other
bioarchaeologists, and we welcome the opportunity for others to provide input and their own interpretation of the defect.
Halling, Christine [248] see Seidemann, Ryan
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       227
Halperin, Christina (Université de Montréal)
[54]
Ancient Maya Recycling: Economic Logics and Embedded Histories of Spolia and Reuse
What are the basic principles of recycling among the ancient Maya? Arguably, recycling is a common economic behavior among all
societies, ancient and contemporary alike. Yet how things are reused, by whom, and to what extent such practices are socially,
economically, and politically embedded in a society’s values varies over time and space. This paper examines recycling among the
ancient Maya through the lens of architectural spolia and artifact reuse. It focuses, in particular, on whether the practices of using
architectural spolia and refashioning ceramic sherds into new tools increased in frequency and social significance during the
Terminal Classic period in the Southern Maya Lowlands, a period often associated with political crisis, shifting economic networks,
and scarcity.
Halperin, Christina [168] see Le Moine, Jean-Baptiste
Hamdan, Leila [18] see Damour, Melanie
Hamilton, Andrew (The Art Institute of Chicago)
[109]
The Ethics of the Visible in the Visual Arts
Art from the ancient Americas raises a host of ethical questions in so-called encyclopedic museums of art. One of the last
geographic and cultural traditions to become exhibited as “Art,” their entry was from certain points of view long overdue. Euro-
American modern art in many ways opened the door as it redefined expectations for Art’s visual appearance. But even with these
changing expectations for the visual, the fundamental understanding of art’s objecthood and how and why it was to be appreciated
remained constant. To this day, objects in art museums, regardless of their cultural origins, are considered in largely Euro-American
ways as things intended or expected to be appreciated visually—the visual arts—for their aesthetic, material, and technical qualities.
But as these objects have entered art museums, so too have associated ancient and contemporary belief systems from these
cultural traditions. How might these intellectual traditions re-shape understandings of art and objecthood? Who permits or performs
that reshaping, and with what ethical consequences? And are the impacts of this relevant only to art from these traditions, or might
they have consequences for how art, writ large, is viewed? Ultimately, what ethical considerations surround making something
invisible?
Hamilton, Derek (Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre) and Sophia Adams (Scottish Universities
Environmental Research Centr)
[135]
Is La Tène Still Relevant in British Iron Age Chronology?
La Tène: a chronology that lives beyond the site, beyond regional and national boundaries; a term that conjures images of swirling
ambiguous imagery, fine metalwork and shining pots. In Britain the term describes artifacts of apparently comparative date, in
particular brooches. La Tène I brooches have strong affinities with examples from the type site and on the near continent, while La
Tène II brooches are often exceedingly different from their apparently contemporary counterparts in France, Belgium, Germany, and
Switzerland. The proposed stylistic connections between regions have been used to create the chronology of these artifacts in
Britain; organized into periods, bracketed by calendar years. In turn these stylistically dated brooches have been used as evidence
to date features and sites. This paper uses radiocarbon dates obtained from human and animal remains found within close
association to brooches to create an independent chronology that transcends geographical, temporal, and culture-historical
boundaries, and can be compared back to the data from Continental Europe. It will also discuss the implications of research on
existing chronological sequences and examine the issues of using La Tène typologies as the basis for constructing Bayesian
models.
Hamilton, Derek [135] see Krus, Anthony
Hamilton, Marcus (University of Texas,San Antonio) and Briggs Buchanan (University of Tulsa)
[26]
The Complex Diversification of North American Projectile Point Typologies over Time and Space
A central goal of complexity science is to understand how complex dynamics results in the diversity we observe in the world around
us. The archaeological record demonstrates that prior to European colonization prehistoric North America was extremely diverse in
terms of material culture. We also know that this diversity evolved rapidly over the course of only a few thousand years from a
relatively homogenous ancestral population that arrived sometime in the late Pleistocene. On the one hand, each manifestation of
cultural diversity could be the result of an entirely discrete, contingent, and self-contained set of mechanisms specific in time and
place. On the other hand, the whole spatiotemporal spectrum of cultural diversity may be the result of a core set of interacting
processes common in time and space but interacting with local phenomena and specific constraints. Here, we quantify the
diversification of North Americas projectile point typologies over 13,000 years using scaling theory. By compiling time series of
projectile point types and their spatial distribution, we show that projectile point diversification was a complex fractal-like space-filling
process where diversification in time was also diversification in space. The underlying dynamics are simple, but their outcomes are
complex.
Hamilton, Marcus [101] see Kilby, David
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       228
Hammerstedt, Scott (University of Oklahoma), Patrick Livingood (University of Oklahoma), Jami Lockhart (Arkansas
Archeological Survey), Amanda Regnier (University of Oklahoma) and John Samuelsen (Arkansas Archeological Survey)
[107]
Multisensor Geophysical Survey at Spiro Mounds: Changing the Landscape
For much of the past decade, we have been conducting landscape-scale geophysical survey at Spiro Mounds, a large regionally
important ceremonial center in eastern Oklahoma. The use of complementary instruments (gradiometry, electrical resistance, and
GPR), combined with archival research and targeted excavations, has led to a new understanding of Spiro’s history, specifically the
identification of numerous temporary structures near the site’s primary burial mound. In this paper, we re-contextualize Spiro based
on this new information.
Hammerstedt, Scott [189] see Levine, Marc
Hammerstedt, Scott [222] see Livingood, Patrick
Hammond, Norman (Boston University)
[163]
Discussant
Hampton, Ashley (University of Montana) and Jesse Harvkey
[254]
With a Plus Five in Archaeology: Examining Representations of Cultural Heritage in Tabletop Role-playing Games
Public archaeology plays a vital role in popular perceptions about the past which is oftentimes at odds with pop culture
manifestations of archaeologists (fictional figures like Indiana Jones or Lara Croft). Games may provide an avenue through which
public archaeology can effectively present the past while tapping into popular media. However, to be productive it is not merely
about creating games with an archaeology theme or games that focus on re-creating past histories. In order for gaming to effectively
promote meaningful and personal interpretations of the past, I argue it is necessary for such games to either be structured around
the “gamification” of archaeological knowledge and/or present such knowledge through experiential learning. Drawing on
discussions of cultural heritage and popular culture, I look at how these two realms intersect to see how cultural heritage is reflected
in—and reflects—popular culture and notions of the past. Tabletop role-playing games (TRPGs) are highly interactive, imaginative
games that can productively combine gamification of archaeological knowledge with experiential/personal learning. By analyzing
how such games present ideas about heritage and archaeology, we may get a better understanding of how the past (and those who
work to understand it) may actually be perceived by diverse audiences.
Han, Ji-Wan [147] see Newell, Zachary
Hanna, Jonathan (Pennsylvania State University), Matthew Napolitano (University of Oregon), Robert DiNapoli (University
of Oregon), Jessica Stone (University of Oregon) and Scott Fitzpatrick (University of Oregon)
[135]
Modeling Demographic Change in the Precolumbian Caribbean
A recent synthesis of radiocarbon dates in the Caribbean is indicative of two major population dispersals that correlate to the
longstanding cultural divisions of the region’s Archaic and Ceramic Ages. Using the most reliable dates from this dataset, we
constructed both region-wide and more local sum probability distributions (SPD) for use as proxies of population fluctuations over
time. We then juxtaposed these with the largest compilation of radiocarbon dates available from South America, along with several
climate datasets and a volcanic record for the Caribbean. Comparison of these data provide support for the traditional divisions
while offering new insights into separate migration events both within the Caribbean archipelago and between the South American
mainland. Results suggest that there was a potential influx of peoples during the middle Early Ceramic period ca. AD 100–300,
human-climate interactions at the start of the Late Ceramic period ca. AD 700, demographic shifts with the supposed arrival of
“Island Caribs” ca. AD 1200, and a potential “depopulation” of some islands before European arrival several centuries later.
Hanna, Jonathan [60] see Hayward, Michele
Hanna, Jonathan [53] see Walling, Stanley
Hannold, Cynthia
[233]
Casting a Wide Net: Experimental Research with Columbia Plateau Net Sinker Types
The prevalence of net sinkers in Columbia Plateau sites reinforces ethnographic and archaeological evidence that points to the
significance of fish, particularly salmon, and related subsistence activities in this culture area. Like other tools, net sinkers require
careful thought and planning, from tool stone selection through methods for lithic reduction. Combining experimental methods to
replicate several hundred net sinkers with an analysis of net sinkers in Clearwater River and Lower Snake River assemblages, the
author examines net sinker manufacture in the Columbia Plateau. Research suggests that one factor driving net sinker type
selection—grooved, perforated, notched et al.—is the workability of available raw material and that individual preferences, as much
as regional ones, strongly influence the distribution of the net sinker types we see.
Hanratty, Colleen [230] see Guderjan, Thomas
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         229
Hanselka, Kevin [68] see Koenig, Charles
Hanselka, Kevin [186] see Nielsen, Christina
Hanselmann, Frederick [18] see Horrell, Christopher
Hansen, Brooke [104] see Harrison, Laura
Hansen, Daniel (University of Chicago)
[234]
Rethinking “Ethnicity,” Rethinking “Archaeology”: Overcoming Epistemic Obstacles to the Study of Social Identity in the Past
Despite efforts toward more nuanced and ethnographically-grounded understandings, progress toward a viable archaeological
approach to ethnicity has proved frustratingly unsuccessful. Some maintain that the methods of archaeology cannot access ethnicity at
all, while others advocate for further inquiry into the relationships between archaeologically-observable phenomena and ethnic identity—
while understanding that such traces can be deceiving. In this paper, I argue both of these ways of thinking are misled by a conception
of ethnicity in which self-understanding is the essential criterion. While internal states are invisible to archaeologists, we often overlook
the fact that they are equally inaccessible to individuals sharing the same social context; they must therefore be immaterial to both the
social phenomenon and the study of ethnicity. It is more useful to understand ethnicity as a language game—a set of rules for talking
about and ordering the world by observable criteria. In participating in this language game, we must recognize that archaeology is a
dialogic practice engaged in tracing social difference. I will employ examples from recent debates on ethnicity in Celtic archaeology to
illustrate the flaws in our current thinking as well as to provide examples of what a viable “archaeology of ethnicity” could be.
Hansen, Richard, Edgar Suyuc (Mirador Basin Project, FARES Foundation), Carlos Morales-Aguilar (Universite Sorbonne,
Paris) and AnaBeatriz Balcarcel (Universidad de San Carlos, Guatemala)
[163]
Multidisciplinary Investigations in the Mirador Basin, Guatemala: New Insights into the Origins and Dynamics of Incipiente Maya
Civilization
Multidisciplinary investigations in the Mirador Basin of northern Guatemala have provided a new perspective of the origins and
dynamics of incipient Maya civilization, including data on settlement patterns, sampling strategies, demographic distributions,
chronological evaluations, DNA and isotope analyses, geological studies, architectural formats, and formation of complex political,
social, and economic structures. Incorporation of extensive lidar data combined with archaeological investigations at numerous sites
on a regional basis have provided evidence of the process and formation of a complex state by the Middle Preclassic period (ca.
1000–400 BC), with an apogee during the early Late Preclassic period (ca. 300 BC). The transformations into state-level formations
suggest that the initial impetus was due to agricultural intensification and population logistics that formed the need for administrative
centralization and the formation of government, which, when combined with competitive ideologies and peer-polity interactions,
allowed increasing sociopolitical complexity. The cultural and environmental sagas in the Basin had a lasting and profound impact
on subsequent Maya social and economic structure and historical trajectories, and provide new theoretical and methodological
avenues of research and can further elucidate Maya social process.
[163]
Discussant
[163]
Chair
Hansen, Richard [163] see Ensley, Ross
Hanson, Annalys (Emory University), Jessica Thompson (Yale University), Jessica Cerezo-Román (University of
Oklahoma), Jay Stock (University of Western) and Elizabeth Gomani-Chindebvu (Malawi Department of Museums and
Monuments)
[38]
Mortuary Practices of Later Stone Age Hunter-Gatherers in Northern Malawi
Later Stone Age (LSA) hunter-gatherer mortuary practices are poorly understood in south-central Africa. Tropical climate and acidic
soils hinder preservation, bioturbation is prevalent, and research coverage is sparse. The site of Hora 1, in the Mzimba District of
Malawi, provides a rare opportunity to examine diversity and continuity over time in mortuary practices. Two flexed adult burials of a
male and female, recovered in 1950, were recently dated to ~9000 and ~8000 cal BP, respectively. A fragmentary adult skeleton,
recovered in 2017–2018, represents an incomplete cremation dated to ~9500 cal BP. In 2019, two infant (neonate) skeletons were
recovered below this incomplete cremation, and show further diversity in mortuary treatment. The first, a nearly-complete flexed
burial, was missing lower limb, hand, and foot elements that cannot be explained through taphonomic or postdepositional
processes. Review of the original 1950 report shows that the flexed adult female was missing the same elements. The second infant
burial also showed signs of postmortem manipulation, with partially-articulated limbs recovered alongside the skull, rather than in
anatomical position. Here we situate these five sets of remains within ethnographic and regional archaeological data, and evaluate
the possibility of mortuary curation practices during the LSA of northern Malawi.
Hanson, John
[26]
Was Life in Larger Cities Less Fair?
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     230
Although it is a common assumption that an increase in group size is associated with the development of institutions for mediating
between individual and wider groups, there has been surprisingly little discussion of the formal relationships between the sizes of
cities and legal systems in the context of the Greek and Roman world. In this talk, I will attempt to shed some new light on these
issues, focusing on basilicas (which are usually interpreted as commercial and legal structures). I will show that, although there is a
relationship between them, it is very sublinear (i.e., doubling the former does not equate to doubling the latter). I will then pause to
reflect on the implications of this result for our view of how much access ancient residents had to legal systems and what this
suggests about overall levels of inequality.
Hanson, Kelsey (University of Arizona) and Nancy Odegaard (Arizona State Museum and University of Arizona)
[79]
Employing Complementary Noninvasive Techniques to Characterize Paint Recipe Diversity in the U.S. Southwest
The characterization of paint recipes requires knowledge of source locations, processing requirements, and application
techniques—but it is a technology that remains largely unproblematized in archaeological research. Studies of painted media often
rely upon visual characterization of color alone to approximate underlying compositions, without chemical confirmation. Assumptions
like these mask potential technological diversity. A combination of complementary noninvasive techniques (optical microscopy, XRF,
FTIR, and Raman spectroscopy) are employed to characterize paint recipes. This poster presents the results of preliminary
analyses of a collection of over 500 paint and pigment samples from the Arizona State Museum recovered from across the U.S.
Southwest—ranging from unprocessed pigment parent material to prepared paint cakes. Preliminary results reveal notable diversity
in paint recipes, reflecting differences in paint constituents, processing techniques, and communities of practice.
Hanson, Kelsey [122] see Hinton, Sarah
Hanten, Nick [236] see Brady, Ryan
Hantman, Jeffrey (University of Virginia)
[251]
Discussant
Hanus, Kasper (Polish Academy of Sciences)
[45]
Water Technologies as a Social Change Facilitator
The Cambridge Dictionary defines “facilitation” as “the act of helping other people to deal with a process or reach an agreement or
solution without getting directly involved in the process, discussion, etc.” But could an ancient technology be a “facilitator” of a social
change? To resolve that question I will present and verify a model which assumes that the introduction of water management
technologies facilitated the development of new social structures in the southern Tarim Basin (Xinjiang, China). The model
conceptualizes different ancient interest groups (e.g., local farmers, nomads, Chinese military colonists) as shareholders with
different goals, while the introduction of new water management technologies as the facilitator helped to crystallize of sustainable
socio-economical system. Tarim Basin between the second century BCE and mid-first millennium CE serves as an interesting case
study due to multiple shareholders mentioned above and gradual introduction of water technologies traceable in archaeological
material: (a) indigenous agro-pastoral irrigation developments, (b) introduction of Chinese military colonies and finally (c) western
Central Asian invention implemented during so-called “Gandhāran migration.”
Hard, Robert (Univeristy of Texas, San Antonio), Raymond Mauldin (University of Texas, San Antonio), Jacob Freeman
(Utah State University), Ashley Waldrip (University of Texas, San Antonio) and Moureen Kaki (University of Texas, San
Antonio)
[179]
Patterns in Radiocarbon Summed Probability Distributions in Texas
Summed probability distributions (SPDs) of large radiocarbon datasets are increasingly used to estimate a variety of population
parameters in archaeological research. We compile a dataset of several thousand radiocarbon dates spanning the last 10,000 years
from multiple regions of Texas, including the Central and Coastal zones, to assess demographic patterns of hunter-gatherers. The
relationships between interregional demographic trends suggested by these SPDs and various ecological patterns are then
examined at multiple spatial scales.
Hard, Robert [240] see Carpenter, Michelle
Hard, Robert [5] see Lazik, Lauren
Hard, Robert [179] see Mauldin, Raymond
Hard, Robert [122] see Whisenhunt, Mary
Hard, Robert [156] see Zaragosa, Gabriella
Hardy, François [81] see Forget Brisson, Laurence
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  231
Hardy, Meredith (National Park Serivce)
[273]
Engaging the Present by Uncovering the Past: Community Archaeology and the Legacy of Enslavement, Resistance, and
Emancipation, St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands
Since 2014, the National Park Service, as a partner in the Slave Wrecks Project, has conducted community archaeology program as
part of multi-year effort combining underwater and terrestrial archaeology with public engagement activities. Christiansted National
Historic Site, and the Danish West India and Guinea Company Warehouse complex, St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands, is unique in the
National Park Service system in that the site was a nexus for the receiving, shipment, and incarceration and torture of Enslaved
Africans from 1733–1803 for the Danish West Indies. Captured maroons were incarcerated at Fort Christiansvaern, tried in the
Colonial court, and punished or executed, making the fort a symbol of flight from bondage. Since 2017, the Society for Black
Archaeologists joined SWP partners in conducting a community archaeology program at Estate Little Princess, also on St. Croix,
which introduces students from local high schools and Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to the world of
archaeology and coral reef restoration. This paper will highlight both of these programs’ efforts to identify archaeological resources
pertaining to the lives of the enslaved and engage local youth in the world of heritage resource management.
[273]
Chair
Hare, Timothy (Morehead State University)
[155]
Discussant
Hare, Timothy (Morehead State University), Marilyn Masson (University at Albany, SUNY) and Bradley Russell (University
at Albany, SUNY)
[269]
Connecting Ceremonial Groups across the Terminal Classic and Postclassic Constructed Landscapes in the Mayapán Region
I present an analysis of the landscape connecting shifting ceremonial groups and settlement distributed across the Terminal Classic
and Postclassic landscapes in the Mayapán region. Mayapán is the largest Postclassic urban center in the Maya Lowlands and has
been the focus of previous research in the area. Traditional and lidar surveys at Mayapán reveal a broader landscape characterized
by widely distributed ceremonial groups linking settlements across the region. The Terminal Classic landscape is densely occupied
and dispersed. The Postclassic landscape is dominated by Mayapán’s walled urban core, surrounded by a halo of ceremonial
groups. This analysis examines regional settlement transformations through reconstruction of connections, such as pathways and
gates in the constructed landscape in relation to the locations and forms of key public architectural features, walled houselots,
cenotes, and the defensive wall. The settlement disjunction between the two periods suggests collapse followed by recovery.
[269]
Chair
Hare, Timothy [138] see Masson, Marilyn
Harkleroad, Eric
[234]
Scales of violence in Wessex
There is no consensus on the nature, frequency, or even presence of warfare in Iron Age Britain largely due to the equivocal nature
of the remains. By utilizing bellicose references rather than more traditional approaches I examine regional trends in the concern for
violence, or warfare, through the Iron Age in Wessex. Sub-regions of Wessex, including Dorset and Hampshire, are compared to
each other and larger trends to understand the amount of variation that exists within the region. The sites of Maiden Castle and
Danbury are examined to see how these trends manifest at the site level. The concern for violence or warfare is contextualized by
examining broader changes in society occurring along with these changes in warfare. The results suggest that changes in warfare
are largely driven by indigenous concerns and factors rather than continental influence.
Harkness, Rebecca (University of Arizona)
[184]
Legal Limbo: A Case Study of NAGPRA Policies in the Mimbres Region of Southwest New Mexico
Mimbres Classic Black-on-white bowls are a hallmark of the Mimbres Classic period (AD 1000–1130) in prehispanic southwestern
New Mexico. Some of these bowls are marked by a post-firing modification where a hole is made at the bottom of the bowl and are
four times more likely to be from burials. This information is important for museums and institutions that house these bowls,
especially when trying to maintain NAGPRA compliance. However, not every bowl with a hole is from a burial context or may not
have provenience information due to looting. This creates an issue of how to respectfully treat, display, and house these artifacts. In
this poster, I discuss how institutions currently display these objects and what could change to promote more respectful treatment in
public exhibits.
Harle, Michaelyn (Tennessee Valley Authority), Laura Smith (University of Tennessee), Suzanne Fisher (Tennessee Valley
Authority) and Heather Heart (Tennessee Valley Authority)
[56]
Florence Hawley’s Enduring Legacy in Southeastern Archaeology and Beyond
One of the pioneers of dendrochronology, Florence Hawley was employed by Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) in the 1930s during
the archaeological excavations that were conducted prior to impoundment of Norris Reservoir. Hawley’s work was one of the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 232
earliest attempts at establishing a tree-ring chronology in the southeast. While Hawley would go on to have an illustrious career in
archaeology in the southwest, unfortunately, sexist attitudes would undermine her efforts in the southeast and her early work was
never published. It would be decades before the scientific community realized the importance of this research both within and
beyond the archaeological discipline. This paper highlights Hawley’s early research in the southeast and describes how TVA is
using her early research on red cedar samples to better understand the impacts of large droughts on TVA’s operating system.
Harley-Wilson, Terry [172] see Pope, Melody
Harmon, Alaina [132] see Joseph, J.
Harney, Éadaoin [173] see Owsley, Douglas
Harper, Kyle
[161]
Precolonial-Historic Transformations of Amazonian Dark Earth Soils at the Carrazedo Site (Para, Brazil)
In the lower Amazon basin of Brazil, the study of Amazonian Dark Earth soils (ADE), or terra preta do índio has demonstrated the
ingenious ways indigenous Amazonians interacted with and altered diverse environments. Developed over several generations in
human domestic and agricultural activities through the burning and mixing of biochar, this soil engineering process replaced natural
concentrations of iron-rich latosols with significantly elevated levels of P, C, Ca, Mg, Mn, Zn, which contributed to the development
of intensive agriculture and complex societies in the region. Upon the arrival of Europeans, ADE production and management would
have most likely been altered due to the shift from a precolonial economy of subsistence agriculture to a colonial economy of
commodity production. While studies have done well to examine precolonial ADE production processes, as well as some present-
day production techniques, there have been relatively few studies that address the differential geo-chemical and archaeological
signatures from the precolonial to the colonial and postcolonial periods. This study, currently being carried out at the Carrazedo site,
near the Xingu-Amazonas confluence region, seeks to examine the socio-economic causes and technological processes behind
ADE variation from the precolonial (~CE 500–1500) to the colonial and postcolonial periods (~CE 1600–1960).
Harrington, Lesley [240] see Pfeiffer, Susan
Harris, Andrew (University of Toronto)
[28]
Theravada Buddhist Monastic Activity at Angkor Thom: A Discussion of What, Where, and When
The religious transition of the Khmer Empire (ca. 802–1431 CE) from Shaivaite and/or Mahayana Buddhism to the religion known
today as “Theravada Buddhism” is thought today to be one of the defining social phenomena of the late Angkorian Period (ca.
fourteenth–fifteenth centuries) in medieval Cambodia. However, despite the archaeological evidence of over seventy monastic
substructures within the terminal Khmer capital of Angkor Thom, the absence of new temples and inscriptions have thrown any
exploration of urban activity directly associated with “Theravada Buddhism” by the wayside. Called “Buddhist Terraces” in traditional
scholarship and prah vihar by Cambodian archaeologists, investigations of these substructures across three field seasons at Angkor
Thom from 2017 to 2019 have yielded incredibly valuable information concerning both specific ritual activities and their chronology
at several sites, as well as structural augmentations over time. Furthermore, spatial data alongside diachronic analysis has revealed
plenty concerning the importance of “place” in the construction of these monastic buildings, which provides clarity as to how
localized religion both supplanted and incorporated previous traditions of temple-building from earlier religious eras at Angkor.
Harris, Brendan, David Moore (Georgia State University) and Chad Keller (Georgia State University)
[186]
Benefits and Challenges of Thick Description in Digital Archaeology and Heritage Management
Archaeologists and historic preservationists have increasingly begun to apply the anthropological concept of thick description in
ethnographic fieldwork to that of architectural documentation in order to create more civically-engaged research. This is done by
implementing an interpretive and intersubjective framework that deeply examines the social and historical context of a structure in
order to better engage with its cultural heritage and with the local community. This poster investigates the value and challenges of
incorporating thick description in digital documentation methods over traditional analog methods. Specifically, this project uses a
case study to investigate the benefits of both analog and digital processes for documenting historic structures. The National Park
Service’s Historic American Building Survey (HABS) standards and guidelines are used to document the architectural features of the
Carpenter Gothic style Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Greensboro, Georgia, USA. The analog data collection methods are
two-dimensional representations using a tape measure. The digital data collection methods are 3D representations using a laser
scanner and structure from motion (SfM) photogrammetry. This research incorporates components of archaeological praxis, such as
community-engaged scholarship and participatory knowledge production, to promote the public benefits of archaeology as well as
the integration of archaeology with historic preservation.
Harris, Chrys [107] see Gaffney, Chris
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    233
Harris, Edward (Retired)
[24]
Discussant
Harris, Jacob [55] see Coon, Sarah
Harris, Jacob [38] see Martin, Miles
Harris, Katie
[253]
Lithics and the Late Prehistoric: Networks and Interaction on the Southeastern Columbia Plateau
The people of the Columbia Plateau have been frequently characterized as a homogeneous culture despite a 2,500-year depth of
history and large spatial extent. Moreover, differences in artifact form, assemblage composition, and household features belie this
characterization. The changing natural and social environment can be detected in modifications to technology, and relationships
among distinct groups can be inferred. The research presented here considers these changes and asks: can the cultural learning
and adaptive strategies of late prehistoric cultural groups be identified in the variability of southern Columbia Plateau projectile
points? And how does obsidian procurement reflect changing cultural interactions and exchange networks in the southern Columbia
Plateau over the past 2,500 years? By using concepts from evolutionary and social network theories, this study employs obsidian
provenience sourcing and the morphometric analysis of projectile points to trace the ways people dealt with these environmental
and social pressures through shifting adaptive strategies and increased intergroup interaction.
Harris, Matthew (AECOM Technologies) and Matthew Jorgenson (AECOM Technologies)
[55]
A Probabilistic Machine Learning Approach to Modeling Uncertainty in Lithic Source Classification
The accurate sourcing of lithic material in an archaeological context is critical for formulating hypothesis for regional settlement and
trade dynamics. One method for this is to classify the Neutron Activation Analysis (NAA) and X-ray Fluorescence (XRF)
geochemical signatures of artifacts based on the same geochemistry of samples from known outcrop sources. Standard practices
for lithic source classification from these data is the use of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for features creation and
Mahalanobis distance from the group centroid for source classification. Despite wide-spread use of this method, the non-parametric
assumptions of Machine Learning (ML) algorithms can increase the accuracy of lithic source classification on PCA features. Further,
probabilistic ML is used to propagate the uncertainty in the estimation of source location to derive a probability distribution of
sources. Finally, these methods are tested on both PCA features and raw geochemical data. This study is performed on a large
sample of provenanced rhyolite samples and artifacts from the Carolina Slat Belt. The broader implications of this method may be
generalizable to geochemical data for any material across all regions.
Harris, Matthew (AECOM Technologies)
[139]
Discussant
Harris, Matthew [9] see Seibel, Scott
Harris, Stephen [202] see Boudreaux, Edmond
Harrison, Janelle
[60]
CRM and Heritage Management: Employing Modern Technologies in Rock Art Recording at MCAGCC 29 Palms, California
This paper describes the preservation methods the Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center (Combat Center) has proposed for the
National Register Listed Petroglyph site CA-SBR-161, known as Foxtrot. The Combat Center recognizes the importance of this rock
art site; the gap in scholarly research of rock art sites aboard the Combat Center, and understands that rock art sites are in danger
of degradation by natural and human impacts. By employing modern technologies such as lidar, D-Stretch, and 3D imaging to
record these sites for public outreach and future studies the Combat Centers cultural resources management programs’ goals are to
expand the understanding of rock art sites of this geographic location from a landscape archeology perspective; and of the Foxtrot
petroglyph site in particular. A brief discussion of the panels, motifs and pictographs found at CA-SBR-161, the site known as
Foxtrot will be presented, as well as a discussion on employing the same preservation methods to other rock art and rock
alignments sites aboard the Combat Center in the future as standard cultural resources and heritage management technique aboard
the installation.
Harrison, Laura (University of South Florida) and Brooke Hansen (University of South Florida)
[104]
Mixed Methods Digital Heritage Research at Egmont Key, FL
Egmont Key, Florida served as an internment camp for Seminoles during the Indian Removal Period, a haven for runaway slaves
and Union soldiers during the Civil War, an outpost for rum runners during Prohibition, and a strategic military installation in multiple
nineteenth- and twentieth-century conflicts. Today, these histories (and others) are largely invisible to the public due to limited
outreach infrastructure on the island, and inadequate public-facing interpretive materials. There is a pressing need for such content
because the island is an established tourist destination drawing over 200,000 visitors each year. Furthermore, in 2017, this
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   234
diminutive 2 km2 island was named one of the most endangered heritage sites in Florida: it has lost almost half of its landmass in
the last century due to coastal erosion and many historic sites are on the verge of submersion. This paper details a collaborative,
mixed-methods project that combines archival research, 3D laser scanning, and Seminole oral histories to brings these invisible
stories to life with interactive digital content aimed at increasing public understanding and awareness of Egmont Key’s endangered
heritage.
[104]
Chair
Harrison, Laura [104] see Bonacini, Elisa
Harrison, Laura [104] see Cali, Denise
Harrison-Buck, Eleanor (University of New Hampshire)
[14]
Introduction to the Lower Belize River Watershed: A Deep History of Human-Environment Interaction
This paper situates the results of nine years of archaeological investigations by the Belize River East Archaeology (BREA) project,
beginning more than 10,000 years ago in the preceramic period. We have also documented ample Maya occupation, including their
settlement, production activities, ritual ceremonies and other aspects of daily life. The BREA study area contains over 122 km2 of
perennial wetlands (28% of all wetlands in Belize). Our investigations have documented a long history of human-wetland interaction
beginning in the preceramic and continuing through the Maya period. European Contact has also been detected, when Spanish
entradas penetrated these swamps en route to the Petén. Logwood in these swamps later attracted the British Baymen, who settled
in the lower Belize Watershed, including Crooked Tree—today one of the oldest Creole communities in Belize. The archaeology of
the Creole, descendants of European and enslaved Africans, has been the focus of our recent investigations. In 2018, BREA
worked with the community of Crooked Tree to develop a museum and cultural heritage center. It features the results of the BREA
archaeological research, from preceramic to colonial times. The museum is geared for the public, namely local school-age children,
aimed at promoting long-term cultural sustainability.
[14]
Chair
Harrison-Buck, Eleanor (University of New Hampshire)
[127]
Discussant
Harrison-Buck, Eleanor [14] see Craig, Jessica
Harrison-Buck, Eleanor [14] see Krause, Samantha
Harrod, Chris [61] see Santana Sagredo, Francisca
Harrod, Ryan (University of Alaska Anchorage)
[131]
Why We Study Violent Behaviors in the Past: Dr. Debra Martin’s Contributions to Research on Systems of Socially Sanctioned
Warfare and Systematic Exploitation
Dr. Debra Martin’s work has enhanced our understanding of how different forms of violent interaction are often supported by cultural
ideology. Additionally, she has highlighted the physical and social impact violence-related trauma has on individuals. My scholarship
continues her work of analyzing human skeletal remains to reveal violent interactions. Building on the collaborative work we have
done together, I illustrate here, the biological consequences of persistent threats of violence as a means of social control over
individuals. The intent is to examine the complex relationship between peace and conflict, from intergroup hostilities that result in
regional warfare, to systems of captivity and exploitation that target women and children and/or nonlocal laborers. My research
focuses on how violent exchanges affect people’s daily lives and are tied to cultural ideology, and ways the influence of violence
transcends multiple generations. Dr. Martin has, and continues, to encourage my passion for studying the nature of human violence.
She has encouraged me to develop theoretical and methodological approaches for better identifying and interpreting conflict, and
realize how interactions between individuals and among groups, both as direct and structural violence, were part of daily practice
and ideology in the past.
Harrod, Ryan [210] see Martin, Debra
Harry, Karen (University of Nevada-Las Vegas)
[88]
Discussant
Harry, Karen [142] see Perez, Daniel
Hart, Elizabeth (Metropolitan Museum of Art)
[232]
Changes in Ancient Egyptian Flaked-Stone Sickle Production, Fifth–First Millennia BCE
Flaked-stone sickle inserts were produced in Egypt for thousands of years, even after the introduction of metals. Scholars have
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   235
explained their endurance in Egypt primarily as a combination of functional and economic factors: flint works as well as metal, and it
is abundant, so it must be cheaper and easier than metal sickles. However, this simple explanation does not account for any
variability that occurred in sickle production over time. Supported by a Metropolitan Museum Fellowship, this study documented
attributes of flaked-stone sickle inserts across time periods, focusing on raw materials, flaking technologies, dimensions, use, and
re-working. The results show that three main sickle insert types can be defined based on technology, and that there are different
degrees of specialization for each. This study demonstrates that sickle insert production did change substantially over time, and that
sickle function, economic organization, and even harvesting practices were in a dynamic dialog with technological, political, and
social factors. These results are significant for understanding how tools got into farmers’ hands, and hence how their lives were
affected by larger-scale changes.
Hart, Isaac (University of Utah), Andrea Brunelle (University of Utah), Jennifer DeGraffenried (U.S. Army Dugway Proving
Ground) and Kaylee Jones (University of Utah)
[66]
A New Radiocarbon Chronology for Lake Bonneville Sediments
We present a new radiocarbon chronology for Lake Bonneville sediments and discuss implications for human settlement of the Lake
Bonneville basin during the Pleistocene/Holocene transition. Our chronology combines radiocarbon dates from multiple sediment
cores, aligned by visual stratigraphy and X-Ray fluorescence based geochemical signatures, and indicates a lake was present in the
Lake Bonneville basin until just after 13 cal ka. While the basin has a rich Paleoindian archaeological record with hundreds of
stemmed point sites, fluted points are nearly absent from Lake Bonneville Basin lowlands. Our updated lake chronology suggests
the presence of a lake in the basin’s lowest elevations during much of Clovis times may have precluded the area’s use by fluted
point-wielding people.
Hart, Isaac [62] see Taylor, William
Hart, John [29] see Vavrasek, Jessica
Hart, Siobhan (Skidmore College)
[172]
Curating Archaeological Collections in the Private Small Liberal Arts Context
This paper considers archaeological curation in a private, small liberal arts college (SLAC) context. Many SLACs have
archaeological collections acquired through donation from alumni or local residents, occasionally through purchase or orphaning,
and increasingly through student and faculty research on and off campus. These collections are sometimes curated by professional
staff in a dedicated museum, but more often are curated within an academic department by a single faculty member. In these
situations, faculty-curators must meet legal requirements and ethical imperatives while also advancing institutional missions of
active and applied learning. Archaeological collection curation can offer rich opportunities for teaching and student learning. It also
requires significant resource investments from institutions and individual faculty. Meeting standards of care and commitments to
inclusion, access, and community engagement present both challenges and opportunities in the SLAC context. I consider both with
examples drawn from my own experience as a faculty-curator.
Hart, Thomas (Franklin and Marshall College), Arlene Rosen (University of Texas, Austin) and Richard Walter (Sul Ross
State University)
[40]
Late Paleoindian Plant Use and Foodways at the Genevieve Lykes Duncan Site, Texas: Phytoliths, Starch Grains, and Calcium
Oxalate Evidence
The early Paleoindian lifeways of Pre-Clovis, Clovis, and later Folsom populations have been the subject of much interest. They are
characterized as highly mobile hunter-gatherers who followed large herds of game across the plains of North America. In contrast,
very little attention has been paid to understanding later Paleoindian populations, and we know particularly little about their plant
foraging strategies and how they might have transitioned away from a focus on big game hunting, toward a broader subsistence
base that were more typical of the Archaic Periods. Excavations at the site of Genevieve Lykes Duncan, Texas revealed three late
Paleoindian stone lined hearths stretching from 11,000–8,180 cal BP. An analysis of starch grains, phytoliths, and calcium oxalate
crystals from these hearths revealed potential calorie-rich foods and utility taxa such as cacti and desert succulents, palmettos, and
gourds. Reed phytoliths suggest a local environment that was marshy and damp, while specific grass phytoliths indicate that the
hearths were used seasonally. This presentation examines these results in detail and discusses their implications for diet, fuel use,
and the local environment during the late Paleoindian period of Texas.
Harte, Marybeth (Logan Simpson) and William Bryce (Logan Simpson)
[229]
A Fresh Look at the Prescott Archaeological Tradition
The Transition Zone separating the Southern Basin and Range from the Colorado Plateau within central Arizona has long been an
area of archaeological inquiry. For over a century most of this research has focused on the eastern and central portion of the
Transition Zone. Recent work on the Prescott National Forest, within the western zone, produced considerable pedestrian survey
data on the Prescott archaeological culture. These data support notable site type variation within small areas inhabited by Prescott
groups. While the non-perishable material culture suggests insularity, additional lines of circumstantial evidence point toward
interaction and trade using perishable goods. This presentation seeks to initially reassess concepts of the Prescott cultural area in
terms of internal identities and cultural markers, re-examine the extent of Hohokam influence in the region, and take a broader look
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     236
at the population’s role in a larger external trade network.
Hartfield, Kyle [186] see van Leeuwen, Willem
Hartman, Adam (University of Cincinnati)
[120]
Roman Fine Ware Ceramics from the Hinterland of Molyvoti, Thrace
This research examines the economic integration of the hinterlands surrounding the Classical Greek site of Stryme (modern-day
Molyvoti), located on the coast of the northern Aegean in the region of Thrace, into the broader exchange networks of the Roman
Empire through an analysis of the imported Roman fine ware ceramics recovered through surface survey. The assemblages of
Roman fine ware from two hinterland sites, Glyphada-Agkathies and Mitrikon-Metochi, are examined in two primary ways: 1)
analysis of the composition of the assemblages in terms of vessel forms, decorative motifs, and clay fabrics from the hinterlands of
Classical Stryme, and 2) comparison of the Stryme ceramics to other published ceramic assemblages from other sites in the region.
This analysis of the ceramics from the hinterlands of Classical Stryme helps to clarify the site’s position in the broader exchange
networks of the Roman Empire, while a comparison with other sites in the region provides a greater understanding of Stryme’s
position at a more local level.
Hartman, Gideon [159] see Vaiglova, Petra
Harvey, David [243] see Neme, Gustavo
Harvey, Virginia (University of Manchester, UK), Michelle LeFebvre (Florida Museum of Natural History, University of
Florida), Casper Toftgaard (National Museum of Denmark, Nationalmuseet), Konstantina Drosou (KNH Centre for
Biomedical Egyptology) and Michael Buckley (University of Manchester)
[212]
The Role of Ancient Biomolecules in the Potential Discovery of an Extinct Marine Turtle
Advancements in molecular science continue to improve our understanding of modern marine turtle biology. Yet, past turtle
distributions and how humans have influenced them remain vastly understudied. Zooarchaeological analyses focusing on
informative biomolecules such as proteins and DNA are becoming increasingly significant in unveiling secrets from our past oceans,
particularly when bone remains are fragmented and thus difficult to assign taxonomic identity. Here, we analyse 130 archaeological
marine turtle bones up to 2500 years old from seven sites across the Caribbean and Florida’s Gulf coast. All of the samples were
analysed using collagen fingerprinting (‘ZooMS’), which allowed species-level identification in the vast majority (85%). From these
analyses we identified two different chemical signatures in archaeological green turtle samples, Chelonia spp., signifying a potential
difference in genetic stock—one identical to the modern day green turtle, Chelonia mydas, and the other a possibly extinct and
undescribed species. Ancient DNA (aDNA) sequencing was employed on samples from both groupings with the aim of verifying this
claim, yet amplification failed due to poor DNA preservation. Here, we discuss the advantages and disadvantages of proteomics and
aDNA analyses on bone remains from the tropics in view of uncovering precise taxonomic identification.
Harvkey, Jesse
[228]
The Unseen Archaeology of Disability and Impairment
Disability and impairment are two vitally important aspects of the human condition that have been present throughout history. Yet,
they have continued to be underrepresented by the field of archaeology which so tirelessly attempts to understand the human past
in all its expansive facets. Perhaps the reason for this shortcoming is the state of ongoing societal invisibility which this social group
currently faces, unknowingly shaping theoretical foci of archaeological inquiry to be unintentionally ignorant of their essential role in
understanding this facet of human history. The archaeology of disability is relevant to modern disability studies and vital to the
understanding of the evolution and current state of the social construct which has varied in cultural definition for years. The purpose
of this paper is to highlight the value of inclusive theory and practice in the archaeological interpretation of disability and impairment
in a social context. It will provide examples of the complexity of the social group’s past as seen in the archaeological record through
artifactual remains reflective of impairment and disability in a wide array of contexts and describe variant historic topics of inquiry
which may help to further ascertain the nature of “disabled” individuals’ lives in the past.
Harvkey, Jesse [254] see Hampton, Ashley
Hasenstab, Robert
[175]
Customized Interpolation of Lidar Data: A Case Study from Casper Bluff, Illinois
Often lidar data are distributed in pre-processed form, either in raster grid (e.g., TIF image) or vector GIS (contour lines) format. In
such cases the spatial resolution is generalized in order to mask any imperfections in the data. Such smoothing loses any detail in
the surface data—detail of a scale at which archaeological features may occur, e.g., meter or sub-meter. This paper outlines a
workflow by which .las files can be broken out into individual mass points. These x,y,z points can then be processed through
customized surface interpolation functions. Data from Casper Bluff Reserve, JoDaviess County, Illinois were processed. Results
revealed a thunderbird intaglio feature.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       237
Hassam, Stephan, Davide Tanasi (University of South Florida) and Kaitlyn Kingsland (University of South Florida)
[104]
Digital Photogrammetry and Terrestrial Laser Scanning Applied to the Roman Hypogeum of Crispia Salvia in Lilybaeum (Marsala,
Italy)
The hypogeum of Crispia Salvia in Marsala, Sicily (ancient Lilybaeum) gets its name from a painted inscription above a tomb
naming the deceased. This uniquely well-preserved chamber tomb contains an important series of frescoes informing us about
interesting Pre-Christian funerary rites. The hypogeum was discovered recently during the construction of an apartment complex in
the 1990s, which has made it relatively underrepresented in the literature, despite its uniqueness in Sicily and the excellent state of
preservation of its frescoes. The site, covered by private property, is very difficult to access, contributing to the difficulty scholars
face in researching the site. Considering the gradual improvement of 3D visualizing technologies, the University of South Florida
Institute for Digital Exploration (USF IDEx), as part of a wider digitization project of Sicilian cultural heritage, digitized the hypogeum
of Crispia Salvia in 2018 in order to increase its visibility in scholarly circles and to the public. Digitization was carried out using
digital photogrammetry and terrestrial laser scanning. The results of the digitization project provide an accurate photorealistic virtual
version of the hypogeum, accessible to the public and researchers interested in the frescoes and morphometrics of the site.
Hassam, Stephan [104] see Kingsland, Kaitlyn
Hassett, Brenna (University College London)
[210]
I’ll Show You: The Visibility of Violence in Human Sacrifice at the Edge of Early “States”
This paper examines the visibility of a specific type of violence theorized to be a near-universal tool of constructing the hierarchical
power relationships that comprise early “state” societies: human sacrifice. A social-control model proposes human sacrifice serves
as a tool for display and legitimization of social control by an elite over a nonelite group and is an endemic feature of lineage-based
control of social hierarchies that comprise early state societies. It is critical to interrogate the relationship of violence experienced in
a human sacrifice context and the violence displayed as part of a human sacrifice event in order to evaluate this model. We use a
case study from the Early Bronze Age cemetery at the site of Başur Höyük in the Upper Tigris River region of modern-day Turkey to
reconstruct the visual presentation of human sacrifice and examine whether the display of violence can be easily equated to the
display of power.
Hastorf, Christine [59] see Bruno, Maria C.
Hastorf, Christine [61] see Miller, Melanie
Hatcher, Lawford (University of Alabama), Emily McKenzie (University of Alabama), Juan Monzon (University of Alabama),
Caleb Ranum (University of Alabama) and Katherine Chiou (University of Alabama)
[147]
Introducing Paleoethnobotany to Machine Learning: a Case Study in the Genus Capsicum
Chili peppers (Capsicum spp.) are an incredibly diverse and abundant crop across the Americas whose domestication began
around 10,000 BP as a complex co-evolutionary process between humans and these plants. This genus has served many culinary,
medicinal, and ritualistic uses throughout its evolution and diversification. With an interest in tracking the domestication of the
Capsicum genus over time, we seek to develop a method of species-level identification based on seed morphometrics. To this end,
we test a variety of machine learning algorithms on the collected morphometric data to determine which best models the high-
dimensional space of the data. Machine learning algorithms utilized are linear discriminant analysis, neural networks, decision tree,
Random Forest, as well as a series of dimensionality reduction algorithms to prevent overfitting. We also compare these models to
previous models developed for species-level identification of Capsicum seeds. As the only remaining portions of chili pepper at
archaeological sites are very often the seeds, these species-level identification models can be utilized in the field to identify the
species of seeds found in order to track their domestication over time.
Hauser, Mark [239] see Wallman, Diane
Hawkins, Alan and Lara Noldner
[231]
Emergency Assessment and Salvage at 13PM7, a Mill Creek Village Site
Archaeological site 13PM7 (a.k.a. Joy Creek Major) was originally recorded in 1965 as a Mill Creek culture (Initial variant Middle
Missouri tradition) “midden mound” and surface scatter site along the Big Sioux River in Plymouth County, Iowa. Following a levee
failure due to heavy rainfall in the spring of 2019, a much more extensive artifact scatter and multiple features were exposed at this
village site, as well as a human burial feature and isolated human remains. In order to determine the best preservation strategy and
condition of the site, the Iowa Office of the State Archaeologist applied for, and was awarded, an Emergency Historical Resource
Development Program (HRDP) grant from the State Historical Society of Iowa to conduct limited surface survey and subsurface
testing. This presentation summarizes the results of the fieldwork at the site.
Hawkins, Rebecca and Julie Olds (Miami Tribe of Oklahoma)
[49]
Lost (and Found) in Translation: Successfully Navigating the Culturally Foreign NAGPRA Process
Over a period of six years beginning in 2012, a group of tribes formerly resident in the lower Great Lakes region, but removed to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    238
Oklahoma Indian Territory in the 1800s, engaged in NAGPRA consultations and negotiations with an institution in Indiana. The
lengthy process was ultimately successful, from the authors’ perspective, when it concluded in a manner satisfactory to the tribes in
late 2018. However, the multiyear interaction was often rancorous, redolent with mistrust, and fraught with technical disagreements.
Indeed, the project was heavily freighted with lessons hard learned regarding the potential impacts on successful repatriation of
competing tribal and institutional goals and disparate interpretations of archaeological contexts and related information. Ultimately,
the experience was instrumental in teaching us how to better navigate a culturally foreign process. Moreover, it not only has taught
us how to improve our approach to NAGPRA matters, it has given us valuable insights on how to help institutions with whom we
consult understand both our specific information needs and our traditionally nuanced perspectives.
Hawkins, Rebecca
[70]
Discussant
Hawkins, Rebecca
[154]
Discussant
Hawkins, Rebecca [49] see Thomas, Jayne-Leigh
Haws, Jonathan (University of Louisville), Nuno Bicho (ICArEHB, Universidade do Algarve), João Cascalheira (ICArEHB,
Universidade do Algarve), Mussa Raja (ICArEHB, Universidade do Algarve) and Milena Carvalho (ICArEHB, University of
New Mexico)
[11]
Stone Age Archaeology in the Lower Save River Valley, Southern Mozambique
The goal our project is to investigate the Stone Age archaeology of the coastal region of southern Mozambique. This region has
great potential to inform on early modern human behavior because it contains extensive and diverse Quaternary-aged deposits.
Despite its geographic proximity to well-known southern African hotspots of Stone Age archaeology, southern Mozambique
represents a major gap in our knowledge due to a lack of research in the region due to civil war and political instability in the late
twentieth century. In 2019, we conducted a reconnaissance survey of the lower Save River valley in the southern half of
Mozambique. This area had no previously documented sites, but we chose this valley because of the occurrence of exposed
Quaternary gravel and sand deposits along drainages leading into the Save River. The initial survey found that these deposits on
the north side of the valley contained abundant raw material in the gravels and that numerous lithic scatters exist that can be dated
on technological grounds to the Middle and Later Stone Age. Testing at one locality, Zimuara 1, confirmed the presence of stratified
deposits in a paleosol exposed in a quarry. Here, we report the preliminary results of our survey.
Haws, Jonathan [250] see Bicho, Nuno
Haws, Jonathan [36] see Carvalho, Milena
Haws, Jonathan [36] see Ellis, Grace
Hayashida, Frances [224] see Murphy, Beau
Hayes, Vivienne (University of Pittsburgh), Colin Quinn (Hamilton College), Jess Beck (McDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research) and Horia Ciugudean (Muzeul National al Unirii, Alba Iulia)
[35]
Place as Identity: A Diachronic Analysis of People and Mountain Landscapes in the Romanian Bronze Age
People and their environment are inextricably linked. By using and manipulating landscapes, people actively construct place and
identity. As a result, archaeologists can analyze landscapes to better understand the dynamics of identity. With this poster, we
present mortuary archaeology and geophysical survey data to discuss changing identities and practices in Bronze Age
Transylvania. The Apuseni Mountains in Transylvania, Romania have provided archaeologists critical information regarding
migration and social complexity during the Bronze Age. Rich metal deposits contributed to an expansion of trade and led to marked
changes in social practices over time. Yet, there is still much we do not know about how and why these peoples shaped this
mountainous environment. Our methods allow us to compare distinctive alterations of these landscapes over several distinct periods
of human activity. This approach allows for a greater understanding of interaction among the communities that inhabited
mountainous landscapes in the past while suggesting new modes of considering place as identity.
Hayeur Smith, Michele (Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology)
[50]
Invisible Women in a World of Men: The Textile Trade in the North Atlantic AD 1000–1600
Waterlogged or deeply buried deposits from medieval harbors in certain northern European towns have produced large and well-
preserved textile assemblages that contain a surprising number of non-indigenous textiles. Some of these appear to have originated
in the North Atlantic Islands (Iceland, the Faroes, the Hebrides, Shetland, and perhaps Greenland) while others may have been
moving from continental Europe to those islands. How did these textiles get there? How were they traded? And how did textiles
often labelled as “Wadmol” in medieval documents, and known as vaðmál in the North Atlantic islands fit within, and flow through,
international trade markets linking the North Atlantic with Northern Europe? With the help of strontium isotope analyses conducted
through Brown University’s Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences to source the textiles, we have been exploring the
roles of women in North Atlantic societies and their involvement in both international textile trade networks and production to meet
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    239
their own local needs on their farms in the distant islands of the North Atlantic.
[50]
Chair
Hayeur Smith, Michele [50] see Bielenberg, Aliosha
Hayflick, Emily (Bard Graduate Center)
[218]
Discussant
Hayhurst, Paige [5] see Lazik, Lauren
Hays-Gilpin, Kelley (Northern Arizona Univ)
[99]
Discussant
Hays-Gilpin, Kelley (Northern Arizona Univ)
[111]
The Peculiar and Multifaceted State of Rock Art Site Management in the Western United States
Public lands are under attack in the western United States now more than ever. This presentation reviews a few areas where
international collaboration to promote rock art preservation and management should prove fruitful, and reviews the peculiar
background of heritage resource management in the United States as it pertains to rock art sites and landscapes.
Hays-Gilpin, Kelley [2] see Webster, Laurie
Hayward, Michele (Panamerican Consultants), Jonathan Hanna (Pennsylvania State University), Donald Smith
(Panamerican Consultants Inc.), Michael Jessamy (Cultural Heritage Officer Grenada) and Michael Cinquino (Panamerican
Consultants Inc.)
[60]
Rock Art Distribution in the Windwards: A GIS Perspective
Rock art locations in the Caribbean are well known, involving caves, waterways, coasts, inland rock formations, and ceremonial
enclosures. Mythological (caves as center of origin and fertility) and practical considerations (guardians of freshwater sources) have
been offered as general explanations for their settings. GIS procedures offer an opportunity to explore in greater detail particular site
locations, in addition to suggesting possible reasons for the observed site distributions. Our exploration of rock art settings in the
Windward Islands will involve comparing petroglyph rock art distributions and those with workstones (boulders with cupules and/or
sharpening lines) to non-rock art distributions employing such environmental factors as distance from fresh water sources, elevation,
and astronomical positioning, and such rock art attributes as element number and images types.
He, Yahui (Stanford University)
[45]
Food Processing Technologies in Early Neolithic Northern Zone, China: Preliminary Study on Microbotanical Residues at the Sites
of Yumin and Simagou
Situated in an ecologically sensitive and fluctuated area, the so-called Northern Zone, today’s south-central Inner Mongolia along
the Yin Mountains, has long been considered as the frontier of Chinese civilization where grassland and agricultural land intertwine,
entailing the diversity of subsistence strategies as well as sociocultural landscapes, en route to regional societal complexity.
Moreover, this region lies at an intersection of cultural interactions, not only connected to the Eurasia steppe farther north and west,
but also to the Yinshan Mountains eastwards and westwards, and even the Loess Plateau to the south. This study is targeted to
explore possible food processing technology in the boundaries across south-central and Inner Mongolia in China during the early
Neolithic period. The early Neolithic cultures in Northern Zone are characterized with the sites of Yumin and Simagou, both located
in Huade County, Inner Mongolia. The results from residue study indicate that different types of tubers, Panicodieae, and Triticeae
were the main plants consumed by people during this time period. By revealing microbotanical residues from the artifacts, mainly
stone tools at the two sites, this study will facilitate to investigate local foodways, subsistence strategy and human-environment
relationship in this region during the early Neolithic period.
Headrick, Annabeth (University of Denver)
[166]
Ice and the Sun: The Aztec Calendar Stone and Its Origins
While many scholars have suggested that the Aztec sacrificed individuals on the Calendar Stone, this paper will not only explore this
aspect but also the object’s affiliation with another form of sacrifice, auto-sacrifice. Using ethnohistoric records, connections between
the imagery of the stone and acts of human sacrifice will expand upon why this imagery was deemed appropriate for this ritual act.
Furthermore, an argument will be made that the iconography of the monument crystalizes ritual acts, actually recording in stone
ephemeral sacrificial events and thereby making the transient permanent. When addressing evidence for the autosacrificial
symbolism of the monument, the paper will identify iconographic precedents for the imagery on the Calendar Stone, specifically
imagery from Palenque and Chichen Itza. Through an exploration of the origins of the monument’s imagery, a clear case may be
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   240
made that not only was autosacrifice intrinsic to the Calendar Stone, but also the intimate relationship between rulers and solar-
related sacrifice was part of the intended symbolism. In sum, by identifying both related but distinct forms of sacrifice within the
imagery, a strong case can be made that royal prerogative intrinsically shaped sacrificial acts of all types.
Heard-Booth, Amber (Michigan State University College of Human Medicine)
[153]
Discussant
Heart, Heather [56] see Harle, Michaelyn
Heath-Stout, Laura (Rice University)
[1]
Pulled In or Pushed Out? Diversity, Discrimination, and the Recruitment of the Next Generation of Archaeologists
In this Presidential Forum, we are exploring how and why archaeology remains dominated by white, straight, cisgender people, and
(in positions of power) men. One piece of this puzzle is recruitment of archaeologists, which tends to take place in field schools and
academic departments. How do these programs reproduce homogeneity in our discipline? In order to address this question, I use
data from my qualitative study of diversity and oppression in archaeology, in which I conducted in-depth interviews with a diverse
sample of 72 archaeologists working in Mediterranean, Mesoamerican, and/or historical archaeology and in U.S. higher education
contexts. I demonstrate that my interviewees were pulled into or pushed out of academic and research opportunities on the basis of
not only their interests and merit, but also their social identities. I show that marginalized archaeologists (e.g., women, people of
color, queer people) must navigate career paths not only following our interests, but also seeking accessible and welcoming
opportunities and safety from discrimination and harassment. This process creates an extra cognitive burden for us to bear, making
it difficult for us to succeed in the discipline. These conditions limit the diversity of our field.
Heath-Stout, Laura (Rice University)
[72]
Chair
Heath-Stout, Laura (Rice University)
[91]
Discussant
Heath-Stout, Laura [72] see Jalbert, Catherine
Hebda, Christopher (University of Victoria)
[195]
Navigating Deep Water: Multidisciplinary Archaeology in British Columbia and the Late Pleistocene Peopling of the Americas along
the Pacific Coast
Recent research has raised many questions about alternatives to the Clovis-first paradigm of the peopling of the Americas: What
does a coastal migration of early peoples into North America look like? When did they arrive? Was their passage blocked by ice?
Were there plants and animals on the late Pleistocene landscape to sustain them? This study draws on archaeology, geology,
palynology, ethnobotany, and genetics to demonstrate the presence and significance of vegetated terrestrial environments during
the late Wisconsin Fraser Glaciation extending to nearly 18,000 cal BP on the outer coast of northern Vancouver Island, British
Columbia, Canada. During this time, the outer coast was dominated by herb tundra but remained vegetated. We also demonstrate
arboreal environments in the mountains of central Vancouver Island extending to nearly 14,500 cal BP, proximal to early period
archaeological deposits. However, this study is only one small piece of an ongoing dialogue that would be impossible without the
intellectual and physical effort of generations of Indigenous knowledge holders, archaeologists, and other scientists. Extending
beyond traditional archaeological investigation, these multidisciplinary projects—past, present, and future—are fundamental to
understanding the deep history of the plants, animals, and people of the northwest coast of North America.
Hechler, Ryan (Tulane University)
[201]
Where’s the Lived Reality? Investigating Non-Monumental Spaces at the Monumental Site of Cochasquí, Ecuador
Archaeological research of the Integration Period of the northern highlands of Ecuador has long focused on monumental pyramids,
burial mounds, and shaft tombs. While non-monumental and non-mortuary spaces have been investigated in exceptionally limited
cases, no residential nor activity space has yet to be conclusively determined. In 1964, Udo Oberem investigated an area of the
monumental site of Cochasquí simply known as the “Pueblo”—although, his own research did not prove the presence of an actual
village but instead found a complicated context that was never properly analyzed. To better understand the non-monumental
landscape, excavations were continued at Oberem’s own Pueblo and remote sensing—ground-penetrating radar and gradiometer—
were implemented in other areas of the site. Quickly, it is becoming clear that Cochasquí has much more than pyramids and burial
mounds to define the site.
[201]
Chair
Hechler, Ryan [201] see Chavez-Chuquimarca, Andrea
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 241
Hechler, Ryan [201] see Ward, Maxwell
Heckel, Claire (University of North Carolina, Greensboro)
[259]
Material Culture in the Archives: Examples from the Digital Library on American Slavery
The Digital Library on American Slavery is an expanding digital collection of historical documents related to slavery in the United
States. Approached with attention to material culture, these documents offer insights into the economic lives and material practices
of enslaved persons that can complement archaeological assemblages and inform their interpretation. This paper draws on
examples from the Race and Slavery Petitions Project, the Runaway Slave Advertisements Project, and the People Not Property
Project to highlight some of the ways in which material culture is documented in digital archives and how these archives might
enrich practices in archaeology, cultural heritage management, and public history. Particular attention is given to: how freedom-
seekers provisioned themselves for escape, the material culture of maroon communities and slave insurrections, the independent
economic activities of enslaved persons, and objects of trade as vessels for the dissemination of subversive literature and
contraband materials.
[259]
Chair
Heckenberger, Michael (University of Florida)
[161]
An Archaeology of Hope: How the Past Informs Indigenous Futures in the Southern Amazon’s “Arc of Deforestation”
Two decades of relentless agropastoral development has reduced closed tropical forests across northern Mato Grosso to small
patches. Within the so-called arc of deforestation along the southern margins of the Amazon basin’s tropical forests, larger blocks
are primarily restricted to indigenous areas, although these areas are also acutely threatened by public health and environmental
problems related to agropastoral development, such as regional desiccation, water pollution and fire susceptibility, and changes in
diet and health. Many commentators believe technological innovation or political change will curb the destruction, or not, but
archaeology suggests that the past may also offer important clues to managing contemporary change. In the Upper Xingu region,
over two decades of ethno-linguistic and archaeological documentation have revealed large, densely settled precolumbian
populations in the centuries before first European contacts in South America. These societies developed sophisticated systems of
land management to support a regional society of 50,000 or more, reduced to 500 people in the mid-twentieth century. Here current
problems are considered against this backdrop of deep indigenous history to show how ancestral practices provide “home-grown”
solutions to current risks, such as soy, fire and diabetes, through robust partnerships with indigenous populations across the Xingu
drainage basin.
[161]
Chair
Heckman, Jasmine [132] see Joseph, J.
Heckman, Jasmine [187] see Mundt, Jessica
Hedlund, Jonathan [6] see Gilmore, Kevin
Hedman, Kristin [233] see Simon, Mary
Heep, Nathan, John Stauffer (Washington University, St Louis), Jesse Nowak (University of Oklahoma), Matthew Colvin
(University of Georgia) and Johann Sawyer (University of Southern Carolina)
[166]
Dr. F. Kent Reilly III: Pioneer of Emic Approaches to Native American Religions and Art
This paper highlights the changing perspectives of Dr. F. Kent Reilly during his early career and the creation of the annual
Mississippian Iconography Workshop at Texas State University, where emphases on professional collaboration, student mentorship,
and engagement with Native American communities have been flagship products of over two decades of research. The annual
iconography workshop was established using the framework employed by the famous Maya Meetings founded by Reilly’s mentor,
Linda Schele, whose legacy has provided innumerable resources to students, academics, and Native American communities alike.
Throughout its existence, scholars have collaborated on approaches that still seek to demystify Native American religious and
political perspectives. In particular, the landmark publications produced from these efforts have emphasized topics drawing from
ethnohistory, iconography, and archaeology to address topics of social stratification, cosmology, and mnemonics. As with the initial
formulations of the workshop, these research agendas have established an invaluable bridge between Mesoamerican and North
American scholarship, resulting in the distinction and comparison of past social conditions among Pre-Columbian cultures in the
Americas.
Hegmon, Michelle (Arizona State University) and Sarah Striker (Arizona State University)
[98]
Stylistic Variation in Prehistoric Ceramics: Mimbres Geometric Designs
Mimbres black-on-white pottery, from southwestern New Mexico, is renowned for its naturalistic designs, which have been the
subject of numerous analyses focusing on the content and meaning of the depictions. Geometric designs, however, are more
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     242
common on Mimbres pottery, comprising about 65% of the corpus. In this paper, we focus on these mostly neglected vessels with
geometric designs dating to the Mimbres Classic period (ca. 1000–1130 AD). A previous study found that naturalistic motifs were
distributed homogeneously across sites in the Mimbres Valley, and these results were interpreted as indicative of a common set of
materially symbolized beliefs. Our paper asks if the same homogeneity is seen in the geometric designs. The analyses use methods
and theory developed in Stephen Plog’s early work on stylistic variation, including a hierarchical system for coding design attributes
and attention to several sources of variation. The data are drawn from MimPIDD—the Mimbres Pottery Images Digital Database—
which points to the importance of online databases including the Chaco Research Archive, developed by Plog.
Heidkamp, Blair (University of Texas), Yorke Rowan (Oriental Institute, University of Chicago), Alexander Wasse (Yeditepe
University) and Gary Rollefson (Whitman College)
[125]
There and Back Again: Ground Stone Evidence of Seasonality at Structure W80, Wisad Pools, Jordan
One of the study areas for the Eastern Badia Archaeological Project is Wisad Pools, located in the Black Desert of the panhandle of
eastern Jordan. The Pools, which fill with the annual rains, are surrounded by hundreds of stone-built structures, presumably from
the Late Neolithic. Excavations of one structure, W80, revealed complex stratigraphy with occupational deposits spanning at least
1000 years. Throughout the intermittent periods of use, a pattern became apparent in which most hand stones were deposited up
against the interior walls of the structure. The particular positioning of these tools implies that the placement was in fact intentional,
possibly while the structure was occupied and during periods of abandonment. Previous interpretations of the area have argued that
the structures at Wisad Pools were occupied seasonally to take advantage of gazelle herd migrations (Rollefson et al. 2014, 2018;
Rowan et al. 2017). Securing the handstone and pestle’s position indicates an intent to return to the same region and the same
structures again. By investigating the spatial distribution of the various ground stone tools found at W80 we hope to gain further
insight on the cyclical process of humans interacting with the region.
Heilen, Michael (Statistical Research, Inc)
[89]
Discussant
Hein, Anno [196] see Kilikoglou, Vassilis
Heitman, Carrie (University of Nebraska, Lincoln) and Worthy Martin (University of Virginia)
[98]
The Chaco Research Archive: Research Impacts and Future Prospects
Dr. Stephen Plog had the foresight to envision the Chaco Research Archive back in 2001. Under his leadership, this resource
(chacoarchive.org) ushered in a new era of research on Chaco Canyon which has reverberated far beyond the academy. In this
paper, I reflect on the process and products of its creation, its academic impact, and Dr. Plog’s legacy.
[98]
Chair
Helmer, Emily (Washington State University)
[177]
Social Organization of a Late Holocene Village in Southern Oregon
Artifact distribution analysis has been used across the Northwest Coast as an effective tool to understand and define activity areas
and social organization. However, it has been underutilized in the southernmost portion of this culture area. This study analyzes
35JA100, a Late Holocene village in southern Oregon excavated in 1982. The ethnographic record of the region indicates that
households within a village operated largely independently and were arranged into “sweathouse groups,” wherein related men
cohabitated in a sweathouse while women and children lived in their own nearby houses. In order to investigate the antiquity of this
social organization, data initially derived from an extensive CRM recovery project is used to reconstruct the activities occurring in
houses at 35JA100. The results demonstrate an apparent lack of specialization between houses, apart from a single structure with
unique features and a higher frequency of artifacts associated with men’s labor and ceremonial activities. This distribution suggests
that the existence of both household autonomy and special-use structures associated with men were in place prior to contact.
Helmke, Christophe (University of Copenhagen) and Sergei Vepretskii (Russian State University for the Humanities)
[223]
An Account of the Kings of Kanu’l as Recorded on the Hieroglyphic Stair of K’an II of Caracol
Many queries remain concerning the hieroglyphic stair dedicated in AD 642 by K’an II, the great king of Caracol. The recently
discovered panels discovered at Xunantunich contribute greatly to our understanding of this fascinating monument and the
tumultuous decades of the Kanu’l dynasty. Thanks to recent discoveries, many gaps have now been closed, with Panels 3 and 4
standing as substantive bookends of this great narrative. These monuments bear witness to the fissioning of the Kanu’l dynasty and
its eventual re-establishment at Calakmul, whence it would go on to control much of Classic Maya politics for the remainder of the
seventh century. Here we built on earlier studies and add recent observations made through renewed examination of the extant
panels.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    243
Helskog, Knut (Professor emeritus)
[111]
Discussant
Hemmings, C. (Aucilla Research Institute)
[238]
Clovis and Pre-Clovis People in Florida: So What Did They Do Once They Got Here?
The upland portion of Florida’s Pleistocene Paleolandscape includes a number of recently dated inundated artifact-rich Clovis and
sparser pre-Clovis archaeological sites that contain a wealth of biological information from plant, animal, and micro-organism
remains. Human interaction and adaptation to the Pleistocene world around them is stressed for the information we can learn about
both that exotic stage, and the players acting upon it, rather than simply pushing back the initial date of when people arrived.
Patterns in subsistence practices, technological organization, and paleobiogeography are examined. As last occurrence dates for
numerous taxa continue to be dated to the extreme Terminal Pleistocene it is clear there are at least 2,000 years, and arguable
thousands more, of human overlap with the now extinct or extirpated species of plants and animals in North and South America.
The rarely considered possibility of taboo avoidance of some species is presented as a possible explanation for notable absences at
sites with well preserved organics and bone.
Henderson, A. Gwynn (Kentucky Archaeological Survey)
[43]
Discussant
Henderson, A. Gwynn [129] see Manzano, Bruce
Henderson, A. Gwynn [190] see Pollack, David
Henderson, Lucia
[127]
Chair
Henderson, Lucia
[157]
Fire and Water: Continuities and Contrasts in the Art of Volcanic Regions
In ancient Mesoamerica, scholars have been able to trace certain deities across enormous spans of time and geography, identifying
various consistent, pan-Mesoamerican iconographic tropes. At times, however, this focus on continuity has overshadowed important
disjunctions in belief systems and behaviors, particularly those that appear to have arisen in response to specific regional environments.
This paper examines the iconography of populations living in volcanic landscapes across Mesoamerica, from central Mexico to El
Salvador, to enrich and complicate ideas of religious and iconographic continuity. Using the repeated trope of intertwined fire and water
symbolism as an entry point, it examines the ways in which particular, widely-shared iconographies were modified to suit regionally
specific needs. Although symbolism related to the duality of fire and water was shared with enormous consistency across Mesoamerica,
it finds unique expression in the art of volcanic landscapes. This iconography demonstrates the ways in which distant populations were
connected by the shared experience of living in singularly volatile landscapes and how this shared experience differentiated their
worldview (and the artistic expression of that worldview) from that of populations living in less violent geographies.
Henderson, Lucia [127] see Woodfill, Brent
Hendrickson, Mitch (University of Illinois, Chicago), Stéphanie Leroy (LAPA-IRAMAT, NIMBE, CNRS, CEA), Enrique Vega
(LAPA-IRAMAT, NIMBE, CNRS, CEA), Kaseka Phon (Royal Academy of Cambodia) and Quan Hua (Australian Nuclear
Science and Technology Organisa)
[28]
Iron Scales: Reconstructing the History and Organization of Angkorian Iron Smelting around Phnom Dek, Cambodia (Ninth to
Fifteenth Centuries CE)
The Phnom Dek, or “‘Iron Mountain,” in central Cambodia is the center of the largest iron production region in mainland Southeast
Asia. Spanning over 1,400 years of metallurgical activity, the most intensive evidence of smelting corresponds with the
expansionary phases of the Angkorian Khmer Empire (eleventh to thirteenth centuries). Integrated, multiscalar analysis of object,
slag mound, site, and landscape using GIS and archaeometallurgical approaches provides new insights into the social organization
of smelting communities, the rituals of production, and identity of ironworkers around Phnom Dek.
Hendrix, Jess
[96]
Discussant
Henebry-DeLeon, Lourdes (Central Washington University) and Angela Neller (Wanpum Heritage Center, Grant County
PUD)
[49]
At the Table Together: Including Tribes in the Lab from Inventory to Cultural Affiliation
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   244
Cultural affiliation would not be possible without the connections between tribes, museums, and federal agencies. Reliance on each
other contributes to a higher standard for a reciprocal and mutual community of practice. By bringing tribes to the table in the lab
from inventory to cultural affiliation we advance methods and strategies to accomplish the requirements and intentions of
repatriation. Central Washington University and the Columbia Plateau tribes working relationship has led to a joint project that brings
data recovered into a large dataset that supports pro-active cultural affiliation on the Plateau. Putting this data within a regional
contextual history allows us to identify individual ancestors and their relationships to present day tribes.
Henebry-DeLeon, Lourdes [49] see Neller, Angela
Heng, Piphal [168] see Stark, Miriam
Henkin, Joshua (Field Museum of Natural History)
[258]
Finding and Binding Your Dream Team for Characterizing Plant Exudates: Molle and Other Adventures in Residue Analysis
Everyone knows that interdisciplinary collaboration is the name of the game when it comes to characterizing plant exudates and
other archaeological residues. But how do we push the ball forward and become confident that we are producing new insights into
material culture from our work in fact rather than engaging in the empty rhetoric of an institutional marketing team? It is possible
now, much as has always been the case, to assemble and value teams of people that span the disciplines of analytical chemistry,
botany and ethnobotany, archaeology/anthropology, history, and conservation science. More than ever before though, recent
innovations in handheld and portable analytical instruments as well as minimally destructive and invasive technologies will permit
these collaborations to initiate pilot projects, see meaningful results, and solidify team efforts into long-term materially based
research programs focused on plant exudates in cultural heritage objects. One should not forget that this is field and collection-
based research, and new tools alone only allow for the possibility of more ideal leverage points with properly trained individuals.
There is no substituting hands-on experience with material culture, plants, and people. My studies with Schinus molle L. (source of
aguaribay resin) and other anecdotes will serve as illustration!
Henry, Aureade (CNRS, University Cote d’Azur), Kelly Graf (Center for the Study of the First Americans, Texas) and Julie
Esdale (Colorado State University)
[81]
New Archaeobotanical Data from the Late Pleistocene Occupations of McDonald Creek (Interior Alaska)
What can archaeobotany tell us about past landscapes and human behavior at McDonald Creek during the Late Pleistocene? Since
2016, systematic charcoal and phytolith sampling has been performed at McDonald Creek with the following aims: (1) reconstruct
the ligneous vegetation and investigate firewood management practice and (2) test the potential of phytolith analysis to provide not
only paleoenvironmental but also paleoeconomic data. The results obtained so far on charcoal and phytolith assemblages from
component 1 (Bölling/Alleröd interstadial, just after 14,000 ky BP) and 2 (Younger Dryas, around 12,600 ky BP) indicate that the
occupations took place within a similar shrub-tundra landscape, while pronounced taxonomic choices operated in favor of willow
(Salix spp.) for fuel. The phytolith morphotypes identified at McDonald Creek are coherent with the ones found in similar
environments. However, some assemblages are characterized by abnormally high proportions of “platelet” and “jigsaw puzzle”
morphotypes, indicating a deliberate input of angiosperm leaf material, which could have taken place only during the summer,
maybe in order to fulfil specific hearth functions. Thus, our results have important environmental, seasonal, and behavioral
implications that are discussed in this poster in light of current archaeological and ethnoarchaeological data.
Henry, Edward [48] see Frachetti, Michael
Hepp, Guy [189] see Joyce, Arthur
Herbster, Holly [63] see Elquist, Ora
Herlich, Jessica (Unity College)
[251]
Taskscapes and Social Sustainability: Archaeobotanical and Ethnohistorical Interpretations from the Chesapeake
The “taskscape,” or a landscape comprised of actions and labor (Ingold 1993, 2000), provides a means for assessing the change
and continuity of a place over time. Through the study of plant remains (including macrobotanical remains, phytolith residues, and
starch grains), taskscapes from the Late Archaic through the Early Colonial era are evaluated in Tidewater Virginia and the
Chesapeake. The archaeobotanical data are informed by both the broader archaeological record as well as regional ethnohistories
to interpret how these taskscapes might connect with the activities of men, women, and children. This paper seeks to bridge the
divide between the pre-Colonial and post-Colonial pasts through the lens of a sustainable society (environment, economics, and
social [Brundtland Report 1987; SD2015]). In addition to environmental and economic sustainability, social sustainability likely
played an important role in the formation of persistent places, or places returned to over many years of time (Schlanger 1992), in
Tidewater Virginia. By considering human relationships within taskscapes, this paper explores social sustainability through activities
and tasks associated with the archaeological record.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    245
Hermann, Aymeric (Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History) and Robert Forkel (Max Planck Institute)
[262]
The Making of Pofatu, a Curated and Open-Access Database for Geochemical Sourcing of Archaeological Materials
Geochemical fingerprinting artifacts and sources has proven to be the most effective way to use material evidence in order to
reconstruct raw material procurement practices, intra- and inter-community interactions, and mobility patterns among past societies.
The popularity of geochemical sourcing has led to a large number of projects using various analytical techniques to produce
independent datasets. In order to facilitate access to this growing body of data and to promote comparability and reproducibility in
provenance studies, we designed Pofatu, the first online and open-access database presenting geochemical compositions for
archaeological sources and artifacts in a form that can be readily accessed by the scientific community. This relational database
currently houses more than 4000 individual samples from the Pacific Islands, which are comprehensively documented for
multidimensional related information, including geochemical compositions, archaeological provenance, and supporting analytical
metadata such as sampling process, analytical procedure, and quality control. In this paper, we will present the challenges of
collecting both the archaeological and methodological metadata associated with compositional datasets. We will then provide a
description of the database content and architecture and will show how to access it via an open access web application.
Hermes, Bernard [128] see Zralka, Jaroslaw
Hernandez, Christine (Tulane University)
[138]
The Role of History, Ancestry, and Alliance in the Place of Noxtepec, Guerrero, Mexico
In the special collections of the Latin American Library at Tulane University is a tracing made by William Spratling of a lienzo map
centered upon the town of Noxtepec, Guerrero. Painted by a native tlacuilo around the end of the sixteenth century, this little-known
piece exemplifies the carto-historic genre of native map-making that became a popular means by which native towns in New Spain
could document their communal history and the ancestry of their leaders in order to keep control of the lands and properties. In this
paper, I highlight those aspects of the Lienzo de Noxtepec that speak of a town history that reaches back into the prehispanic
period. Exploits like a defeat of the Aztecs, acceptance of Christianity, and fealty to Spanish authority, I contend, helped to enhance
the town’s standing among its neighbors in an ethnically diverse and dynamic province of the former Aztec empire. Native
communities in the Puebla-Tlaxcala region used a similar strategy in later pictorial documents like the Lienzo de Tlaxcala created
and encoded with a history of alliance with Cortés and conversion to Catholicism to support claims by native elites to land,
privileges, and tribute promised to allies of the Spanish conquistadors.
Hernandez, Christopher (University of Illinois, Chicago)
[265]
The Practice of Maya Warfare: Theoretical and Methodological Implications
Although studies of warfare are now common in Maya archaeology, much remains to be learned about strategy, tactics, operations,
and a myriad of other practical factors in the process of making war. An emphasis on the concrete and practical side of war is
necessary to both acknowledge agency and understand how conflict relates to the human experience. As numerous case studies
from Eurasia highlight, human actions in the process of making war can have profound impacts on political economy, landscape,
and culture. Through an examination of ethnohistoric, iconographic, and archaeological data, I elaborate on practices of Maya
fortification construction and how the creation of a martial landscape ties into relations of power during the Late Postclassic/Early
Spanish Colonial Period (AD 1200–1600). During this period, in the region of Mensabak, Chiapas, Mexico, Maya peoples fortified a
peninsula according to principles of defense-in-depth. In other words, they created layers of fortification to slow and stall an attack.
My settlement pattern analysis reveals how the creation of a martial landscape shaped local culture by perpetuating social
inequality.
[265]
Chair
Hernandez, Emely [14] see Krause, Samantha
Hernández, Enrique (Mirador Basin Project, FARES), Richard Hansen (FARES, University of Utah), Carlos Morales
(Université Paris 1 Pantheon-Sorbonne, FARES) and Francisco López (Mirador Basin Project, FARES)
[163]
Resultados de las exploraciones y sondeos en el complejo henequen del sitio Tintal, Guatemala
El sitio arqueológico Tintal ha sido considerado un asentamiento de primer rango ya que alcanzó una monumentalidad y
complejidad urbanística que incluye pirámides, palacios tipo acrópolis, plazas, plataformas, calzadas y aguadas dentro del sitio. Las
investigaciones presentadas en está ponencia se focalizaron en el reconocimiento topográfico y en excavaciones preliminares en la
Pirámide Henequén, Calzada Jade y Calzada Tintal-Mirador y en otras áreas del Complejo Henequén. Los datos obtenidos de los
materiales cerámicos sugieren que los rasgos investigados fueron originalmente edificados y utilizados durante el Preclásico Tardío
(400 aC al 150 dC). Además, muestran una interesante reocupación del Complejo Henequén durante el Clásico Tardío (550 al 800
dC) que se extiende hasta el Clásico Terminal (800 al 900 dC) solamente. En resumen, los resultados obtenidos permiten obtener
una visión preliminar de los periodos de ocupación de este complejo, y del sitio. La prospección arqueológica en los sitios de los
alrededores permite tener una aproximación más amplia sobre el alcance que pudo haber tenido Tintal con sus vecinos más
cercanos, la calzada Tintal-Mirador sugiere alguna relación con El Mirador otro centro de poder de primer rango localizado al
noreste a unos 25 km de distancia
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  246
Hernández, Enrique [163] see Paine, Richard
Hernández Espinoza, Patricia Olga (Centro INAH Sonora)
[144]
Identities and Social Roles: The Main Characters of La Casa del Linaje del Armadillo, Tamtoc, San Luis Potosí
Burials recovered from Structure F7, in Tamtoc, SLP, present a funerary pattern different from those located in other parts of the
site. Offerings and associated objects suggest that residents of Structure F7 belong to a different social stratum, loaded with ritual
significance. They may be part of one of the ruling lineages of this site. The analysis of this funerary context postulates a hypothesis
that the interred may have been part of one of the ruling lineages of this site.
[144]
Chair
Hernandez Godoy, Silvia [173] see Naegele, Kathrin
Hernández Sariñana, Daniela (Boston University)
[150]
Domestic Life and Ceramic Consumption in Tlajinga, Teotihuacan
Tlajinga is the southernmost district of Teotihuacan, a cosmopolite city that thrived in Central Mexico during the Classic Period.
Previous research done in this neighborhood includes surface collection associated with the Teotihuacan Mapping Project and the
excavation of one compound, designated 33:S3W1 during the ‘70s. Recent investigations carried out by the Proyecto Arqueológico
Tlajinga Teotihuacan (PATT) have yielded new data concerning the ceramic chronology and domestic lifeways in apartment
compounds. Two compounds (17:S3E1 and 18:S3E1) were explored beginning 2012 and two platforms that formed part of a barrio
center were excavated in 2019. The analysis of ceramics at a household level provides different social insights into provenience,
trade and exchange networks, technological changes, consumption patterns, and larger-scale sociocultural preferences. The results
from a previous evaluation supported with radiocarbon dates were successful in giving chronologic information about the occupation
in Tlajinga. The empirical and archaeometric components of this analysis thus focus on the changes that the ceramic traditions
underwent to understand their role in their sociocultural context.
Hernández Sariñana, Daniela [150] see Carballo, David
Hernbrode, Janine [25] see Boyle, Peter
Herr, Sarah (Desert Archaeology Inc.) and Susan Stinson
[1]
Achieving Safe Workplaces in Cultural Resources Management
In this paper we will take a three-part approach to examining and achieving safe workspaces in cultural resource management
(CRM), considering demography, reports of harassment and assault in the workplace, and solutions. First, we will provide a
snapshot of the participation of women and men in private and public sectors CRM jobs. Second, we will look at who is reporting
harassment and try to get a sense of the scale of the problem. Finally, we will discuss solutions, including achieving equity in the
workplace, attention to corporate culture, and broadening responsibility for reporting and resolution. We will draw from new and
existing datasets and reports, including those of the Society for American Archaeology, the Society for California Archaeology, the
Southeast Archaeological Conference, and the American Cultural Resources Association.
Herr, Sarah (Desert Archaeology Inc.), Lynn Gamble (University of California, Santa Barbara), Maria Gutiérrez (UNICEN,
Argentina), Geoffrey Braswell ( University of California, San Diego) and Hugh Radde (University of California, Santa
Barbara)
[72]
Assessing Diversity in the Society for American Archaeology Journals
The three peer-reviewed journals of the Society for American Archaeology, American Antiquity, Latin American Antiquity, and
Advances in Archaeological Practice are available to all members of the SAA electronically, but have different readerships, distinct
submission bases, and individual cultures of practice and production. The editors share a desire to increase diversity and achieve
equity along a variety of different axes. In this presentation, we share data—as available—about gender and geographic diversity in
submission rates, publication rates, peer review, and readership. As we consider what is behind these trends and comment on our
successes, attempts, and failures, we ask for a broader study of equity in archaeological practice and publication so that our
journals, in the future, will better reflect the membership of the Society and the global archaeological community.
Herr, Sarah (Desert Archaeology, Inc.)
[154]
Discussant
Herrera, Eric [119] see Gaylord, Donald
Herrera-Santos, Yoanna [133] see Elliott, Michelle
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      247
Herrera-Schneider, Alexandra [238] see Evans, Amanda
Herrmann, Nicholas [35] see Cook, Jacob
Herrmann, Edward [198] see Cory, Mackenzie
Herrmann, Edward [232] see Flood, John
Herrmann, Edward [175] see Friberg, Christina
Herrmann, Nicholas [215] see Rodriguez, Katherine
Herron, Molly (University of Wyoming), Todd Surovell (University of Wyoming) and Madeline Mackie (University of
Wyoming)
[270]
Identification of Fragmented Mammoth Ivory in Archaeological Sites Using SEM Microscopy
Although mammoth ivory appears distinctive from other organic materials when found in large pieces, many morphological
characteristics that distinguish ivory—such as Schreger lines—cannot be easily identified with small fragments. However, other
characteristics, including dental tubules and canals, can be microscopically identified. In this study I attempt to establish a
methodology for identifying sub-centimeter ivory fragments using a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). After blind testing this
method, I will then apply it to the fragmentary faunal remains from the La Prele Mammoth site, a Clovis mammoth kill/scavenge and
camp from Converse County, Wyoming. If fragmentary pieces of ivory are identified in multiple excavation blocks, this would
suggest that the Clovis occupants were sharing ivory across the site. The identification of sub-centimeter ivory has applications at
other archaeological sites with fragmentary faunal collections.
Herron, Molly [65] see Dersam, Sari
Hertfelder, Paula (Binghamton University), Alejandra Abrego (Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia) and Cinthia
Campos (Binghamton University)
[147]
Integrating UAV-based Photogrammetry, Digital Data Collection, and GIS during the Trincheras Tradition Project Excavations
The Trincheras Tradition Project is an ongoing collaborative effort to better understand the prehispanic past of Northwest Mexico.
Led by Dr. Randall McGuire and Elisa Villalpando, researchers from Binghamton University and the Instituto Nacional de
Antropología e Historia (INAH) spent two field seasons in 2017 and 2018 excavating three Trincheras Tradition sites in Sonora,
Mexico: El Póporo, San Martin, and La Potranca. This project involves the first intensive excavations of Trincheras sites dating
before 1200 AD. This poster documents how project researchers integrated an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), Filemaker, and
ArcMap to photograph and map features and artifacts during archaeological excavation. UAV photogrammetry provided aerial
imagery and a digital elevation model of each site. In addition, the UAV provided high quality images of features. All feature maps
were drawn digitally with tablets in the field and georeferenced into ArcMap. Other data from artifact, soil, and pollen analyses are
also designed to be joined with the project GIS. Integrating these technologies allowed for more streamlined data entry and
improved visualization of spatial information.
Herzner, Louis (University of Cincinnati), Kenneth Barnett Tankersley (University of Cincinnati), Dylan Zedaker (University
of Cincinnati), Maddie Moeller (University of Cincinnati) and Larry Sandman (University of Cincinnati)
[63]
Extracting Micro-meteorites and Micro-tektites from Archaeological Contexts
This poster describes a new standard protocol for extracting high-temperature cosmic airburst related magnetic spherules (i.e.,
micro-meteorites) and melt-glass (i.e., micro-tektites) from bulk archaeological sediments. Aliquots are first collected from well-
dated, stratified archaeological sites and labeled by depth and archaeological context. In the laboratory, the aliquots are weighed
and slurries are created by mixing the bulk sediment with water. The magnetic grain fraction is then extracted using rare earth
neodymium magnets enclosed in a removable plastic sleeve. Once magnetic samples have been extracted the plastic sleeve is
removed, separating the samples from the magnet. A deflocculant (hydrogen peroxide, H2O2) is used to wash the samples from the
plastic sleeve into a petri dish. A stir-bar is added to the petri dish to agitate the samples in the slurry and separate the cleaned
magnetic samples. The samples are then left to dry to be analyzed under the microscope. Additional sieving of the original slurry is
used to collect non-magnetic micro-meteorites and micro-tektites. Micro-meteorites and micro-tektites morphologies are identified
using light microscopy followed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive analysis of X-rays (EDAX) is used to
determine elemental composition.
Herzner, Louis [63] see Zedaker, Dylan
Herzog, Hunter (Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis) and Brooke Drew
[167]
Early Settlers of Central Indiana: The Historical Background of Decatur Township and the Bethel Cemetery
Before Bethel Cemetery (ca. 1827–1935) was excavated in the summer of 2018, it was understood that an important part of the
cemetery relocation project would be the construction of a historical narrative that would assist in contextualizing the lives of those
buried at the site. In the early-to-mid nineteenth century, central Indiana was part of the American frontier and a difficult place to live
with survival predicated on high resolve and an unmatched level of perseverance. This paper will investigate the lives of the earliest
settlers and provide a historical background for Decatur Township, Indiana, home to the Bethel Methodist Episcopal Church and
Cemetery. In addition to describing the growth of Decatur Township and the Bethel Church, we will also examine a few of the more
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    248
prominent citizens of the township, many of whom were interred at Bethel; this includes several veterans of the Indian Wars, War of
1812, and Civil War. The individuals described played major roles in the development and success of the community and provided
their fellow settlers with both spiritual and physical sanctuary.
Herzog, Nicole [235] see Louderback, Lisbeth
Hess, Erin
[256]
Public Outreach and Engagement as Mitigation
The mission of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ (Corps) Regulatory Program is to protect the Nation’s aquatic resources while
allowing reasonable development through fair and balanced permit decisions. The Corps works with consulting parties to develop
appropriate mitigation measures when adverse effects to historic properties cannot be avoided. Mitigation measures usually include
additional archival and archaeological research and other documentation, including measured drawings and large-format
photography, of historic properties. While the submittal of records to the Library of Congress through Historic American Engineering
Record, Historic American Building Survey, and Historic American Landscapes Survey documentation makes the records available
to the public, other archival and archaeological research is often relegated to “grey literature.” This presentation discusses the need
to include public outreach and engagement as a standard mitigation measure to accompany archival and archaeological research. It
also discusses approaches to sharing information to ensure that new research is incorporated into the literature and is made
available to the public and other researchers to ensure the context of future research is based on the most current information
available. Several methods for maintaining the availability of shared information once the initial outreach is conducted are discussed
to ensure continued learning and engagement.
[256]
Chair
Hester, Thomas (Emeritus) and Michael Glascock (University of Missouri)
[267]
Ongoing Studies of Obsidian from Texas Archeological Sites
The Texas Obsidian Project was initiated almost 50 years ago. Obsidian artifacts are rare in Texas sites, and since there are no
obsidian sources in the state, a continuing effort has been made to determine the geologic sources of each specimen. Techniques
used include XRF and NAA, working first with the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, and in recent years, with the
Archaeometry Laboratory, University of Missouri. Overall, most Texas obsidian has been linked to localities in the Jemez Mountains
of New Mexico and to the Malad (Wright Creek) source in Idaho. However, distant sources including several in central and western
Mexico, as well as a few artifacts from scattered locales in the western United States, have also been recognized. The Mexican
sources offer a promising line of research, greatly enhanced in the past decade. For example, obsidian artifacts have been found in
the Rio Grande Delta and southern parts of Texas, dating from Clovis times into the Historic era. Thus far, one principal route has
been defined for the movement of the Mexican material into Texas. Mexican sources in western Mexico, identified by Michael
Glascock, represent long-distance interactions that we cannot yet identify.
Hickey, Kristen [241] see Jones, Ashley
Hiep, Hoang Trinh [199] see Adams, Alisha
Higgins, Howard (TRC Environmental Corp.), Brenda Ireland (First Light Initiatives) and Sandra Marion (Tahltan First
Nation Central Government)
[97]
A View from the Bridge: The Role of Anthropological Consultation in the Twenty-First Century
Many indigenous groups that underwent colonialism and forced acculturation are in the process of repatriating their traditional
knowledge and culture, and reclaiming their unique identities, social structures, governance and legal structures. In Canada, this
process of self-determination is within the context of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples which the
Canadian government officially adopted in May 2016, and more generally under Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s
94 Calls to Action (December 2015). Such action is being undertaken by the Tahltan, a First Nation whose people live in
northwestern British Columbia. As a step toward reclaiming and repatriating Tahltan knowledge, they are reviewing the historical
record to identify what outsiders observed about Tahltan culture, values, social structure, and cultural practices. This effort is being
directed by Sandra Marion, Director of Culture and Heritage for the Tahltan Central Government; the Principal Consultant (the
“Bridge”) is Brenda Ireland. The paper presents the goals and methodology of this work, identifies problems found during its
promulgation, and concludes with recommendations for those involved in such efforts in the future.
Hildebrand, Elisabeth (Stony Brook University), Katherine Grillo (University of Florida), Anneke Janzen (University of
Tennessee, Knoxville), Elizabeth Sawchuk (Stony Brook University) and Susan Pfeiffer (University of Toronto)
[171]
Buffering New Risks? Social and Economic Changes around Lake Turkana, Kenya 5000–4000 BP
As the African Humid Period ended, rainfall in eastern Africa decreased and Lake Turkana shrank dramatically 5300–3900 BP.
Retreating shorelines and arid-adapted vegetation transformed local landscapes, and environments became less predictable.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    249
Economies shifted from food procurement (fishing/hunting aquatic resources) to food production (herding), likely through both in-
migration by pastoralists and adoption of herding by local fishers. Early herders built six megalithic pillar sites that served as
communal cemeteries. Temporal association between environmental, economic, and social changes might lead one to propose that
early herding and monumental architecture were adaptive responses to heightened risk. Classic risk-buffering strategies include
mobility, diversification, physical storage, and exchange (Halstead and O’Shea 1989). Around Lake Turkana, economic shifts from
fishing to herding could have entailed diversification and/or increased mobility (though not necessarily). As fixed landmarks in an
unstable landscape, pillar sites could have provided settings for congregation and exchange. However, risk buffering is just one
potential explanation for these new practices. Gauging its applicability requires (a) assessing the spatial mobility of communities and
individuals interred at pillar sets, (b) evaluating whether (and if so, how) mobility strategies changed as pastoralism supplanted
fishing, and (c) examining alternative explanations for social and economic changes in middle Holocene Turkana.
Hill, Austin (Dartmouth College), Elise Jakoby Laugier (Dartmouth College), Jesse Casana (Dartmouth College), Mark
McCoy (Southern Methodist University) and Kelsey Reese (University of Notre Dame)
[147]
Archaeological Prospection using Drone-Acquired Lidar: Benefits, Limitations, and Results
Aerial Lidar is increasingly recognized as the go-to technology for archaeological remote sensing in heavily vegetated areas, yet the
extremely high cost and logistical difficulty of Lidar surveys with full-scale aircraft has limited access to this technology for most
archaeologists. Instead, researchers generally rely on publicly available lidar data, which are often of relatively low resolution.
However, small and lightweight Lidar sensors, designed specifically for use on drones, are increasingly affordable, functional, and
accessible alternatives. While these sensors suffer from a number of limitations, they do allow archaeologists to capture their own
Lidar data efficiently and with sufficient resolution to identify and record archaeological features that would be otherwise
inaccessible. This paper presents the results of drone Lidar surveys at sites in Hawaii, Colorado, and New Hampshire and
discusses the current capabilities and constraints of this technology.
Hill, Catherine (Smithsonian), Molly Kamph (Smithsonian) and Michael Frank (Smithsonian)
[185]
Securing a Legacy: Examining the Dennis Stanford Paleo-Indian Collection Project
In 2019, the Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of Natural History’s Department of Anthropology began a collaborative
project through the Smithsonian’s Collections Care and Preservation Fund aiming to inventory the archival and artifact collections of
late Paleo-Indian archaeologist Dr. Dennis Stanford. Through a team of professionals encompassing expertise in Stanford’s career
and collections, museum practice, and archives, the project continues the Smithsonian’s collections strategy of maintaining the
association between archaeological collections and metadata during the inventory and eventual cataloging and processing phases
to increase the collection’s value to future researchers and the public. The project will further establish Dr. Stanford’s legacy by
establishing the Dennis Stanford National Paleo-Indian Collection, a preeminent national resource for Paleo-Indian scholarship,
while making his work more accessible and allowing future researchers to further the field through engagement with Dennis
Stanford’s collections. The poster will highlight the Dennis Stanford Paleo-Indian Collections Project’s goals, methodologies, and
challenges as well as encourage discussion about the preservation, physical and intellectual accessibility, and legacy of
archaeological artifacts and records while highlighting the incredible career of one of Paleo-Indian archaeology’s greatest voices.
Hill, Ethan [80] see O’Donnell, Lexi
Hilliard, Jerry [107] see Lockhart, Jami
Hillman, Aubrey [59] see Contreras, Daniel
Hillman, Aubrey [125] see Vining, Benjamin
Hillman, Samuel [119] see Alarcón Tinajero, Edgar
Hills, Kendall (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[28]
Sandstone Temple Survey in the Northwest Provinces of the Angkorian Khmer Empire: Preliminary Results of the 2019 Field
Campaign
Situated between Cambodia’s Tonle Sap to the south and the Kulen Hills in the north lies the capital of Angkor—the heart of the
Angkorian Khmer empire (ninth–fifteenth centuries CE) and the largest preindustrial urban center in the world. Due to the large
corpus of monumental architecture found within the capital of Angkor, research has traditionally been heavily geographically focused
on this imperial core. Such regionally constricted research, however, has produced a narrow perspective of early imperial craft in
Cambodia. Recognizing the limits of core focused archaeology, scholars have begun to extend their research beyond the capital of
Angkor and to situate their investigations in the provinces of the empire. This paper discusses the preliminary findings of a
sandstone temple survey performed in the northwest modern Cambodian provinces of Battambang, Banteay Meanchey, and Oddar
Meanchey. These contiguous provinces are situated beyond what is considered the imperial core yet are regularly depicted as part
of the Angkorian Khmer Empire. The overall objective of the 2019 Field Campaign was to collect metric data from regional
sandstone temples in order to provide insight into the imperial experience from the perspective of provincial intermediate elites, via
the analysis of their monumentality.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  250
Hilo, Regina (SHPD Hawaii)
[262]
Legacy Data within a Regulatory Agency Framework: Hawaii’s State Historic Preservation Division
As a regulatory agency, the State Historic Preservation Division (SHPD) of Hawaii reviews projects for compliance with Hawaii
Revised Statutes Chapter 6E and the National Historic Preservation Act. This paper will discuss origins, challenges, and favorable
outcomes to address our legacy data.
Hinkelman, Sarah (Ohio State University), Benjamin Cross (Ohio State University) and Robert Cook (Ohio State University)
[221]
Iron Men and Earthen Mounds: Effects of Monumentality on Historic Narratives
How history is presented shapes the way that we perceive our world. Specifically, the way individuals experience the landscape
around them affects their values, beliefs, and worldview. Monuments are key elements within landscapes which impact the values of
a cultural group, as they are central to transferring shared memories across time. Monuments, however, usually only tell a limited
version of history. Whoever has control of history can legitimize or ignore the narrative of the past that they prefer. However, such
biased interpretations have lasting impacts on public perception and consequently the decisions and behaviors of individuals. In this
study, we look at two cases in which the interpretation of monuments creates conflict over how the past is presented to the public.
Confederate monuments in the southern United States have long been used to establish and maintain a Lost Cause Mythology that
reinforces racial inequality. Similarly, the selective presentation and access of ancient earthworks can be at odds with the wishes of
living Native American populations. We argue that as we move forward, as archaeologists and museum specialists, we must
evaluate the way that we present and control narratives to encourage multivocality and push interpretations based on established
facts and evidence.
Hinton, Sarah (Texas State University) and Kelsey Hanson (University of Arizona)
[122]
Let’s Get Crafty: Social and Spatial Organization of Craft Specialization in the Aftermath of Migration
Migration fundamentally restructures social relationships between migrants and host communities. Recent research in the U.S.
Southwest demonstrates that migrant craft specialists use their skills in crafts to position themselves in their new communities.
Recent excavations at the Gila River Farm site in the Cliff Valley of western New Mexico reveal important information about
interactions between local populations and migrants from the Kayenta region of northeastern Arizona. Distributions of ground stone,
ceramics, and mineral samples suggest spatially restricted production activities at the site. We focus here on the intrasite level
organization of craft production, namely production tools and associated debris, to examine the spatial organization of craft
production—especially pottery and ornament production—to examine social relationships between migrant and host communities.
Hipskind, Scott [232] see Flood, John
Hiquet, Julien (Université de Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne)
[20]
From the Quarry to the Building: Stone Procurement, Distance Transportation, and Cost Simulation at Naachtun (Petén, Guatemala)
In the Maya Lowland, quarrying marks left on the bedrock surface are often found literally at the foot of residential or public
buildings. In general, Maya builders used to extract stone building materials as close as possible to construction sites. This trend
has also been noted in the Classic Maya center of Naachtun (Petén, Guatemala), where many quarries are located in the immediate
vicinity of monumental buildings. Nevertheless, various platforms and pyramids were built upon—and surrounded by—plazas that
physically prevented such a nearby extraction. Large quarries situated at some distance from any construction and in off-site areas
are also known in many Maya sites. One would therefore assume that these quarries have been carefully selected for their potential
to provide the huge volumes of stone required to raise such massive platforms and pyramids. Using an architectural energetics
approach, I will test this hypothesis by simulating various scenarios for stone procurement at Naachtun and attempt to measure and
evaluate the impact of the distance between quarries and construction sites on construction costs.
Hiquet, Julien [102] see Arnauld, M. Charlotte
Hirniak, Jayde (Arizona State University)
[38]
Chair
Hirniak, Jayde [38] see Cabadas, Horacio
Hirschfeld, Nicolle [175] see Martin, Samuel
Hirth, Kenneth [133] see Andrews, Bradford
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    251
Hiscock, Peter
[253]
Lithic Raw Materials and Morphological Variation, a Small Example
Microliths are often thought to be standardized hunting weapons, but in Australia the evidence points to them being used in craft
production of organic tools and paraphernalia. It has been argued that these tools also operate to send public signals and that this
accounts for their standardization. But how standardized are they and how does regularity of shape come to be constructed on quite
different raw materials? In this paper, I use geometric morphometrics to study these questions on a large sample of microliths from a
desert region. The results shed light on the ways these technologies were organized.
Hitchings, Philip (University of Toronto) and Edward Banning (University of Toronto)
[55]
The Use of Bayesian Allocation for the Optimization of Archaeological Survey Effort
For many archaeological surveys, it is critical to record not just the most common sites, but rare and unobtrusive ones. While
surveyors use predictive models to accomplish this, they have previously ignored the very useful method of Bayesian allocation,
which maximizes the probability of finding sites with a fixed cost. Bayesian allocation, originally developed for searches during
WWII, determines the optimal solution for distributing available search effort by exploiting prior probabilities that spaces contain
“targets.” These probabilities are updated with new information as survey proceeds, in an iterative fashion. No other method so
efficiently directs survey effort, or directs repeated survey in the same space on the basis of posterior probabilities. Our use of this
approach successfully discovered rarely found Epipalaeolithic and Early Neolithic sites in Cyprus and Late Neolithic sites in Jordan,
sometimes after survey of the same space multiple times. Some of these sites would have escaped detection in surveys that only
searched each space once. Furthermore, typical surveys may waste effort searching spaces not likely to contain sites. The
Bayesian approach could be particularly useful in CRM, to minimize the chance that surveys fail to discover sites that are significant,
unobstrusive, and at risk of destruction.
Hixon, Sean (University of California, Santa Barbara), Kristina Douglass (Pennsylvania State University), Lucien
Rakotozafy (l’Institut de Civilisations/Musée d’Art et d’Archéologie), Brooke Crowley (University of Cincinnati) and Douglas
Kennett (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[76]
Past Temporal and Dietary Overlap among Introduced and Extinct Endemic Herbivores in SW Madagascar
Early human colonists of Madagascar encountered a diverse endemic fauna that included elephant birds, pygmy hippopotamuses,
and giant tortoises. All species >10 kg went extinct by ca. 1000–500 years ago. Hunting and anthropogenic landscape
transformation help explain aspects of the extinction pattern. Competition between introduced bovids and endemic herbivores may
have also played a role, but its contribution is uncertain due to poorly constrained times of past species introductions and limited
information regarding the diets of past introduced species. We present radiocarbon and stable carbon and nitrogen isotope (δ13C
and δ15N) data from the bulk bone collagen of introduced cattle (Bos indicus/taurus) and sheep/goats (Ovis/Capra spp.), as well as
endemic hippos (Hippopotamus lemerlei) and tortoises (Aldabrachelys spp.) from sites in southwestern Madagascar. Radiocarbon
dates confirm that introduced and endemic herbivores overlapped chronologically in this region between at least 800 and 1000
calendar years before present. Stable isotope data suggest that sheep/goats, tortoises, and hippos had broadly similar diets and
foraged in similar habitats. However, the δ13C data also suggest that cattle and sheep/goats exploited a wider range of plant types
than endemic herbivores. These data thus support the potential for past exclusion competition between introduced and endemic
herbivores.
Hixson, David (Hood College) and Jeffrey Vadala (College of New Jersey)
[175]
Unreal Archaeology: From Low-Cost Drone Imagery to Rapid VR Simulation at the Ancient Maya site of Chunchucmil, Yucatán,
Mexico
As detailed 3D models of archaeological sites and features have become the desired method for surveying and interpreting the
cultural landscape, most techniques for achieving this result remain either too labor intensive or beyond the technological capacity
for the everyday archaeologist. Solving this issue, we have developed a flexible, low-cost, and rapid methodology for the creation of
stunning 3D models using off-the-shelf consumer-grade hardware, widely available software, and requiring very little experience in
3D modeling. We demonstrate our methodology in the context of ancient Maya archaeology, utilizing inexpensive drone
photography to develop research-quality digital surface models, digital terrain models, and fully immersive Virtual Reality
experiences covering a portion of the ancient Maya city of Chunchucmil, Yucatán, Mexico. The addition of VR to this process
produces data products that are more impactful, more intuitive, and provide greater flexibility for a wide range of archaeological
research. Opportunities to view the resulting 3D models in VR will be made available following the presentation.
Hodgetts, Lisa (University of Western Ontario), Kisha Supernant (University of Alberta), Natasha Lyons (Ursus Heritage
Consulting) and John Welch (Simon Fraser University)
[1]
An Intersectional Analysis of Responses to the Equity and Diversity in Canadian Archaeology Survey
Since its first use by Kimberlé Crenshaw in 1991, intersectionality has emerged as a potent lens for identifying and tool for disrupting
ways that multiple identity categories converge to influence individual access to power. Our 2019 online survey of Canadian
archaeologists gathered information from over 550 students and practitioners. It explored experiences of sexual and nonsexual
forms of harassment, violence, discrimination, and exploitation in field, institutional, and other professional settings across all
disciplinary sectors. It also collected information on respondents’ gender, sexual orientation, ethnicity, age, and seniority, providing
an opportunity to explore how intersections of identity impact people’s experiences in the discipline. Preliminary analysis indicated
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   252
some clear trends based on gender, career stage, and sector. In this paper, we deepen our analysis to look at intersecting identities,
including how respondents reacted to our framing of questions of gender, sexual orientation, and ethnicity, as well as present data
about how intersections of identity increased or decreased the vulnerability of Canadian archaeologists to negative experiences. We
nuance quantitative analysis of the survey responses with qualitative data from survey respondents representing a diverse set of
demographics.
Hodgetts, Lisa (University of Western Ontario), Natasha Lyons (Ursus Heritage Consulting), Rebecca Goodwin (University
of Western Ontario), Jeffrey Grieve (University of Western Ontario) and Jason Lau (University of Western Ontario)
[64]
Digital Co-creation in the Inuvialuit Living History Project
The Inuvialuit are the Inuit of the Canadian Western Arctic, a community with a long history of documenting their knowledge and
cultural experiences through oral transmission, publishing, film, and novel communication technologies. The Inuvialuit Living History
Project is a long-standing community-based partnership, which has worked to create better access for Inuvialuit to cultural materials
housed in southern repositories and to represent living cultural traditions in real and digital spaces. We currently focus on bringing
together Elders and youth to share and learn land-based knowledge and traditions and to document these experiences using digital
tools including interactive maps, photospheres, and digital graphic arts. These tools open space for collaborative meaning-making
as we connect longstanding traditions and pedagogies to the present and shape desired futures. This poster highlights land- and
town-based cultural events hosted by the project, illustrating how different technologies fostered knowledge transmission between
Inuvialuit generations in these settings. It also outlines how we will use digital media co-created by Elders and youth to re-imagine
our project website (www.inuvialuitlivinghistory.com). Finally, it explores the interrelationships and tensions between knowledge
creation, traditional pedagogy, and the practice and sharing of living cultural traditions in digital and real-world contexts.
Hodgins, Gregory [119] see Bethke, Brandi
Hodgins, Gregory [135] see Kessler, Nicholas
Hodgkins, Jamie [38] see Keller, Hannah
Hoedl, Lucas [135] see Kessler, Nicholas
Hoffman, Brett [188] see Jamison, Gregg
Hoffman, John [229] see Morgan, Linda
Hoffman, Megan (University of Indianapolis)
[167]
Estimating Sex in Subadults from the Bethel Cemetery, Indianapolis, IN, via Dental Metric Dimorphism
The Bethel Cemetery is a historic church cemetery that yielded 543 individuals, containing a large portion of subadult remains. This
study used odontometrics from known male and female adults from the Bethel Cemetery to estimate sex of Bethel subadults with
permanent teeth via a three-step discriminant function analysis (DFA). Intraobserver error found there were no significant
differences between measuring episodes (t = 0.533, p>0.05, df = 23). Interobserver error found there were no significant differences
between observers (t = 0.088, p>0.05, df = 23). First, a Primary DFA was used to build a model of the adults to determine
dimorphism classification accuracy. The DFA that best classified individuals consisted of 5 measurements (MDcerv_LC, BLcerv_LC,
BLcerv_UC, MDcerv_UC, and MDcerv_LP4) at 87.9% correct classification. Second, a Verification DFA tested sex estimation of the
known subadults. By adding BLcerv_UP4, more known subadults were successfully classified. Of the known subadults, 12 out of 13
classified into their correct male and female groups. Lastly, the 6 measurement DFA was applied to the unknown children for sex
estimation. These findings provide a way to estimate sex of immature remains with up to 88% confidence. Without the use of dental
metrics, estimation of sex to Bethel’s unknown children would otherwise not be possible.
Hoffman, Nancy (Minnesota Historical Society)
[56]
Janet D. Spector
Janet Spector is best known for her groundbreaking work in Feminist Archaeology and collaborative research but she also made
significant contributions beyond Archaeology. Spector helped form the Women’s Studies Department at the University of Minnesota
in 1973, the first in the nation to offer a major in women’s studies and in the wake of Rajender v. University of Minnesota (a
landmark class action lawsuit dealing with sexual discrimination in the academy), she was tapped by university administrators to
head a special Commission on the Status of Women. Using an anthropological approach, Spector began a series of ethnographic
interviews with faculty, staff, and students to evaluate conditions in order to improve the campus climate. In all of her work, Spector
sought to challenge existing structures of knowledge; she used the same integrated, multivocal approach that characterized her
work in Archaeology.
Hofman, Corinne [271] see Shev, Gene
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        253
Hofman, Courtney [244] see Singleton, Robin
Hofman, Courtney [169] see Wright, Sterling
Hofman, Jack (University of Kansas) and Barbara Crable (R. C. Goodwin and Associates)
[68]
Bison Hunting Using Bottlenecks and Funnells during Folsom Time: The Bethel Locality, Western Oklahoma
The narrow divide between the Canadian and Washita rivers in west central Oklahoma is the location of multiple historic
transportation routes. These routes followed a game trail which was a focal point for prehistoric hunting. Prominent buttes provide
overlooks while spring-fed and wooded canyons offered protected habitation and hunting opportunities. This combination of
landscape features along the narrow Bethel divide, made the locality ideal for pedestrian bison hunting. We argue that this locality
was used intensively from early prehistory through the contact period for intercept bison hunting. Other settings with these
landscape features in the plains region were probably used in a similar fashion, and a few examples are offered. Here we
summarize Folsom evidence which represents the early period of bison hunting in the region. Points, preforms, and lithic materials
in the Bethel locality are documented and brief comparisons are made between Folsom and other periods.
Hofman, Jack [236] see Rapes, John
Hoggarth, Julie (Baylor University), Claire Ebert (Northern Arizona University), Leszek Pawlowicz (Northern Arizona
University), John Walden (University of Pittsburgh) and Jaime Awe (Northern Arizona University)
[230]
Energetic Investment in Agricultural and Water Management Landesque Capital in the Belize River Valley
New applications in lidar remote sensing have revolutionized what we know about the scale of settlement density and urban
planning of the ancient Maya. Despite these advances, fewer studies have focused on using lidar to examine the social dimensions
of intensive agricultural cultivation. Here we apply spatial analyses of lidar data from the Belize River Valley to estimate the
energetics of constructing and maintaining landesque capital related to intensive agricultural production and water management. We
focus on the southern foothills of the Belize River Valley, identifying the size and extent of terraces, ditches, and aguadas and
discuss the implications of population size for their construction.
Hoggarth, Julie [178] see Saldaña, Gabriela
Holcomb, Justin (Boston University), Karl Wegmann (North Carolina State University) and Panagiotis (Takis) Karkanas
(American School of Classical Studies)
[195]
Identifying the Younger Dryas in the Northern Great Basin using Soil Micromorphology: A View from the Connley Caves, Oregon
The Younger Dryas Chronozone (YDC) was a cooling event occurring 12,900–11,600 years ago (cal BP) marked by rapid changes
in plant and animal communities, subsequently affecting late Pleistocene human population organization and settlement dynamics
across the globe. In North America’s Northern Great Basin, these changes appear to have positively affected mobile foragers, but a
lack of well-dated archaeological sites in the region hinder our ability to test this hypothesis or to adequately understand its role in
shaping the archaeological record. Thus, there is a need for more datable archaeological occupations and high-resolution studies of
Pleistocene-aged deposits in the region. At the Connley Caves, located in the Fort Rock Basin, Oregon, stratified deposits have
yielded rich Western Stemmed Tradition assemblages spanning the YDC, providing a unique opportunity to address this issue. We
present ongoing geoarchaeological research at the Caves, and discuss both the macro- and microscopic characteristics that help
define the YDC. These data provide one approach to disentangling human-environment dynamics taking place during the late
Pleistocene and early Holocene transition.
Holcomb, Justin (Boston University)
[219]
Moderator
[219]
Discussant
Holcomb, Justin [170] see Jenkins, Dennis
Holcomb, Justin [66] see Quiroz, Itzel
Holdaway, Simon [162] see Coco, Emily
Holen, Kathleen (Center for American Paleolithic Research) and Steven Holen (Center for American Paleolithic Research)
[75]
Human-Induced Percussion Technology: A Synthesis of Bone Modification as Archaeological Evidence
Prey animal bone modification by humans has long been part of the archaeological record; however, debate continues as to
whether this evidence alone is sufficient to justify interpretation of technological activity. This is especially true if such evidence is
used in support of archaeological sites older than 16 ka in the Americas. This poster synthesizes data that represent over a decade
of research including experimental bone breakage and archaeological excavations of proboscidean assemblages. Replicable
features of percussion and use wear patterns on bone elements are described along with interpretive methods which demonstrate
analogous, concurrent and anomalous patterns that represent human behavior. Geological contexts that rule out alternative causes
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   254
of percussion breakage are described. We conclude that features of bone modification by percussion can be strong evidence of
human behavior when interpreted in the light of experimental reference samples, analogous archaeological sites and geological
context. The age and geographic location of a site does not invalidate this evidence.
Holen, Kathleen [170] see Holen, Steven
Holen, Steven (Center for American Paleolithic Research) and Kathleen Holen (Center for American Paleolithic Research)
[170]
The Mammoth Steppe Hypothesis: New Evidence Concerning Pre-Last Glacial Maximum Humans in the Americas
In 2013, Michael Collins and colleagues wrote a book chapter titled “North America Before Clovis: Variance in Temporal/Spatial
Cultural Patterns, 27,000–13,000 cal yr BP”. In the same book we offered a similar view of the early peopling of the Americas titled
“The Mammoth Steppe Hypothesis: The Middle Wisconsin Peopling of North America” suggesting a 40,000–20,000 cal BP peopling
event. These two chapters differed somewhat in describing the early colonization event. Collins emphasized the coastal route and
we proposed a land-based entry, these two hypotheses are not mutually exclusive. However, both models were quite similar in the
time frame and assertion that people had been in the Americas long before Clovis. Here we update the evidence from North
America supporting the Mammoth Steppe Hypothesis and include new data from South America that indicates an early human
occupation there. Collins closing statement that “The diversity of the tool kits and the attendant lifestyles at the sites discussed
herein point toward multiple movements by different groups at different times via different routes into the New World well before the
Clovis temporal benchmark” is relevant today. Ongoing research supports this viewpoint.
Holen, Steven [75] see Holen, Kathleen
Holland, Russell [196] see Iñañez, Javier
Hollenback, Kacy [119] see Thimmig, Rachel
Holley-Kline, Sam (Florida State University)
[57]
Beyond Sites and Communities: GIS Counter-Mapping and Indigenous History in El Tajín, Mexico
In Mexico, much state-sponsored archaeology has focused on the excavation and reconstruction of monumental urban sites to
understand their prehispanic occupations. While archaeologists and ethnographers increasingly look to “local communities” for
differently-situated understandings of the past, the “local” category has been subject to extensive theoretical critique. In this paper, I
discuss the use of a GIS-based counter-mapping methodology as a means of both rethinking the site-community distinction and
productively de-centering archaeological knowledge in favor of the histories relevant to indigenous communities. Based on a
counter-mapping study conducted in El Tajín, Mexico, I argue that mapping historic routes of access—trails called caminos reales—
constitute the most locally-salient means of defining the cultural landscape, rather than a combination of archaeological site and
local community. From there, I discuss the local histories elucidated during the counter-mapping process. In the case of El Tajín,
counter-mapping illustrates the importance of local landscape features—particularly the cerro de Trakátlokg—for understanding the
pasts relevant to area residents. I conclude by arguing for the broader applicability of the method.
Holliday, Trenton, Christelle Lahaye (Université Bordeaux Montaigne), Maxime Pelletier (University of Oulu), Brice Lebrun
(Université Bordeaux Montaigne) and Guillaume Guérin (Université Bordeaux Montaigne)
[36]
The French Mousterian site of Regourdou: First Synthesis of Different Absolute Dating Investigations
In 1957, a Neandertal skeleton was discovered at Regourdou. Bonifay’s 1961 to 1964 excavations defined the site’s
lithostratigraphy (layers 8 to 1 bottom to the top). He associated the Neandertal with layer 4 that also yielded roe deer, wild boars,
brown bears and Mousterian lithics, arguing layer 4 dated to MIS 5. Since 2013, we have sought new absolute ages: C14 (faunal
remains in layer 2), 230Th/234U for a stalagmite (atop layer 3) and a speleothem (interface between layers 3 and 4), and OSL and
IRSL for layers 3 and 4. Reindeer from layer 2 are 33–43 kyr cal BP while hares are 42–45 kyr cal BP; the site functioned as a
natural faunal trap. AMS dates (31–42.5 kyr cal BP) show rabbit burrowing during isotopic stage 3. The stalagmite atop layer 3 was
contaminated with exogenous Th, and therefore could not yield reliable Th/U results. Nevertheless, four attempts on the speleothem
gave a corrected age from 77.9–82.9 kyr. OSL and IRSL dates show layer 3 is ca. 80 kyr, and OSL results for layer 4 are ca. 91 kyr,
thus stage 5c. We now consider Regourdou 1 to be the best-preserved and earliest associated fossil from Western Eurasia.
Holliday, Vance (University of Arizona), Bruce Huckell (University of New Mexico) and Peter Condon (Versar Inc.)
[68]
Folsom Archaeology and Geoarchaeology along the Rio Grande Basin, Southwestern USA
Folsom lithic assemblages are the most common Paleoindian manifestation in the basins of the Rio Grande Rift, from south-central
Colorado to southern New Mexico. Most of the sites represent single-component Folsom occupations, but some are multiple-
component Paleoindian sites. Most are on the surface or shallowly buried, found along drainages on fans/bajadas that flank the
basins or are in proximity to paleo-wetlands in small playa basins. A few of the Folsom sites are near paleo-lakes. The lithic
assemblages are from kill/butchery sites and base camps. The types and relative abundance of lithic materials from these Folsom
sites suggest that the river may mark a significant boundary. There is also variation in lithic material types on a north-south axis on
the west side of the river. These western groups employed a variety of raw materials from local or regional resources from the west
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  255
while groups on the east relied on Southern Plains sources, although local resources are common in some basins. Limited contact
between western and eastern groups is seen in occasional occurrences of western materials on the east side of the river, and vice
versa.
Holliday, Vance (University of Arizona)
[219]
Discussant
Holliday, Vance [82] see Kielhofer, Jennifer
Hollingshead, Analise (National Park Service), Tara Skipton (Florida State University), Jayur Mehta (Florida State
University), Brian Ostahowski (Louisiana Archaeological Society) and Theodore Marks (New Orleans Center for the
Creative Arts)
[18]
We’re Far from the Shallow Now: Assessing Climate Change Impacts in the Gulf of Mexico
What would it mean to lose our cultural heritage within the Gulf of Mexico? As greenhouse gas emissions continue to increase and
contribute to global warming, the rapid onset of events such as Hurricane Michael in 2018 or slow onset of sea level rise continue to
threaten terrestrial and submerged archaeological sites. With 39% of Americans living in counties directly on the shoreline, this is a
serious concern; especially considering that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts anywhere from 0.5 m to 1.2 m
of sea level rise by 2100. Climate change today threatens a unique archaeological record located along or within the Gulf of Mexico
that dates as far back as 20,000 years ago. We present information on archaeological sites located in the Big Bend region of Florida
and the Mississippi River Delta, examining how climate change has or will impact both terrestrial and submerged archaeological
sites. Through predictive modeling and direct observation, we highlight a few key narratives whose story has or will be significantly
impacted by climate change.
Holly, Donald (Eastern Illinois University), Christopher Wolff (University at Albany, SUNY), James Williamson (Memorial
University) and Jessica Watson (University at Albany, SUNY)
[12]
Hearth and Home at Sabbath Point: A Beothuk Housepit on Red Indian Lake, Newfoundland
We report on recent excavations at an unusual Beothuk housepit feature located on Red Indian Lake, in the interior of the island of
Newfoundland, Canada. The housepit is remarkable for its large size and hexagonal shape, for having escaped destruction from
logging, flooding, and earlier avocational investigations, and for the fact that it does not appear to have been embedded within a
cluster of other housepits. Furthermore, excellent faunal preservation and material evidence suggesting that the house was
occupied toward the end of the eighteenth century presents an extraordinary opportunity to investigate Beothuk lifeways at a critical
point in the history of these people. In this paper we discuss our archaeological research at the site and situate these findings within
the broader context of what is known of Beothuk domestic architecture, settlement organization, and the late eighteenth-century
history of these people.
[12]
Chair
Holmberg, Karen (New York University)
[157]
Prehistoric Eruptions, Contemporary Catastrophes, and Future Risk Perception at Chaiten Volcano, Northwestern Patagonia, Chile
Chaiten volcano erupted unexpectedly in 2008 and prompted the largest evacuation in Chile’s history. Once the eruption ended and
resettlement began, closer examination of the landscape resulted in two surprises: (1) the volcano has erupted nearly continuously
for 18,000 years, and (2) a cave filled with prehistoric shell middens and rock art was used throughout millennia of human
occupation. A newly constructed museum will house the archaeological interpretations from our transdisciplinary research team as
well as live streaming volcanological data from monitoring stations on the volcano and work created during art therapy sessions
done with residents in 2013 and 2019. This commemoration of the past experience of eruptions and current data is important
because residents chose to resettle the town directly on the former site, leaving them vulnerable to future volcanic hazards. The
municipality is keen to use the geological and archaeological heritage as a draw for the tourism they feel will provide a sustainable
economic base. In addition to presenting our recent data, this paper will query what the role of the past is to the present and future
in active volcanic contexts.
Holmes, Charles (University of Alaska, Fairbanks), Ben Potter (University of Alaska, Fairbanks) and Joshua Reuther
(University of Alaska Museum of the North)
[82]
A New Cultural Sequence Synthesis for the Tanana Valley, Alaska
Archaeological data for the Tanana Valley region are expanding at a rapid pace. There is a need to synthesize nomenclature across
archaeology sites in the region that have been investigated from the 1930s to the present. These sites and their archaeological
components have been reported by investigators using different naming systems for increasingly complex records. We examine
cultural chronologies through radiocarbon data at the assemblage level and evaluate ostensible cultural designations to provide a
common terminology across the region. In general, archaeologists have documented components that are fitted into familiar cultural
units (e.g., Denali complex, Northern Archaic tradition); however, not all components have assigned affiliation, and we introduce
some new designations to complete the regional cultural sequence.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       256
Holmes, Charles [82] see Reuther, Joshua
Holt, Evan (University of Wyoming), Todd Surovell (University of Wyoming), Brian Wygal (Adelphi University), Kathryn
Krasinski (Adelphi University) and Charles Holmes (University of Alaska, Fairbanks)
[82]
Site Formation Processes: A Vertical Refit Distribution Analysis from the Holzman South Site, Shaw Creek Flats, Alaska
Archaeologists have long-recognized that postdepositional activities and processes can affect site deposits, and that these
processes may introduce substantial biases in the interpretation of sites and assemblages. A frequent assumption is that, barring
stratigraphic disturbances, thin, well-defined stratigraphic layers are discrete and meaningful archaeological units, but vertical mixing
of archaeological deposits can cause errors in interpretations, particularly with respect to occupation history and the age of
archaeological components. Vertical mixing, for example, can cause artifacts to spuriously become associated with sediments
and/or artifacts older or younger than themselves. To reconstruct the occupation history of a site, therefore, it is critical to have some
understanding of the degree to which sites are vertically intact. Another aspect of this study will pertain to the horizontal distribution
of chipped stone refits. Horizontal dispersion of artifacts gives insight toward the use of space at this site. Refitting of chipped stone
artifacts is one means of gaining such insights for both vertical and horizontal distributions. In this study I will analyze the vertical
and horizontal distribution of refits at the Holzman South site (XBD-422) in the Tanana River Valley of Interior Alaska to contribute to
our understanding of these aspects of site formation.
Homan, Michael (Xavier University of Louisiana)
[86]
Discussant
Honeychurch, William
[62]
Discussant
Hong, Hyewon [162] see Akoshima, Kaoru
Hong, Jong Ha [244] see Shin, Dong Hoon
Honorato, Vinicius [161] see Rocha, Bruna
Honychurch, Lennox [239] see Wallman, Diane
Hooker, William, III [132] see Whitney, Kristina
Hoover, Corey (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú) and Kylie Quave (George Washington University)
[242]
Phytolith Plant Remains from Yunkaray, Cusco, Peru
Yunkaray, located in the Maras Plain of Cusco, Peru is the largest LIP settlement attributed to the Ayarmaca cultural group and was
occupied from approximately 1050–1450. The proximity of the group to Incan political centers provides for several differing
interaction dynamics between the two groups and neighboring entities. This investigation is an extension of previous research on
plant remains at Yunkaray, focusing on Phytolith remains. Utilizing macro, micro and phytolith analyses, we discuss a comparison
between the archaeological record and ethnographic and chronicled records through the scope of phytolith plant remains. We find
several examples of plant remains outside the scope of a simple subjugated polity in the shadow of the Inca empire and discuss the
broader network dynamics these findings imply.
Hoover, Hannah (University of Michigan)
[119]
An Analysis of Soapstone “Gaming” Disks from the Berry Site in Western North Carolina
Soapstone is the primary temper source for Burke phase pottery—a regional variant of the Lamar ceramic tradition—produced in the
western North Carolina Piedmont at the time of Spanish contact in the mid-sixteenth-century. Soapstone, in both its temper reduced
and whole form, has also been documented at several Burke phase sites in the form of ceramic and worked stone “gaming” disks. A
high frequency of worked soapstone fragments and soapstone disks were found during excavations of sixteenth-century Fort San
Juan and the adjacent Spanish residential compound of Cuenca, a colonial outpost located near to the upper Catawba Valley
settlement and likely paramount chiefdom town of Joara. This poster presents a novel analysis of these soapstone gaming disks
and fragments by testing different approaches to differentiating stone and metal tooling. Results will serve as a proxy for evaluating
Spanish engagement in a colonial cottage industry that may have mimicked local Native American disk forms and uses. This study
offers to enhance our understanding of how small-scale economic strategies and gaming were used by both the Spanish and the
indigenous people of Joara to navigate the complex social worlds of colonial interaction.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   257
Hoppa, Kristin (Channel Islands National Park), Matthew Vestuto (Barbareno-Ventureno Band of Mission Indians) and
Jennifer Perry (California State University Channel Islands)
[160]
Navigating Cultural Landscapes with Ethnographic Place Name Story Maps
This presentation shares an interactive story map that visitors can use to navigate and interpret the cultural landscapes of Channel
Islands National Park. The human story of the Channel Islands is unique and fascinating, with over 13,000 years of occupation. One
challenge to communicating this story to park visitors is the sensitive nature of archeological sites—in order to best protect our
cultural resources, we have to keep their locations confidential. Research into traditional place names allows us to tell the human
story as it relates to the island landscapes, seascapes, and natural resources without compromising archeological sites. By working
directly with members of the Chumash community, this project allowed descendants to narrate their own history in ways that serve
their needs and interests, in particular by making them partners in decision-making about what can and should be communicated in
a public forum. Further, the emphasis on human-environment relationships allows visitors to connect the cultural and natural
resources of the islands in a particularly meaningful and powerful way for everyone.
Hopper, Courtneay [77] see Waters, Albert
Hopwood, Marie (Vancouver Island University)
[86]
Teaching with Beer: An Archaeology of Beer in and outside of the Classroom
Why study an archaeology of beer? Beyond the modern popularity of craft beer, this beverage is a deeply ancient and meaningful
form of material culture. It is also a powerful tool to put faces onto the past, and to make the ancient peoples we study both relevant
and enticing to our students and the larger public. Through my Raise Your Glass to the Past experimental archaeology project
community members from central Vancouver Island, BC, experience ancient-inspired ales combined with information about the
associated cultures in a way not experienced by these audiences before. Aside from drinking the beer, the Raise Your Glass to the
Past project shares archaeological knowledge through interpretations of taste, daily practices and ways of knowing. It has long been
shown that the cultural construction of taste is embedded with meaning and references both identity and place. Evidence of the daily
practices of ancient life can highlight ways of production, gender roles and habitus. Lastly, the ways of knowing about the science of
fermentation, as well as relationships structured around drinking, allows for a unique viewpoint into the lives of past peoples, putting
faces onto the past and making their humanity more real to non-academic audiences.
[86]
Chair
Horan, Robert [231] see Napora, Katharine
Horn, Marty (Louisiana Geological Survey), Britt Bousman (Texas State University), Jennifer Whittington (Consulting
Geologist, Golden, CO), Sarah Morris (Texas State University) and Molly Hall (AR Consultants, Richardson, TX)
[170]
Looking for Pre-Clovis Geological Deposits in the Sulphur River Valley, Texas
The presence of Pre-Clovis archaeological evidence is limited in the southern U.S. due to Late Pleistocene geological erosion. Few
regional alluvial sequences contain deposits that are old enough to preserve in situ evidence of Paleoindian human occupations and
even fewer are likely to have evidence of Pre-Clovis occupations. Michael Collins inferred over 30 years ago that the Sulphur River
valley offers great potential for Paleoindian occupation in the woodlands of East Texas. Field research in the Sulphur River drainage
by Collins and Britt Bousman in the 1980s and later by Bousman and Alan Skinner in early 2000s identified preserved fluvial
deposits dating to Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene. Recent field study in the North Sulphur flood basin expands this work by
integrating electrical resistivity tomography and geological coring on a basin scale. To date, over 6.5 km of resistivity transects have
been measured in the North Sulphur River basin, imaging lithostratigraphic topology among Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene
fluvial deposits cradled in Cretaceous bedrock. The resultant remote sensing models, constrained by sediment cores and channel
wall profiles, are interpreted in context of Late Pleistocene–Early Holocene paleogeography, permitting assessment of potential pre-
Clovis occupation in the northeast Texas region.
Horn, Sherman (Grand Valley State University), Anabel Ford (University of California, Santa Barbara) and Paulino Morales
(University of San Carlos, Guatemala)
[7]
Terraces, Quarries, and Berms, Oh My! Evaluating Land Use and Landscape Modification at the Ancient Maya City El Pilar
Ongoing research at El Pilar—an ancient Maya city located along the Belize/Guatemala frontier—has documented hundreds of
landscape-modification features in the area surrounding the monumental civic center. The complexity and variety of these features,
which include terraces, berms, quarries, check-dams, and aguadas, indicate the sophistication of Maya environmental manipulation
and reveal potential aspects of socioeconomic organization within the city. Our full-coverage survey at El Pilar, guided by high-
resolution Lidar imagery of the area surrounding the city center, permits a broad-based inquiry into human-environment interactions
in the tropical Maya Forest. This poster presents updated survey results from the 2019 field season and preliminary spatial analyses
of cultural remains. We explore the distribution of landscape modification features and examine relationships between these
features, settlement patterns, and topography to investigate land-use strategies around a major Classic Maya center.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   258
Horn, Sherman (Grand Valley State University)
[155]
Discussant
Horning, Audrey (College of William and Mary)
[112]
Efficacious Objects? Architecture and Dwelling in the Ulster Plantation
The Ulster Plantation, launched in 1609 as a colonial effort to supplant the Irish with British planters, intended architecture as a
“civilizing” tool. Plans required the construction of dwellings “after the English manner”; meaning timber framing, glazed windows,
and chimneys in contrast to Irish forms such as turf walled buildings with open hearths, or fortified tower houses. Yet archaeological
evidence suggests that planters adapted existing structures, while buildings that outwardly comply with regulations still employed
Irish construction techniques. Some planters appear to have intentionally engaged in mimicry of elite Gaelic practices through
appropriation of tower houses, while use of vernacular Irish buildings within plantation villages may have served as a means of
cultural mediation. Buildings within the urban setting of Londonderry followed plantation precepts, yet archaeological finds from the
town ditch indicate material hybridization. The extent to which the built environment was central to the transformation of identities in
early modern Ireland emerges as a key interpretative theme with relevance to other colonial settings.
Horowitz, Rachel (Appalachian State University)
[54]
Chair
Horowitz, Rachel (Appalachian State University) and M. Kathryn Brown (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[158]
Preclassic Ritual at the Las Ruinas de Arenal, Belize E Group
Early public architecture in the Maya lowlands, including E Groups, are marked by the presence of ritual activities associated with
foundational offerings and ritual displays. Recent investigations at Las Ruinas de Arenal, Belize revealed a series of ritual deposits
that may represent the initial founding of a Middle Preclassic E Group complex. Investigations of burials, caches, and other deposits
in the E Group plaza illustrate the development and continuity of ritual activities at the site and the importance of creating sacred
place and centering. This paper will explore ritual activity at Arenal, focusing on evidence of ancestor veneration, while situating
these activities within the broader regional context during the Preclassic period.
Horowitz, Rachel [54] see Cap, Bernadette
Horowitz, Rachel [20] see Paling, Jason
Horrell, Christopher (Meadows Center for Water and the Environment at Texas State University), Roberto Junco (INAH),
Melanie Damour (Independent Researcher) and Frederick Hanselmann (Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric
Science)
[18]
Conquest: The Lost Ships of Cortés Project and the Search for a 500-Year-Old Scuttled Fleet in the Gulf of Mexico
The discovery and exploration of Mexico during Spanish expeditions in 1517 and 1518 set the stage for the conquest of the Aztec
capital Tenochtitlán in 1521. Appointed by the Governor of Cuba in 1519, Hernán Cortés led another expedition to explore and
establish trade in these newly discovered lands. While Cortés forged alliances with indigenous communities, a faction of his men
mutinied. As a result of the mutiny and the poor condition of the vessels, Cortés ordered 10 of his 11 ships sunk in an effort to quell
the mutiny and motivate his men. In addition, Cortés made the decision to break from the Cuban Governor by establishing the town
of Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz. With the 10 ships scuttled, Cortés ordered the eleventh vessel, Cortés’ flagship, sent to Spain with
news of his discoveries and intentions. Shortly afterward, Cortés began the march inland and began his conquest of Mexico. In 2018
and 2019, the Lost Ships of Cortés Project conducted geophysical surveys and diver investigations to identify the 500-year-old
remains of these scuttled vessels. This paper discusses the results of the first two field seasons.
Horta, Luis [67] see Belardi, Juan
Houghten, Holly (THPO Mescalero Apache Tribe)
[113]
Discussant
Houk, Brett A. (Texas Tech University)
[155]
Discussant
Houk, Brett A. [53] see Novotny, Claire
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  259
Houle, Jean-Luc (Western Kentucky University), Oula Seitsonen (University of Helsinki), Natalia Égüez (University of La
Laguna), Lee Broderick (University of York) and Jamsranjav Bayarsaikhan (National Museum of Mongolia)
[62]
A Window to the Past: Tracing the Development of Mobile Pastoralism in Northwestern Mongolia
Currently, the development of mobile pastoralism and the chronology and nature of early pastoralist societies in Mongolia is known
almost exclusively from burial and ritual contexts. Here we present the results of archaeological excavations and geoarchaeological
work carried out at a deeply stratified habitation site in the Zuunkhangai region of NW Mongolia. Our data include material culture,
faunal remains, environmental data, and chronology that document the development of mobile pastoralism in this region. The
preliminary results of the ongoing Western Mongolia Archaeology Project are starting to provide new details about the chronology,
nature, and environmental context of early pastoralism and the long-term patterns of settlement geography and site use in NW
Mongolia. Among other things, our findings index the local durability of pastoralist occupation over 4000 years, as well as the
adaptive resilience of the herders here, indeed up to the present day, and this despite major changes in the sociopolitical,
socioeconomic, and environmental conditions through time.
Houle, Jean-Luc [62] see Égüez, Natalia
Housse, Romuald [174] see Chamussy, Vincent
Houston, Gordon
[211]
The Houston Solar Marker Matrix
Rock art is ubiquitous around the world. Solar markers are the placement of rock art motifs placed to interact with sunlight and
shadows on culturally significant days. The astronomical interpretation is the most objective interpretation of rock art. In the
American Southwest the numbers of reported solar markers is more than statistically significant, hence the intentionality of the
placement.Yet, worldwide, there is a paucity of reported solar markers. This is in part, due to the lack of knowledge on the part of
researchers. The Solar Marker Matrix of Intentionality was introduced at the 2014 SSA Annual meeting. Through continued
observations, discussions, and impute the Houston Solar Marker Matrix (HSMM) has been updated and revised. The purpose of the
HSMM is to confirm reported solar markers, and or to be used to identify new solar markers. Finally, to help educate researchers
worldwide in the astronomical analysis of solar markers, leading to additional reports, from which a data base can be created for
statistical analysis.
Houston, Stephen (Brown University) and Karl Taube (University of California, Riverside)
[164]
Houses of Mirth: The Ancient Maya and the Laughter of States
Kings are laughter-averse: to invite humor is to encourage disruption, an agelastic (non-jovial) orientation that tends to pomp but not
to self-directed mirth. The Classic Maya invited laughter in political settings through ritual clowning, sponsored by kings and placed
within detectible spaces and buildings. Often understood through folklore or in villages, mirth had a role in Maya cities and among
the dynasties that governed them. The foreign and the fat, the awkward and ugly, fell squarely into what was funny, but as slotted
away from local, elegant, and pleasing kings.
Hovezak, Tim (National Park Service), Gary Ethridge (National Park Service), Kay Barnett (National Park Service) and
Donna Glowacki (University of Notre Dame)
[149]
Far View House: Evolution of a Chaco-Era Great House, Past and Present
The Far View Great House in Mesa Verde National Park is the center of a densely populated pueblo village currently under study by
the Far View Archaeological Project (FVAP), a five-year collaboration between the National Park Service and the University of Notre
Dame. Now maintained by the Park Service as an exhibit for public education, the site has weathered the elements for a full century
since its excavation in 1916 by Dr. J.W. Fewkes. The history of preservation treatments at Far View House is replete with examples
of structural weakness and failure, with the prevailing treatment strategy continually focusing on stabilization and reconstruction with
commercial materials which, in combination with natural weathering of the fabric, has significantly changed the character of the site.
We explore the archaeological significance, history, and management of this iconic site, beginning with Fewkes’ early investigations,
continuing through the work of other notable professionals such as Earl Morris, J. A. Lancaster, and Stanley Morse, to a recent NPS
architectural documentation and stabilization effort which has resulted in new findings on how the site evolved during its occupation.
Hovezak, Tim [149] see Field, Sean
Howard, Alex (Logan Simpson)
[214]
The Historic Context of Eagle Creek through the Lens of Field and Archival Data
The Eagle Creek area of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests has a rich history, both prehistoric and historic. Logan Simpson
recently conducted a pedestrian survey on behalf of the ASNF along a portion of Upper Eagle Creek, recording several historic-age
archaeological remains reflecting the varied land-use of the region, including ranching, homesteading, and Forest Service
management. This poster discusses the historic context of the Eagle Creek region, with archival research augmenting our survey
data within this eastern Arizona community.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    260
Howe, David, Chris Rowe (New South Associates Inc.) and Kelly Brown (New South Associates Inc.)
[187]
Applied Anthropology at the Veterans Curation Program
The Veterans Curation Program (VCP) is a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) program designed to assist veterans in their
transition from military service to civilian life while simultaneously rehabilitating at-risk USACE archaeological collections. The
majority of VCP laboratory managers have a graduate degree (or comparable experience) in anthropology so that a basic
theoretical approach to the science of anthropology is understood by the management staff of each lab. While archaeology is the
main subfield of anthropology practiced at the VCP, managers continually utilize their backgrounds in the other subfields of
anthropology, particularly cultural anthropology. This poster showcases several examples of how applied anthropology helps
managers better assess the needs of their technicians and how it makes the VCP experience more effective for veterans in an often
uncertain transitional period.
Howe, Ellen [258] see DeLeonardis, Lisa
Howe, Mark (U.S. State Department, USIBWC) and Nancy Gonzalez (Independent Academic)
[101]
W. T. Millington and the Mexican Revolution: The Search for Battle Sites and Camps
The Millington letters from 1910 to 1913 described military actions along the Rio Grande in Presidio, Texas at the start of the
Mexican Revolution (1910–1920). These letters are handwritten accounts of the Mexican Revolution and what was occurring across
the U.S.–Mexico international border and how this unfolded in the Big Bend region. This presentation will examine what happened in
this area and the battles across the river in Mexico between the “insurrectors” and Mexican Soldiers. We will review what has been
found archeologically on the United States side and explorations in Mexico. In all, by examining new information along the border
and how the International Boundary Commission (IBC) under Consulting Engineer W. W. Follett was involved, we can understand a
little more of this time in history. Examination of Follett’s activities and Millington’s letters show how both played large but unknown
roles in history, especially in the Big Bend Region.
[101]
Chair
Howell, Mark (Winterville Mounds-Mississippi Department of Archives and History)
[266]
Sound as a Ritual Offering: The Underlying Meanings of Mississippian Effigy-Rattling Bowls
Soundmaking artifacts are rare at Amerindian mound-plaza sites of the Mississippian Period (1050–1550 AD). Curious exceptions
are small ceramic container rattles in anthro- or zoomorphic shapes such as those that have been found in relative abundance at
the Lake George site in the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta. Five Lake George rattles that were originally affixed to the rims of pottery
vessels, here sometimes called adorno rattles, are part of the Butler Collection donated to the Mississippi Department of Archives
and History. This paper focuses on the sonic and iconographic elements of these rattles, including reasons for the intentional
combination of their sensory-related elements, and the circumstance(s) of their being found separated from vessel rims. The
research draws on contemporary visual and audio technologies, combined with experimental archaeology in interpretation. The
multimedia aspect of the Lake George adorno rattles makes their decipherment particularly important for understanding the role of
sound and its relationship to iconography, and perhaps ritual in Mississippian culture.
Howey, Meghan (University of New Hampshire) and Dylan Kelly (University of New Hampshire)
[33]
High Risks for High Rewards: Modeling Early Seventeenth-Century Aquatic Transport Suitability in the Great Bay Estuary, New
England
During the early 1600s, the Great Bay Estuary was a frontier colonial settlement that rapidly became an economic hub for the
extraction and export of natural resources into the West Indies trade network. Transport of goods using specialized boats in this tidal
riverine system was critical to the region’s key role in helping fuel the success of the British Colonial Empire in Northeastern North
America. The shallow, strong tidal rivers of Great Bay Estuary offered a high risk/high reward scenario for aquatic transport. If
knowledge of tides was executed perfectly, the energy power of tides meant specialized boats could carry heavy goods at almost no
cost. With any miscalculation, boats would be stranded and/or destroyed. We develop a model of aquatic transport suitability for this
estuary to understand why and when investment in this risky transport system became a productive decision. We develop a first
iteration of the model as if we were working in an ancient period, without historic documents, and compare our findings with historic
records to refine and improve subsequent model iterations. We aim for this case, which has rich archival sources, to help inform
models of aquatic transport in expansive empires without similar detailed records.
Howey, Meghan [184] see Friese, Crystina
Howland, Matthew [147] see Liss, Brady
Hoyos Velasco, Fabiola [121] see Medina Hernández, Abril Ameyalli
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    261
Hranicky, William
[198]
A Reexamination of the Thunderbird Paleo-Site in Virginia
The Paleoindian Thunderbird site in Virginia was excavated in the 1970s by William Gardner of Catholic University. There have
been suggestions of problems with stratigraphic work at the site and its interpretation. This paper identifies several methodological
mistakes that have been previously published. The paper argues that there is a pre-Clovis occupation at the site associated with
blade-made artifacts that can be correlated with the Upper Paleolithic of Europe. Similar examples are illustrated with artifacts found
elsewhere in the Middle Atlantic region at sites dated to the pre-Clovis period, such as the Meadowcroft Rockshelter site in
Pennsylvania. This paper also discusses the Thunderbird site’s protection by the Archaeology Conservatory.
Hronec, Laura
[88]
Discussant
Hrynick, Gabriel (University of New Brunswick)
[12]
Building the Dawnland: Toward an Architectural History of Hunter-Gatherers on the Maritime Peninsula
Architectural history relies on the idea that the human-built environment reflects and reinforces cultural ideas about how people view
the world. Architecture therefore permits cultural changes to be tracked through time. Despite this, a literature review of past
considerations of hunter-gatherer-built environments reveals remarkably little interest in approaching them through a lens of
architectural history. Rather, a few contrary themes emerge: that hunter-gatherer architecture is so ephemeral that the traces it
leaves on the landscape elude study; and, that hunter-gatherers don’t really produce houses at all—they make shelters, the shapes
of which are more or less dictated by environmental realities. In this paper, I begin to consider an architectural history on the
Maritime Peninsula: how Wabanaki people built their homelands as an historical process, contextualizing historic accounts of
Wabanaki wigwams as forms of persistence and resistance against colonialism and a way to maintain mobility and identity.
[12]
Chair
Hsiao, Wei-Lin [175] see Payntar, Nicole
Hu, Lorraine (Washington University, Saint Louis)
[216]
Earth, Water, and Fire: Reexamining Cremation Practice in the Pastoral Neolithic of Kenya
The spread of pastoralism in East Africa ca. 5000–1000 BP was facilitated by peoples with diverse technological suites, subsistence
strategies, and cultural practices. Recent aDNA work has revealed the genetic similarity of individuals associated with two material
culture traditions in southern Kenya, the Savannah Pastoral Neolithic and Elmenteitan. While scholars have elucidated the
economic aspects of these two traditions, the expression of social groups on the cultural landscape is as of yet unclear. The study of
cremation, a particularly intense mortuary practice from this time period, is one avenue by which community practice may be
investigated but has received little scholarly attention. This presentation will focus on pilot data from a reanalysis of previously
excavated cremation sites including the Njoro River caves, Lion Hill Cave, Keringet Cave, and Porcupine Cave. Initial research
suggests that cremation practices were more diverse than previously assumed, with funerary components including secondary
reburial of cremated individuals as well as corpse defleshing prior to cremation. Both inter- and intrasite variation in practice
demonstrate that a straightforward attribution of cremation to the Elmenteitan tradition, as previously assumed, may be obscuring
the full diversity of Pastoral Neolithic mortuary practices and the communities taking care of their dead.
Hu, Qitian [26] see Smith, Michael
Hu, Xiaonong [199] see Zhao, Chao
Hua, Quan [28] see Hendrickson, Mitch
Hua, Quan [100] see Weisler, Marshall
Huaman, Oscar [86] see Jennings, Justin
Huang, Cindy Hsin-yee (Arizona State University)
[36]
An ABM for the IUP in NEA? An Agent-Based Model for the Spread of the Initial Upper Paleolithic in Northeast Asia
Discussions of human dispersal out of Africa traditionally use the Initial Upper Paleolithic as markers of the arrival of anatomically
modern humans. From this perspective, there was a single migration event that eventually allowed humans to move out of Africa,
across Eurasia, and eventually into the Americas. However, new research has suggested that these migrations are far more
complex than previously hypothesized, involving multiple migrations, varying routes, and some interbreeding with archaic Homo
populations. In particular, as the Upper Paleolithic spread into Asia, the relationship between what is known as the Initial Upper
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      262
Paleolithic and anatomically modern humans is unclear. In this paper, I use an agent-based model to examine the spread of the
Initial Upper Paleolithic in Northeast Asia and to test whether it was the result of the arrival of the first anatomically modern humans
in the region, or if the Initial Upper Paleolithic could have been a set of cultural traditions that spread through existing populations.
Northern Asia is a locale of particular importance in discussions of peopling the New World, and thus a better understanding of
human movement in this region could clarify our knowledge of large-scale migrations.
Huang, Cindy Hsin-yee (Arizona State University)
[95]
Discussant
Huang, Lushuang [244] see Rayfield, Kristen
Huashuayo Chávez, Willy [268] see Zborover, Danny
Huckell, Bruce [68] see Holliday, Vance
Huckert, Chantal (Universidad Veracruzana)
[2]
The Grid Patterns in the Vestments and Headdresses of Female Statuary from the Classic Period Cultures of Central Veracruz
Various researches report that the diamond, rhomboid, and square-gridded patterns and their stepped variants designate the
surface of the earth as the fecund female progenitor, manifested in flowers, corn cobs, and sweet nurturing waters. These patterns
also designate the zoomorphic aspects of the shell or skin of the fertile earth. In the Maya codices, the mother goddesses weave
gridded-patterned fabrics on their autochthonous looms, creating a primordial texture of the warp and weft crossing of the threads.
From these perspectives, we shall explore the meanings of the gridded patterns in the headdresses and vestments of female
statuary from Late Classic Central Veracruz archaeological sources. As we identify the various gridded patterns with the depicted
objects, for instance the body of a mazorca de maíz and its kernels, and the pictogram that consists in a pars pro toto of this same
corn cob, we shall show that these patterns are intended to be signs in a graphic system implemented in textiles, which correspond
to Mesoamerican forms and conventions. The body languages of the statues, their hairdos, headdresses, and vestments, will
comprise datasets that will allow us to highlight the ceremonial functions associated with the female gender in Classic Veracruz.
Huckleberry, Gary (Geoarchaeological Consultant)
[140]
Past Landscape Changes and Human Occupation of the Northern Sonoran Coast near Puerto Peñasco, Mexico
Recent geoarchaeological research of shell midden sites along the arid to hyperarid northern Sonoran coast near Puerto Peñasco
confirm ~6,000 years of human exploitation of lagoons, estuaries, and tidal flats for procurement of fish and shellfish. Evidence
suggests that different groups briefly visited the far northern Gulf of California during the cooler seasons of the year at strategic
points where there was potable water. Coastal geomorphic processes including the creation of sand barriers that help protect
wetlands and fish-shellfish nurseries play an important role in creating and maintaining these productive habitats. There appears to
be no significant change in nearshore ecology or in the intensity of human coastal habitation from the Middle Archaic to Protohistoric
periods despite local neotectonism at Bahia Adair and Rio Sonoyta channel shifting. However, it is unclear to what degree these
productive nearshore environments were present during the period of post-glacial rapid sea level rise during the Pleistocene-
Holocene transition. Two scenarios are presented that have different consequences with respect to earlier (Paleoindian and Early
Archaic) human occupation of the coast and the resilience of current coastal habitats to forecasted rapid sea level rise.
Huebert, Jennifer [262] see Filimoehala, Darby
Huey, Samuel [9] see Britt, Tad
Huff, Meagan [172] see Wilson, Douglas
Huffman, Thomas (University of the Witwatersrand)
[234]
Archaeological Research in the Mapungubwe Cultural Landscape
Archaeological investigations in the Limpopo Valley began in 1999 as part of the University of the Witwatersrand’s’ Origin of
Mapungubwe Project. Initially, the focus was on the role of agriculture in the development of Mapungubwe—southern Africa’s first
state. Over the years, various student teams recorded some 1150 Iron Age (AD 400–1800) settlements inside the World Heritage
site and Buffer Zone. The sites range from agricultural-orientated homesteads, to agricultural field camps, cattle posts and ritual
places. In addition to cultural themes, these sites have contributed to three inter-related research projects that involve natural
scientists: droughts, baobabs and paleomagnetism. First, burnt granaries in agricultural homesteads and field camps were the result
of ritual acts by people suspected of causing severe droughts. Secondly, isotopic data from growth rings in living baobab trees help
to date the droughts. And thirdly, burnt granaries fixed magnetic signals that show dramatic changes in Earth’s magnetic field,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    263
challenging the retrodicted model for past stability.
Huffman, Thomas [60] see Earley, Frank
Huggins, Kathleen (University of California, Berkeley) and Matthew Sitek (University of California, San Diego)
[243]
Typology and Intrasite Distribution of Tiwanaku (ca. AD 500–1100) Ground Stone Tools at Cerro San Antonio (L1) in the Middle
Locumba Valley, Peru
We present a typology and intrasite density analysis of ground-stone implements at the multicomponent site of Cerro San Antonio
(L1) in the middle Locumba Valley in southern Peru. The contexts examined for this study were marked by dense domestic refuse
and associated domestic architecture, with most material correlates suggesting an affiliation to the Tiwanaku culture during the
Middle Horizon Period (ca. AD 500–1100). Ground-stone tools and implements were essential to household food preparation and
craft production tasks, and can be found in most prehistoric domestic assemblages. Ground-stone tools are also commonly
identified between and outside of households, with intrasite household distributions of specific tool types suggesting lending
between households as well as outdoor domestic activity areas. However, due to their bulky nature and heavy weights, ground-
stone artifacts are often simply counted and generally identified in field, and only collected for further analysis from excavation. This
study combines data from targeted systematic survey and extensive excavations conducted at two large domestic sectors in 2019,
with a “catch and release” in-field analysis and GPS tagging strategy. With these descriptions and technical illustrations, we hope to
provide the basis for more systematic studies of ground-stone tools from Tiwanaku and Middle Horizon domestic sites.
Hughes, Karissa (Laboratories of Molecular Anthropology and Microbiome Research), Nawa Sugiyama (University of
California, Riverside), Nihan Dagtas (Laboratories of Molecular Anthropology and Microbi) and Courtney Hofman
(Laboratories of Molecular Anthropology and Microbi)
[244]
Using Ancient Mitogenomics to Investigate Canid Procurement in the Teotihuacán Ritual Landscape
Dogs have captured mankind’s attention for thousands of years, often overshadowing human interaction with other canids. In ritual
contexts at Teotihuacán, four different canids have been identified in the faunal assemblages: the Mexican grey wolf (Canis lupus),
the coyote (Canis latrans), the domestic dog (Canis lupus familiaris) and possibly a wolf-dog hybrid (Canis lupus-familiaris). As one
of two domesticated species in Mesoamerica (alongside the turkey), dogs were prominent participants in domestic rites but
seemingly absent as key actors in state ritual spectacles. Wild and domestic canids were symbolically and functionally distinct, and
the Teotihuacán state selected the wolf as a primary state symbol. To explore the relationship between canids and people in ancient
Mesoamerica, we sequenced mitochondrial genomes from six canid samples from three areas inside the city: the Moon Pyramid
(ritual complex), the Sun Pyramid (ritual complex) and the Plaza de las Columnas (civic-administrative complex). We also
investigate the relationships between individual canid samples by comparing mitogenomes within and between the two different
contexts. This project contributes intriguing information about Teotihuacán, its people and ritual as well as informing broader
questions regarding human interactions with endemic canids in the Americas prior to European arrival.
Hughes, Karissa [244] see Singleton, Robin
Hulen, Cyrus (College of Wooster) and Olivia Navarro-Farr (College of Wooster)
[5]
Meeting the Neighbors: An Analysis of Inter-Archipelagic Interaction in the Cook Islands
The Cook Islands are situated east of Samoa in Polynesia. In this poster, we examine the trade relationship between the Cook
Islands and the surrounding Samoan, Tongan, and Society Islands as a proxy for general interaction. Preliminary research, based
on x-ray fluorescence analysis of stone tools and debitage and petrographic analysis of the few sherds derived from archaeological
contexts in the Cook Islands, suggests a preference for trade with islands groups in Western Polynesia, notably Samoa and Tonga.
Additional evidence for interaction comes from the analysis of fishhook morphology and relevant anthropological literature. The
prevailing question is why this preference exists despite mutual accessibility models predicting more contact with the Society and
Austral Islands than West Polynesia. This poster will include review of climatological, economic, and socio-political explanations, all
of which likely contribute to a more nuanced understanding of this complex pattern.
Humphreys, Stephen (Durham University), William Griswold (Northeast Region Archaeology Program) and Steve Roskams
(University of York)
[188]
Rehabilitation Archaeology in the Context of the DPAA Mission
Since 2016 American Veterans Archaeological Recovery (AVAR) has placed American military veterans onto mission-oriented,
team-centered archaeological excavations to build peer-support communities and enhance mental health. In September of 2019
AVAR partnered with the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency in its mission to recover the remains of aircrew lost in a B-24
Liberator crash in southern England in 1944. The project benefited from a combination of British and American technical expertise
and support; archaeologists from the National Park Service and the University of York Department of Archaeology oversaw
technical aspects of excavation. The University of York and Breaking Ground Heritage, a British veterans archaeological program
dedicated to using archaeology as a recovery pathway, provided participants to the program and facilitated logistics. This poster will
illustrate the methodology employed in surveying and excavating the site. Additionally, it will provide results of the wellness surveys
utilized during the project in order to demonstrate the positive impact archaeological excavation can have upon veteran participants
when appropriate support methods are put into place.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    264
Hundman, Brittany [21] see Espino Huaman, Richard
Hünemeier, Tábita [244] see Ferraz da Silva, Tiago
Hunt, David
[195]
Using Landscape Learning to Explore Diachronic Change within the Western Stemmed Tradition
The Western Stemmed Tradition (WST) spanned as much as 5,000 years in the Great Basin. However, due to deflationary erosion,
more refined control within this wide temporal range remains elusive. Thus, temporally sequencing WST sites, subtypes, and their
diagnostic artifacts is currently difficult, often unattainable, and leaves Great Basin archaeologists with few traditional methods for
constructing a WST point chronology. Without a means to date many WST sites, some of the most important questions about the
human colonization of, and adaptation to, a vast expanse of the arid west have gone unanswered. To help address these problems,
my research explores a new method for the chronological ordering of WST sites and for establishing a WST stemmed point
chronology. This research employs models of landscape learning, which consider how human colonizers of a new land collectively
acquire and share knowledge about their new environment, specifically regarding toolstone acquisition and usage, and creates new
methodologies for quantifying the prominence, or discoverability, of lithic resources on the landscape. This approach should allow
the detection of a continuum of landscape learning over time, a continuum that should allow WST sites to be ordered in time.
Hunt, Terry [24] see DiNapoli, Robert
Hunt, Turner
[113]
Discussant
Hunter, Andrea (Osage Nation)
[49]
A View from the Osage Nation
The concept and the procedures provided by federal law for the assessment and potential return of Native Americans’ ancestors
and objects which are sacred, funerary, or deemed cultural patrimony are not conflicting or difficult. It is absolutely amazing how
many, and I mean Many, institutions and museums have chosen to address this “issue.” In dealing with NAGPRA and also the
NMAI Act since 1989, I have had the privilege to work with both laws from the tribal side, the university side, the museum side, and
back to the tribal side. This presentation will provide insight on what the Osage Nation has been subjected to from federal agencies,
universities, and museums. The Osage Nation’s protocol for taking control of the procedures will also be shared.
Hunter, Andrea (Osage Nation)
[96]
Discussant
Huntington, Yumi (Framingham State University)
[141]
Mapping Motifs and Techniques: Tracing the Development and Transmission of Cupisnique-Style Engraved Head Images
Most scholars have identified the ceramics of the Casma, Zaña, and Jequetepeque valleys as being in the Cupisnique style based
on shared characteristics of black or brown color and stirrup-spouted shape. Many of these ceramics also exhibit thinly engraved
head motifs in numerous variant iconographies, which I have identified in previous writing as being emblems of a unified cultural
identity in the region, both borrowing from and contrasting with the imagery of other neighboring cultures. At the same time, the
development of the technique of post-firing engraving that was used to create these motifs has not been mapped either historically
or geographically based on the archaeological record. While it is widely recognized that these unique objects first appeared in the
Formative period (ca. 1200–200 BCE), much more remains to be known about precisely where and when their innovative imagery
first arose and how post-firing decorative practices spread through the region over time, for example also appearing in the Formative
period ceramics of Paracas. More than just identifying a singular Cupisnique style, then, a visual map of the archaeological record
allows us to trace local developments and transmissions even within a region previously defined only through a singular
cultural/stylistic identity.
Huntley, Deborah [156] see Baxter, Erin
Huntley, Deborah [203] see Schaefer, Jonathan
Hurst, Heather (Skidmore College), Boris Beltrán (Proyecto Regional Arqueológico San Bartolo-Xultun), Franco Rossi
(Boston University), David Stuart (University of Texas, Austin) and Karl Taube (University of California, Riverside)
[138]
Placemaking at the Los Arboles Complex of Xultun, Guatemala
In 2010, archaeologists of the San Bartolo-Xultun Project began investigations of an acropolis complex located at the northern limit
of the urban center of Xultun, designated “Los Arboles.” The penultimate phase of the complex included extensive preserved plaster
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     265
friezes adorning building facades and platforms. Since then, systematic excavations have studied the multiple phases of Los
Arboles’ construction sequence and documented the incredibly complex iconographic program marking the acropolis as a sacred
location associated with ancestral deities and dynastic history. This paper presents the distinct architectural facades of the
penultimate phase of Los Arboles as a unified artistic program that includes iconographies of world trees, rain, maize, fire and
sacrifice, and reflects on Maya placemaking through the archaeological context of this urban boundary and its imagery.
Hurst, Heather [57] see Rossi, Franco
Hurst, Stance (Museum of Texas Tech University) and Eileen Johnson (Museum of Texas Tech University)
[103]
Decoding Knudson’s Flintknappers: A 3D Model Analysis of the Plainview Bison Kill Projectile Points
Excavated in the mid-1940s, the Plainview site on the Southern High Plains generated considerable interest and continues to do so
today. After many hours spent illustrating each flake scar of the Plainview (41HA1) bison kill site’s lithic assemblage, Knudson
stated in her 1973 dissertation that “perhaps only one and at the most two individuals made these tools.” To further examine this
observation as a hypothesis, 3D models were made using photogrammetry of the Plainview-type projectile points. Twenty of the 28
Plainview projectile points Knudson examined were available for this research. The other eight had been from local collectors.
Analysis of the 3D projectile point models focused on flake scar size, orientation, and overall patterning. These data were then
compared with 3D models made of Plainview projectile points from the Warnica-Wilson Plainview campsite located near Portales,
New Mexico. Greater variation might be expected in a camp assemblage vs. a kill assemblage. Results suggested that 3D models
have the potential to quantify the number of flintknappers responsible for projectile point manufacture. A focus on individual variation
within Plainview lithic assemblages also appeared to have the potential to delineate the Plainview projectile point type better—a
notorious problem for Paleoindian scholars.
Hurt, John Duncan (University of Texas at Austin)
[108]
Social and Behavioral Implications of Architecture at the Cividade de Bagunte
The Cividade de Bagunte is an Iron Age and Roman Period hillfort, or castro, located in the municipality of Vila do Conde in
northwestern Portugal. This paper looks at specific features of Bagunte’s architectural remains in order to speculate about past
social behaviors. Novel approaches to the spatial and material properties of the site’s remains may allow us to understand aspects
of the ancient community’s construction of, perception of, and interaction with their own built environment. Toward this end, the
architecture of Bagunte is interpreted as a reflection of past ways of seeing and being, and as a material dimension of fundamental
significance to the daily experiences of the site’s ancient inhabitants.
Hussey, R. Scott (University of Florida)
[212]
Dungeons and Digital Heritage Advocacy: Preserving Tetouan’s Mazmorras through a Virtual Online Museum
Advocating for the heritage management of threatened archaeological sites brings many challenges related to the deterioration,
conservation, and accessibility of the sites. In Morocco, Tetouan’s Mazmorras, a subterranean prison where Christian captives and
slaves were kept from the sixteenth to eighteenth century, are structurally unsound and, thus, sealed from public access. However,
this site is one of the only surviving evidences of the networks of capture, trade, and ransom of faith captives in the Early Modern
Mediterranean. I have created an online multilingual virtual museum that digitally preserves and increases access to the site while
reducing impact on its fragile structure. This museum offers a virtual reconstruction of the underground space through which visitors
can navigate virtually. 3D reconstructions of artifacts found during the excavations are also displayed through photogrammetric
methods. Finally, I present findings of my archaeological and historical research in multiple languages, which are further
contextualized by excerpts of narratives of people held within the dungeons. Overall, this multilingual online museum helps to
convey the historical importance of the site to international audiences while protecting it from further damage.
Huster, Angela (Arizona State University)
[133]
Ceramic Chronology in the Absence of a Horizon
In this paper, I present an initial ceramic seriation for the Epiclassic site of Chicoloapan Viejo, in the southern Basin of Mexico, with
a discussion of issues particular to periods of political fragmentation. I demonstrate that two phases can be distinguished at
Chicoloapan Viejo, based on relative type frequencies, rather than the presence or absence of diagnostic markers. As one of only a
handful of Epiclassic chronologies based on well-excavated data and anchored by radiocarbon dates, this seriation has the potential
to clarify the dynamics of regional interaction during Teotihuacan’s collapse and aftermath. One of the primary challenges in
studying periods of political fragmentation can be the establishment of basic chronological periods in cases where political
fragmentation has resulted in high levels of regional diversity, resulting in either a lack of diagnostic marker types, or high levels of
variation the frequencies and dates of use of a type within a relatively limited area. However, if overcome with detailed, site-level
chronologies, such periods of fragmentation offer unique opportunities to examine the very social processes that produced them.
Huster, Angela [26] see Smith, Michael
Hutson, Scott (University of Kentucky)
[102]
Preclassic Pop and Classic Community: Demographic Archaeology in Northwest Yucatán
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     266
Research in Northwest Yucatán, Mexico, has played a large role in the development of demographic archaeology in the Maya area,
beginning with Edward Thompson’s nineteenth-century investigations of housemounds at Labna and reaching a mid-twentieth-
century pinnacle with maps of Mayapán and Dzibilchaltun. In the twenty-first century, advances have continued in Classic and
Postclassic period demography in both the Puuc and the Plains, along with surprising revelations about the Preclassic. This paper
focuses on mapping and excavation conducted by the author in Preclassic contexts in the Ucí area and Classic contexts at
Chunchucmil. The paper also reviews new data from Puuc sites such as Kabah, Xocnaceh, Muluchtzekel, Paso de Macho and
Yaxhom and from Northern Plains sites such as Poxilá, Xtobo, Izamal, Mayapán, and Aké.
Hutson, Scott (University of Kentucky)
[155]
Discussant
Hutson, Scott [54] see Kidder, Barry
Hutson, Scott [128] see Plank, Shannon
Hyde, David (Western Colorado University) and Fred Valdez Jr. (University of Texas, Austin)
[253]
Shedding Light on the Pre-Maya to Maya Transition: Continuity and Discontinuity in Lithic Technology at Colha, Belize
Occupation of the Maya Lowlands begins with pre-Maya populations that extend back to at least 12,000 years ago with early
Paleoindians and later Archaic people. The beginnings of what we call Maya first appear around 1000 BC in the Lowlands during
the Middle Preclassic. Though the Maya Highlands have evidence for the Early Preclassic, the transition from pre-Maya to Maya,
2000–1000 BC, is poorly understood in the Lowlands. Colha is a medium-sized Maya site known for its extensive Preclassic and
Classic stone tool workshops. Additionally, data have been recovered for a pre-Maya occupation of the site. In this paper, we will
attempt to shed light on this transition by examining continuities and discontinuities in the lithic technology from the site of Colha in
the Northern Belize Chert Bearing Zone.
Hyde, David [178] see Godhardt, Ava
Hyde, David [53] see Thompson, Lauri
Hyland, Corrie (Trent University), Paul Szpak (Trent University) and Jean-François Millaire (University of Western Ontario)
[243]
High Tide and Low Tide: Variable Marine Consumption by Victims of Ritual Violence in the Virú Valley, Peru
Multi-tissue stable isotope analysis is a valuable tool to analyze subtle changes in diet, and can alter our understanding of the
dietary and cultural customs of ancient societies. My research explores the diet of individuals associated with ritual violence at
Huaca Santa Clara and Huaca Gallinazo using stable carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur isotope analyses. Multiple soft-tissue (hair, nail,
skin, tendon, brain matter) and bone collagen samples from burials with and without evidence for ritual violence were sampled to
determine the role diet played in the preparation of individuals for ritual violence during the Virú and Tomaval periods (200 BC to AD
600, and AD 750–1150) in the Virú Valley, Peru. In contrast to previous archaeofaunal research, bone collagen isotopic
compositions indicated low consumption of marine resources. However, incremental isotopic analyses of hair revealed that major
changes in diet before death by ritual violence were driven by variable consumption of marine protein. These results contribute to a
growing body of isotopic research in the Andes suggesting that proximity to the coast cannot be universally associated with a high
reliance on marine resources.
Iannone, Gyles (Trent University), Pyiet Phyo Kyaw (Mandalay University) and Scott Macrae (Trent University)
[28]
Searching for Classical Bagan’s Peri-Urban Neighborhoods: Preliminary Results of the 2019 Field Season
The IRAW@Bagan project is aimed at generating an integrated socio-ecological history for residential patterning, agricultural
practices, and water management at the Classical Burmese (Bama) capital of Bagan, Myanmar (eleventh to fourteenth centuries
CE) across a range of significant ecological, climatic, economic, sociopolitical, and religious changes. This objective is being
achieved through a settlement archaeology study within the peri-urban (mixed urban-rural) settlement zone immediately surrounding
Bagan’s walled and moated, regal-ritual epicenter. This discussion presents the preliminary results of the 2019 test excavations at
the Shwe Creek and Otein Taung residential sites, with particular emphasis on the nature of occupation surfaces and the character
of the associated features, artifacts, and ecofacts.
Iannone, Gyles [28] see Macrae, Scott
Ibarra, Thania [130] see Shaw, Justine
Ibarrola, Mary Elizabeth (University of Florida)
[213]
Placemaking in the Borderland: An Archaeology of African-Descendent People in Colonial Florida
During the colonial era, Florida was a region of constant geopolitical turmoil. The purpose of my dissertation research is to examine
how people of African descent responded to and transformed this turbulent landscape. In a comparative regional study I consider
the various tactics and strategies employed by people of African descent to adapt within the changing political landscape of colonial
and territorial Florida through the everyday creation of place. The research examines six archaeological sites which range from the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    267
Second Spanish Period through the Territorial Period and were occupied by individuals of varying legal and social status but
overlapping ethnic and racial categorization. In this poster, I highlight particular insights gained from an examination of site
distribution and site arrangement. Through this close spatial analysis, I have been able to build a better picture of spatial
relationships among sites and their positioning within a physical landscape, as well as understand how that physical landscape
might be manipulated to limit or encourage certain kinds of interaction. Ultimately, I hope that this research may lend insight into
how internal and external pressures influence the structure of diasporic places.
Ichikawa, Akira (University of Colorado, Boulder)
[197]
The Open and Restricted Plazas of San Andres in the Zapotitan Valley, El Salvador
Plazas were important spaces for daily life in ancient Mesoamerica. However, in the Southeastern Maya area, especially in El
Salvador, there have been limited studies on plazas. This paper focuses on San Andres, a ceremonial center in the Zapotitan valley
during the Late Classic period, which contained two plazas in the main architectural group: the open and restricted plazas. Based on
the new excavations and radiocarbon data from San Andres, this paper examines when and how these plazas were formed and
interprets its social implications. Both plazas were constructed simultaneously after 650 cal AD, but with different techniques and
purposes. The open plaza was covered with mud plaster and was possibly surrounded by four elite residential houses with easy
access from the outside, indicating that it most likely functioned as a gathering place. In contrast, the plaza with restricted access
was constructed as part of the Acropolis, with tons of adobes, practically invisible from outside the Acropolis. There exists rich ritual
evidence in this plaza, which indicate that the restricted plaza was used for exclusive elite rituals.
Iglesias, Christina (California State University, Los Angeles)
[137]
Interpreting a Subterranean Feature at Chichen Itza
During the 2019 season, a subterranean feature was excavated atop a pyramidal structure in the pueblo of San Felipe Nuevo 839 m
NE from the El Castillo pyramid at Chichen Itza. The entrance is a round, finely finished, chultun-like entrance 53 cm in diameter.
The walls are plastered which suggests its function as a water cistern but the plaster is a mere 0.5 to 1 cm thick which is certainly
too thin to prevent leakage. Additionally, the feature measures only 84 cm from floor to ceiling which makes it anomalous for a
chultun. The feature was constructed in fill so it is also not a sascabera which may have a similar entrance. Its placement at the very
top of a large platform provides the best clue to its function. At this point I am interpreting the feature as a small man-made cave.
Iizuka, Fumie (University of California, Merced), Masami Izuho (Tokyo Metropolitan University), Hans Barnard (University of
California, Los Angeles) and Mark Aldenderfer (University of California, Merced)
[252]
Petrographic Provenance Study of the Late Pleistocene Pottery from the Soujiyama and Kenshojo-Ato Sites, Southern Kyushu,
Japan
With tephrochronology, southern Kyushu of southern Japan has among the most reliable dates for late Pleistocene pottery in East
and Northeast Asia. Pottery from the Incipient Jomon Period is found below Satsuma tephra dated to around 12,800 cal BP. In our
previous study, we selected Incipient Jomon sherd samples from the Soujiyama and Kenshojo-Ato sites of southern Kyushu and
conducted visual analyses of the inclusions. We suggested that most pottery was produced locally. For the current study, we
conducted petrographic thin-section analysis of a number of sherds. The results agreed with the results of our visual analysis.
Apparently, in the Late Pleistocene Period, foragers in southern Kyushu mainly used locally produced ceramic vessels.
Ikeshoji-Orlati, Veronica
[32]
Discussant
Ikeshoji-Orlati, Veronica
[51]
The San Simone Tombe a Fossa: Preliminary Analysis of Four Early Seventh-Century BCE Villanovan Funerary Assemblages
The San Giuliano necropolis, located within the Marturanum Regional Park in northern Lazio, Italy, is well-known for its hundreds of
Villanovan and Etruscan graves. As part of our mission to understand the patterns of human habitation at the site from the ninth
century BCE through the thirteenth century CE, the San Giuliano Archaeological Research Project (SGARP) has excavated a
selection of the Etruscan rock-cut chamber tombs and Villanovan tombe a fossa (pit graves) over the past four field seasons. This
presentation focuses on the material evidence from four late Villanovan tombe a fossa located on the San Simone plateau within the
San Giuliano necropolis. Dating to the early seventh century BCE, the San Simone tombs are inhumation graves of three adults and
one child with rich assemblages of ceramic, bronze, and amber goods. Analysis of the material remains reveals the transitional late-
Villanovan to early-Etruscan nature of these tombs; in conjunction with the physical proximity and orientation of the four graves, it
raises further questions about the social status and possible kinship relationships between the deceased.
Iñañez, Javier (University of the Basque Country [UPV/EHU]), Juan Guillermo Martín (Universidad del Norte), Michael
Glascock (University of Missouri), Russell Holland (University of Sheffield) and Helen Thompson (University of Sheffield)
[196]
Clay and Glaze: Similar Materials, Different Choices: Chemical and Petrographic Characterization of Pottery from Colonial Panama
Panamá Viejo was founded in 1519 by the Spanish expeditionary Pedrarias Dávila. At the time, it was the first permanent settlement
in the Pacific Ocean, becoming a city by a royal decree in 1521. Shortly after its creation the city became an important base for the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    268
trade with Spain. In 1671, the English pirate Henry Morgan attacked and sacked Panama Viejo, resulting in a fire that destroyed the
entire city. Thus, a new settlement was built a few miles west, which would become the origin of the modern Panama City. An
integrated analytical study of the rich pottery assemblage pottery from Panama Viejo, both glazed and unglazed, has shed light on
the technological influence on American majolica and local potting traditions within the cultural frame of societies in contact in a
colonial context. The supply of raw materials for the potting industry in colonial Panama is assessed diachronically from
colonization, through the disruptions and eventual relocation of the city. Examining the spectrum of indigenous style pottery, colonial
production and imported ceramics, this technologically based study considers the important archaeological and historical
implications of these important ceramics in the Spanish colonial market within the broader region.
Ingalls, Victoria (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[158]
Ritual and Movement in the Preclassic Hinterlands of the Mopan River Valley
Evidence from the Mopan River valley continues to clarify the nature and extent of Preclassic occupation of the region. The
hinterland community of San Lorenzo sits directly across the river from both Xunantunich and Actuncan, sites with substantial
Preclassic construction and ritual use. Using data gathered from this ancient community, this paper focuses on the role of focal
nodes within a wider landscape, analyzing the potential for movement and interactions across the built and natural environments.
While not monumental in scale, San Lorenzo boasts several Preclassic structures, including a round ritual structure that was likely
used for gatherings of the local community. Numerous analogous structures are documented across the lowlands, and seem to be
most commonly found at or near sites that also include a Preclassic E-Group. This paper explores the role of outlying communities
in the construction and use of monumental spaces, and conceptualizes how movement at different scales may shape community
identity and social memory through the creation of space/place.
Ingram, Scott [214] see Paradiso, Emma
Ingram, Scott [165] see Patrick, Shelby
Inomata, Takeshi (University of Arizona)
[10]
Discussant
Inomata, Takeshi (University of Arizona)
[24]
Poor Preservation in Complex Urban Settings: Chronology-Building in the Maya Area
Archaeologists working in the Maya area face multiple challenges as they develop chronological studies. First, many sites are
complex urban centers with diverse types of structures and areas. Second, these sites commonly have long occupation, involving
migrations, destructions of buildings, and recycling of construction materials. Third, in this tropical environment, the preservation of
organic materials is poor. To build reliable chronologies under these conditions, researchers need to have substantial data from
excavation and a sufficient number of radiocarbon dates combined with ceramics studies and stratigraphic information. A particularly
important issue is the identification of problematic old radiocarbon dates resulting from stratigraphic mixing. The Bayesian analysis
of radiocarbon dates provides an effective tool in this process.
Inomata, Takeshi (University of Arizona)
[265]
Discussant
Ion, Rodica -Mariana [159] see Turcanu-Carutiu, Daniela
Iovita, Radu [162] see Coco, Emily
Ireland, Brenda [97] see Higgins, Howard
Iriarte, José [198] see Robinson, Mark
Isayev, Vugar [111] see Abdullayev, Rahman
Iseminger, William (Cahokia Mounds)
[164]
Cahokia-style Engraved Stone Tablets: A Study of Form and Design
Cahokia’s iconic Birdman Tablet is well-known but there is a corpus of many other examples, a few with graphics on one side and
the other side cross-hatched or plain; the majority have cross-hatching on one or both sides. Thus far, 28 examples of engraved
stone tablets in the Cahokia style have been identified and their characteristics and proveniences, when known, documented.
Possible functions will be discussed and a request for any additional known specimens that can be added to this database.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     269
Ito, Nobuyuki (Nagoya University)
[189]
Un fragmento de estela relacionada con la fecha Bak’tun 7 en Chalchuapa, El Salvador
En la Costa Sur de Mesoamérica, se han descubierto numerosas estelas esculpidas. Sin embargo, solamente una docena de estas
se registró dentro de un contexto arqueológico del período Preclásico. No obstante, en esta región se localizan dos sitios que
poseen estelas con las fechas calendáricas más tempranas del Bak’tun 7, entre estas Chiapa de Corzo y El Baúl, mientras que
hacia el norte de esta región, hasta el momento solo existe un sitio identificado, Tres Zapotes en Golfo de México. En El Trapiche,
Chalchuapa, se han encontrado varios fragmentos de estela al frente del Montículo E3–1, los cuales se colocaron como ofrenda al
frente del acceso a la misma Estructura. Al sur de la Estructura E3–1 y frente a la Estructura E3–2, se descubrió otro fragmento de
estela cuya fecha pertenecía al calendario de la cuenta larga relacionada al Bak’tun 7. En esta ponencia se presentará la evidencia
arqueológica en el área de El Trapiche, Chalchuapa, que muestra la presencia de una fecha muy temprana del calendario de
cuenta larga maya en El Salvador y su relación con Mesoamérica.
Ito, Yumiko [235] see Habu, Junko
Ives, John (University of Alberta)
[103]
A Canadian Perspective on Later Paleoindian Technocomplexes and Emerging Genetic Data
Ruthann Knudson had an abiding interest in the later Paleoindian world and an affinity for Canadian research, keeping in regular
touch with colleagues across the 49th parallel. Geneticists consistently identify three clades in the early prehistory of the New World:
an ancient Beringian population in Alaska and early northern and southern clades south of the ice masses. The northern clade
contained ancestors of the Haida, Tlingit, Tsmishian, Athapaskans, Algonquians, and Salish. Early Holocene language identities are
essentially beyond the range of the comparative method in historical linguistics, yet this northern clade would eventually yield the
northern speech communities of the later Holocene. While it would be folly to think that it would be a simple matter to correlate
technocomplexes of the later Paleoindian world with language identities, it is worth asking just which technocomplexes and social
behaviors might have been involved in this time range. Eastern Beringian populations and people from south of the ice masses
came into contact with each other by the fluted point era; emerging genetic perspectives should serve to sharpen our interest in
subsequent Cody Complex and northern Plano manifestations, as well as intriguing toolstone distributions from this early Holocene
time frame.
Izuho, Masami [175] see Gillam, J. Christopher
Izuho, Masami [252] see Iizuka, Fumie
Izzo, Victoria (Texas A&M University), John Walden, Kirsten Green, Rosie Bongiovanni and Ashley McKeown
[169]
Identifying Patterned Variability in Preclassic-Postclassic Maya Mortuary Practices in the Belize River Valley
The Classic (AD 300–900) period Belize River Valley represents a complex political landscape of numerous semi-autonomous Maya
polities. Many of these began their emergence at the end of the Early Preclassic period (1200–900BC), consolidated their political
power in the Late Preclassic, underwent collapse in the Terminal Classic period (AD 750–900/1000), but then witnessed Late
Postclassic reoccupation (AD 900/1000–1521). Archaeological investigations at the major centers of Lower Dover, Cahal Pech and
Baking Pot have yielded a sizeable burial dataset comprising ruling apical elites from the major centers, and intermediate elites and
commoners from the minor centers and households across the hinterlands. We present a meta-analysis of osteological, artifactual
and contextual data gathered from burials recovered throughout these polities. We apply three multi-variate statistical techniques;
principle components analysis, multi-dimensional scaling and hierarchical cluster analysis to discern broad temporal and spatial
patterns in these data. Analysis allows the identification of changing burial trends over time at different hierarchical levels of society,
broad spatial variability in burial customs between polities, neighborhoods and households, and an assessment of wealth
investment in mortuary practices in the region.
Izzo, Victoria [178] see Messinger, Emma
Jablonski, James [176] see Casson, Aksel
Jackson, Sarah (University of Cincinnati) and Linda Brown (University of New Mexico)
[127]
Persons, Places, and Dreams: Relationships Mediated by Residential Spaces at Classic Maya Say Kah, Belize
In this paper, we consider the ancient Maya built environment as an extension of the living landscape from which it was constructed.
The built environment was a dynamic space for ongoing relationships between multiple types of persons (living, ancestral, and
nonhuman). We discuss examples from our excavations at the Classic Maya site of Say Kah, Belize, where we have encountered
material traces of relational persons in different forms, and evidence of ongoing, interactive relationships with them that unfolded
over time. A specific focus of our discussion is the importance of residential spaces in ongoing relationships with secondary
ancestral bundles, which were visited and communicated with. We interpret these burials, typically embedded within a sleeping
bench, as being active communicating bundles who conversed with their descendants during dreams. We consider the role of
benches and sleeping or dreaming spaces within residential structures and how these experiential environments point toward
dreamscapes as important loci for relationships with ancestors and other-than-human communicating entities.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  270
Jackson, Stephen [235] see Perrotti, Angelina
Jacobs, Iris (University of Chicago) and Vanessa Muros (UCLA Cotsen Institute of Archaeology)
[268]
Public Outreach and the Community Museum: Engaging Local Communities in Archaeological Conservation and Research
This presentation will focus on public outreach efforts undertaken by members of the Corral Redondo Archaeological Project during
the 2018 and 2019 field seasons. We will discuss activities that provided opportunities to interact with students and teachers of the
IE Miguel Grau school in the town of Iquipi, where the team members lived and worked. Additionally, we will discuss our community
education activities related to the ‘Luis Guillermo Lumbreras’ community museum. Initiatives that engaged the wider community
around the site of Corral Redondo and Iquipi, such as the oral history interview project associated with the museum, will also be
discussed.
Jacobs, Zenobia [11] see Phillips, Natasha
Jacobson, Jodi (Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University), Taylor Bowden (Texas State University) and
Susan Sincerbox (Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University)
[76]
Grease, Dogs, Rats, and Rivers: Marrow and Bone Grease Processing at the Late Prehistoric Jayroe Site (41HM51) in Central
Texas
The Jayroe Site (41HM51) is a Late Prehistoric site located along the Edward’s Plateau in Hamilton County, Texas. Previous
analysis of faunal material from 41HM51 by other researchers noted that the assemblage was diverse with good preservation, yet
artiodactyl bone was heavily comminuted. Conclusions associated with prior analyses by other researchers was conflicting. Quigg
(2014) suggested fragmentation was due to marrow and bone grease extraction, while Dockall (2016) disagreed and indicated
taphonomy as the primary cause. Lacking from discussions was a hypothesis for identifying bone grease manufacturing at Texas or
Southern Plains sites. Seasonal differences in animal fat storage, catabolization order of fat reserves, longevity and viability of
marrow and grease storage given seasonal temperature thresholds in Texas, and large scale versus small scale bone grease use
and consumption should be considered. Additional factors include differentiating bone grease extraction or other intentional
breakage by humans from various taphonomic variables (carnivore modification, alluvial abrasion action, etc) at the site. Results of
studies by authors and methodology for identifying bone grease processing at macro and micro level are presented, including
additional findings regarding potential evidence for dog domestication encountered while researching other variables.
Jaimes Vences, Gustavo [133] see Sugiura, Yoko
Jalbert, Catherine and Laura Heath-Stout (Rice University)
[72]
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society: An Analysis of Authorship, 1929–2019
The data produced and disseminated by archaeologists is partly shaped by their social positions and employment contexts.
Therefore, demographics have far-reaching impacts for how knowledge is constructed and received in the discipline. Recent
research demonstrates that this results in a “peer review gap,” wherein men and academic archaeologists are overrepresented in
peer reviewed publications, while women and cultural resource management archaeologists have more representation in non-
refereed venues. In this paper, we examine this dynamic using the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) and its Bulletin (BTAS) as a
case study. The BTAS is considered unique in that it is one of the oldest, continually published archaeology journals in the United
States (founded in 1929) and publishes editorially-reviewed articles with an optional peer review process. We will present
aggregated data on longitudinal trends in BTAS publications as well as survey results of TAS members and BTAS authors. Because
it is a venue for avocational, academic, and professional archaeologists, we will use this data to quantify the rates of refereed and
non-refereed publications and understand how they correlate with the institutional affiliation, gender, and race/ethnicity of authors.
[72]
Chair
Jalbert, Catherine
[91]
Discussant
James, L. Brock (University of Utah Archaeological Center), Kaley Joyce (University of Utah Archaeological Center), Kate
Magargal (University of Utah Archaeological Center) and Brian Codding (University of Utah Archaeological Center)
[236]
A Stone in the Hand Is Worth How Many in the Bush? Applying the Marginal Value Theorem to Understand Optimal Toolstone
Transportation, Processing, and Discard Decisions.
The acquisition and transport of material for the manufacturing of flaked stone tools comes at a cost. Numerous studies evaluate
how processing may reduce transport costs, often using theoretical frameworks derived from behavioral ecology theory, typically
applying central place foraging or the field processing model as a guide. However, to date these studies do not adequately address
either the continued reuse of toolstone over distance and time, or the repeated use of toolstone by multiple individuals. Here we
offer a novel application of marginal value theorem to lithic acquisition and conveyance. This study examines the impact of distance
on processing and abandonment of lithic cores, and quantifies these spatial patterns in terms of environmental quality. Predictions
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  271
of archaeological outcomes resulting from behaviors driven by marginal value theorem are tested through an analysis of several
archaeological sites in the Lower Dolores River Canyonlands Area in east-central Utah. The results support the model predictions,
showing that the degree of processing represented in lithic assemblages changes as a response to the decreasing quality and
abundance of available lithic material. This novel theoretical framework offers some general insights that are capable of explaining
variation in the distribution of lithic artifacts across diverse archaeological contexts.
[236]
Chair
James, Nathaniel (University of California, San Diego), Isabell Villasana (University of California, San Diego), Alexia Decaix
(Université Nice Sophia Antipolis), Steven Weber (Washington State University) and Jade d’Alpoim Guedes (University of
California, San Diego)
[205]
Taphonomy, Labor, and Subsistence at Harappa
Harappa is a critical site in understanding the plant-human relationships that defined the increasing urbanization and eventual
regionalization of the Indus Valley from 3300–1700 cal BC. The primary paleoethnobotanical methods for investing ancient social
organization have been the application of ethnographically based crop processing models. Relying on specific ratios of grains,
weeds, and chaff these models are vulnerable to social and taphonomic processes such as dung burning that can obscure past
activity. This paper presents an evaluation of these methods, and integrates functional weed ecology in order to disentangle both
crop processing and dung burning within the macrobotanical assemblages excavated at Harappa from 1990 to 2000. Further, it
attempts to disentangle how the archaeobotanical record reflects changing social organization at the site.
James, Steven (California State University at Fullerton)
[56]
Two Pioneering California Women Archaeologists, 1940s to 1960s: Agnes Bierman Babcock and Freddie Curtis
Although this may seem surprising, there were very few women California archaeologists prior to the 1940s. This presentation
discusses the lives of two pioneering women archaeologists who worked primarily in Southern California from the late 1940s to the
1960s, that of Agnes Bierman Babcock (1923–2018) and Freddie Curtis (1913–1996). These two women, who are generally not
well-known today, each conducted some of the first archaeological investigations at coastal and desert sites in the region. The lives
of these women and their contributions to archaeology are discussed as part of this year’s HAIG session celebrating early women
archaeologists.
Jamieson, Zachariah
[101]
The Quantification of Fire-Cracked Rock in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands and the Edwards Plateau of Texas
Burned Rock Middens (BRMs) are one of the most ubiquitous types of archaeological sites found in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands
and the Edwards Plateau of Texas. The collection of quantifiable fire cracked rock (FCR) data from BRMs allow for a meaningful
comparison of earth oven baking activities occurring at different sites. Furthermore, the quantification of previous excavation
methods ascertained in the literature review of documented BRMs support the standardization of methodology to aid researchers
with comparable datasets. This research attempts to construct a well-documented FCR quantification dataset as well as the
excavation methodology by utilizing the site Langtry Rock Midden in Val Verde County, Texas. The site is comprised of a large 1.5m
high, ring-shaped midden located north of Bonfire Shelter that is on the east ledge of the Eagle Nest Canyon. Through Texas State
University’s Ancient Southwest Texas Project and the assistance of the Texas State University Archaeology Field School and
volunteers, Langtry Rock Midden was excavated as a practical example to provide a model to standardize methodology of
excavations of BRM sites through the use of SfM (Structure from Motion) photogrammetry, modern sampling methods, and Rock
Sort.
Jamison, Gregg (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee), Charles Konsitzke (University of Wisconsin, Madison), William
Belcher (University of Nebraska), Brett Hoffman (University of Wisconsin, Madison) and Ella Axelrod (Colorado College)
[188]
UW MIA Recovery and Identification Project: A Multidisciplinary Approach to DPAA Partner Recovery Missions
Since 2016, the University of Wisconsin Missing-in-Action Recovery and Identification Project (UW MIA Project) has partnered with
the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency (DPAA) in conducting field operations to recover missing American servicemembers in
support of identification. Working in northern France, the project has successfully recovered the remains of two servicemembers lost
during WWII, helping DPAA to achieve their goal of providing the fullest-possible accounting to families and our nation. This poster
highlights our successful efforts and provides insights into the multi-disciplinary nature of the project, which includes historical
research, archaeological and forensic field methods, and student training in and out of the field. Students and volunteers have
gained valuable field experiences including survey, excavation, and analysis of recovered materials in the field, and developed
innovative on-site recovery infrastructure that facilitates expedient operations. These successful missions influence and support our
long-term goals of establishing a research institute that focuses exclusively on MIA recovery operations. The UW MIA Project
provides an important case study in how to develop and implement a successful partnership with DPAA. Working together, the UW
MIA Project and DPAA will continue to strive toward fulfilling our Nation’s promise to bring all of our missing servicemembers home.
Janesko, Sarah (VCP, Alexandria Laboratory)
[187]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   272
Janesko, Sarah [187] see Petrie, Jacob
Janz, Lisa (Trent University), Davahuu Odsuren (Mongolian Academy of Sciences) and Dashzeveg Bukhchuluun (Yale
University)
[62]
Tamsagbulag: New Center of Cattle Domestication in East Asia?
Tamsagbulag is one of the most important archaeological sites in Mongolia and is critical to understanding non-unilinear trajectories
toward sedentism and domestication. Located in the far eastern steppes, the site represents the only known evidence of sedentary
hunter-gatherer communities in Mongolia. The site is famous for evidence of ritual and intensive use of wild cattle many thousands of
years earlier than the introduction of western domesticates. Although we do not yet fully understand the nature of human-animal
relationships at the site, new excavations strongly support the idea that the site was used year-round and that local sedentism was
closely related to intensive exploitation, or even some level of management, of large game. Our research at Tamsagbulag offers many
new opportunities to for understanding variation in trajectories of sedentism and domestication both within East Asia and beyond.
Janz, Lisa [62] see Dashzeveg, Bukhchuluun
Janz, Lisa [125] see Rosen, Arlene
Janz, Lisa [76] see Routledge, Jennifer
Janzen, Anneke [171] see Hildebrand, Elisabeth
Jarman, Nicholas [9] see Steffen, Anastasia
Jaskowski, Clay (University of Notre Dame) and Kelsey Reese (University of Notre Dame)
[149]
Connecting Great Houses and Nearby Sites on the Mesa Verde North Escarpment
Hundreds of ancestral Pueblo sites occupied throughout the Basketmaker III through Pueblo III period (AD 500–1300) have been
recorded on the Mesa Verde North Escarpment in southwestern Colorado. Among these sites are one Chaco-era Great House, and
two potential post-Chaco era Great Houses. Each of these sites were likely constructed during the Pueblo II period, but were used
for differing lengths of time by their surrounding communities. By studying ceramic data associated with each of these potential
Great Houses and their neighboring communities, the time period and use-life of each site within these communities will be
estimated. We will also examine the population density on the North Escarpment before, during, and after Great House construction
in an attempt to determine whether a high population density led to the formation of Great House communities, or if the
establishment of Great Houses on the North Escarpment was the catalyst for an increased population. The results of this project will
show the construction and resilience of communities on the Mesa Verde North Escarpment through time, and offer an estimate of
when each of these communities were no longer being used.
Jazwa, Christopher (University of Nevada, Reno) and Ryan Anderson (Santa Clara University)
[135]
A Radiocarbon Chronology of Human Occupation in the East Cape Region of Baja California Sur, Mexico
We will develop an initial chronology of human occupation of Cabo Pulmo National Park (CPNP) in Baja California Sur, Mexico, and
the surrounding coastal region. Unlike Alta California, which has received more archaeological attention, large regions of Baja
California have been relatively unstudied and there is little information about when they were first occupied. We target coastal sites
in CPNP, many of which have eroding escarpments with stratified deposits exposed. We apply stratigraphic relationships to AMS
radiocarbon dates on multiple marine mollusk samples from coastal sites to establish the full range of occupation. These
relationships are modeled using software that employs Bayesian statistics and can be used to mitigate calibration errors related to
poorly understood variability in the local marine reservoir age, which has mixed carbon sources from the Gulf of California and
Pacific Ocean. This will provide an important framework for future archaeological research in the East Cape region and highlight its
potential for addressing broader research questions for western North America.
Jenkins, Dennis (Museum of Nat. & Cult. Hist., University of Oregon)
[19]
Discussant
Jenkins, Dennis (Museum of Nat. & Cult. Hist., University of Oregon), Katelyn McDonough (Texas A&M, Center for the
Study of First Americans), Richard Rosencrance (Museum of Nat. & Cult. Hist., University of Oregon) and Justin Holcomb
(Boston University)
[170]
Current Investigations at Connley Cave 5, Fort Rock Basin, Oregon: A Series of Late Pleistocene Western Stemmed Tradition
Occupations
University of Oregon field school investigations continue (2000–2001, 2014–2019) at the Connley Caves in the Fort Rock basin of
south-central Oregon. First investigated by Stephen Bedwell in 1967–1968, these caves revealed large, deeply buried, and stratified
Western Stemmed Tradition (WST) assemblages possibly dating to as much as 11,200±200 14C BP. However, beginning in 1967
Bedwell excavated in an expedient manner involving shovels, arbitrary 10 cm levels, and backhoe removal of 230 cm of post-
Mazama deposits. He recovered inverted radiocarbon dates in caves 4, 5, and 6 as a consequence and confidence in his work has
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    273
been justifiably low. Here, we report more nuanced investigations in a previously undisturbed rockshelter attached to the east side of
Cave 5. Specifically, we present the current stratigraphic and geochronological framework, provide an overview of the archaeology
at the site, and discuss future research initiatives. Our intention is to refine the geochronology, more fully understand site formation
processes, culture-history, settlement-subsistence, and lithic and osseous technology records for this truly impressive WST site.
Jenkins, Jessica [251] see Gallivan, Martin
Jenks, Kelly (New Mexico State University)
[165]
Investigating Parajes: An Exploration of “Camping” Sites on the Camino Real
For three centuries, El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro National Historic Trail served as the main wagon road transporting people
and merchandise between the New Mexico colony and the interior of New Spain. Most archaeological investigations of this trail
have focused on only two types of sites: actual trail segments, and associated camping areas known as “parajes”. Knowledge of
these paraje sites comes mostly from Spanish colonial- and Mexican-period travel accounts, which name and briefly describe
several camping areas regularly used by travelers in the long stretches between colonial settlements. Reconnaissance surveys
along the trail have revealed a more complicated pattern of trail-related activity, however, with numerous sites that vary in scale,
content, and date. This paper investigates the concept of parajes and presents a more nuanced way of thinking about the types of
sites associated with travel.
Jennings, Justin (Royal Ontario Museum), Aleksa Alaica (University of Toronto), Matthew Biwer (University of California,
Santa Barbara) and Oscar Huaman (Quilcapampa Archaeological Project)
[86]
A Final Feast: Molle Beer, Camelid Meat, Smashed Pots, and the Closing of Short-Lived Site in Middle Horizon Peru
In this paper, we reconstruct the final moments of Quilcapampa’s ninth century AD occupation. A group of Wari colonists had
founded the site on the coastal plain of southern Peru as little as a generation earlier, and in the ninth century were ceremonially
abandoning the settlement by drinking beer, eating meat, smashing pots, making fires, sealing doorways, and laying down fills. We
highlight beer’s essential role at the event—its preparation, consumption, and disposal—and discuss what the beverage can tell us
about Quilcapampa’s residents and their relationships to each other, local groups, and the Wari state.
Jennings, Justin (Royal Ontario Museum)
[268]
Discussant
Jennings, Thomas [232] see Jones, KC
Jennings, Thomas [17] see Smallwood, Ashley
Jensen, Anne (University of Alaska Fairbanks/Bryn Mawr College)
[9]
Vulnerability and Values: Things to Consider for Site Prioritization
Archaeological sites being threatened in various ways by accelerating environmental change. The scale and urgency of the threat
requires new models for funding, education, and recruitment of staff, engagement with the public and long-term curation of rescued
samples. One critical issue is how to prioritize sites for recording or salvage, since we cannot save them all, or even come close. To
be able to use limited resources for the maximum benefit of all stakeholders, a broadly applicable transparent prioritization scheme
is highly desirable. This poster will focus on what sorts of things should be considered in prioritization to achieve this goal.
Jensen, Anne (University of Alaska Fairbanks/Bryn Mawr College)
[220]
Moderator
Jepsen, Jacob (Brigham Young University), Scott Ure (Brigham Young University), Ridge Anderson (Brigham Young
University) and Michael Searcy (Brigham Young University)
[147]
Heat Seekers: An Experiment to Identify Prehistoric Architectural Features Using Aerial Thermography
Advances in thermal camera capabilities, improved dependability of unmanned aerial systems, and the increased capabilities of
various software packages are revolutionizing the collection, processing, and analysis of aerial thermal imagery. This poster shares
the results from an experiment developed by the authors to examine the parameters required for successful archaeological aerial
thermographic imaging. Following previous experiments and research in archaeological aerial thermography, we created a six-
month-long controlled experiment to determine to what degree environmental and climatic conditions impact buried archaeological
features using aerial thermographic imagery. Our results show that some conditions and environments are more conducive to
identifying buried ephemeral archaeological features than others. We conclude that ground cover, soil composition, soil
temperature, soil moisture, feature depth, feature type, and time of day significantly impact whether a buried archaeological feature
is visible using aerial thermography. As with most remote sensing, even the most ideal conditions do not always yield useful results;
however, we suggest that in some circumstances archaeological aerial thermography can successfully record the thermal signature
of shallowly buried archaeological features.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    274
Jeremiah, Kristen (Public Archaeology Laboratory Inc. [PAL])
[176]
Examining Exploited Resources from a Selection of Archaic Sites in Eastern Connecticut
This poster summarizes how organic and lithic analyses were employed to help interpret Native American settlement and
subsistence practices during the Archaic period in eastern Connecticut. Research conducted by The Public Archaeology Laboratory,
Inc., for proposed utility lines in the northeastern U.S. indicates that seasonality impacted site selection and that inhabitants were
reliant on diverse marine and terrestrial resources. These interpretations were based on floral and faunal identification, radiocarbon
dating of charred floral remains, blood residue analyses on stone tools, and lithic raw material choice. These analyses were applied
to a selection of sites in the Thames River drainage basin, and findings at these sites were then compared.
Jerrems, William and Amy Dansie (Nevada State Museum, Retired)
[198]
More Bits and Pieces: Twenty Years of Lahontan Basin Paleoindian Research
It appears that a pre-Clovis entry into the Americas (pre-13,500 cal BP) occurred across Beringia most likely by intermittent boat
ventures along parts of the North American coastline. The Yana Site (western Beringia) above the Arctic circle at 32,000 rcybp sets
a potential trajectory for human entrance into North America (eastern Beringia). Bluefish Caves evidence humans in eastern
Beringia at 24,000 cal BP, referred to as the Beringian Standstill model. Ultimately, settlements along the coastal route initiated a
movement into the continental interior potentially as early as 16,000 cal BP, as evidenced at the Coopers Ferry Site in northern
Idaho and Paisley Five Mile caves at 14,500 cal BP. A reevaluation of the dates of the last high stand of Pleistocene Lake Lahontan,
northwestern Great Basin, has resulted in a twenty-year research project that restructured the chronology of lake level rises and
falls. Lake levels made dramatic fall at 13,070 RCYBP (16,000 cal BP), which is contrary to the belief that a highstand occurred
during the Younger Dryas (12,000 cal BP). Focusing on the Lahontan basin of northwestern Nevada, we see strong evidence of a
very early entrance into the interior lands of North America.
Jeske, Robert (University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee) and Richard Edwards (Commonwealth Heritage Group)
[264]
Is Mississippianization a Thing? Testing the Spread of Innovation and Cultural Contact in the Eleventh-Century American Midwest
Mississippianization is often treated as an homogenized wave of influence emerging from the American bottom to transform
Northern groups into imitations of Cahokians. These hinterland people began using shell-tempered pottery and decorative motifs
that appear to have symbolized Mississippianness. This influence has been portrayed as an epidemic spread of innovation, or as
migration, and/or missionization that fueled conversion to Mississippianized lifeways. However, these models remove agency from
people outside of the American Bottom. Recent data indicate that cultural change occurred in discontinuous and divergent
patterns—and that many traits exemplified by Upper Mississippian groups occurred earlier or concurrently in the Hinterlands and
American Bottom. Furthermore, Cahokia-related artifacts are rarely found north of the Central Illinois and Apple River valleys with
few exceptions (Aztalan, Fred Edwards, Trempealeau). That these outlier sites appear to have extremely limited interaction with
neighbors belies the notion of a unidirectional wave across cultural boundaries. The appearance of Upper Mississippian material
culture shortly after AD 1050–1100 is likely tied to a pan-continental shift in ideology entrained to subsistence and settlement shifts
that took hold and resulted in regionally diverse expressions due to local historical tradition, environments, and network
associations.
Jeske, Robert [264] see Edwards, Richard
Jessamy, Michael [60] see Hayward, Michele
Jeu, Michael (Eastern New Mexico University)
[6]
An Experimental Spatial Analysis of Lithic Discard at Hunter-Gatherer Sites
As prehistoric hunter-gatherer manufactured and rejuventated stone tools, they left behind traces of these behaviors in the form of
spatially patterned lithic debris. Such patterns have been carefully studied and applied to models such as Binford’s (1978) Lithic
Drop Zones. GIS analysis of the spatial arrangement of debitage provides a digital method for comparing stone-tool reduction
episodes from various hunter-gatherer site types. Today, flintknapping remains a popular past-time among skilled craftspeople
around the world, but have our habits changed? This poster presents an experimental analysis testing models of lithic-discard
behaviors that occurred at prehistoric versus a modern flintknapping site to see if the spatial arrangement of debitage resulting from
modern behavior significantly differs from that of the past. Obsidian cores were reduced modern flintknappers and the provenience
of all lithic debris was collected and spatially modeled using ArcGIS. Results were compared to published models of Lithic Drop
Zones and spatial data collected at archaeological sites. An attribute analysis was also conducted on each lithic piece generated by
the two modern day flint-knappers to test for correlations in spatial patterning between prehistoric and modern lithic reduction sites.
Jijon, Juan
[257]
Lidar Application in the Cerros Hojas-Jaboncillo, Manabi, Ecuador
Currently, precise and high-resolution lidar data are increasingly significant for the detection of archaeological settlements. We are
presenting the preliminary observations resulting from the lidar flight carried out by the IGM (Military Geographic Institute of
Ecuador) in the summer of 2016. The incidence of this study is a priority for updating the Patrimonial Polygon of the Cerros Hojas-
Jaboncillo, which was delimited in 2009. Thanks to the lidar technology it has been possible to detect a series of landscape
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    275
modifications of prehispanic origin. This technology also allows the verification of the progress of quarry companies of stone material
that are exploiting the Hojas-Jaboncillo massif and, therefore, new prospects for heritage conservation are increasingly effective.
Jimenez, Socorro (Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán), Charles Golden (Brandeis University) and Andrew Scherer (Brown
University)
[126]
The Ceramic Laboratory of FCA-UADY: The Influence of R. L. Bishop on the Ceramic Technology Studies in the Usumacinta River
Basin of Chiapas, Mexico
This talk details the results of ceramic studies in the Usumacinta River Basin of Chiapas, Mexico from 2011–2019, carried out by the
Proyecto Arqueológico Budsiljá-Chocoljá (PABC). This ceramic research represents a collaborative effort led by investigators at the
Ceramic Laboratory of the Facultad de Ciencias Antropológicas de la Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán (FCA-UADY) in
collaboration with archaeological fieldwork led by scholars from Brandeis and Brown Universities among other institutions. Since
2004, Ronald Bishop has been one of the principal promoters for the creation of the FCA-UADY Ceramic Lab in Merida, Yucatán.
The physical reference collections of the PABC are organized in the laboratory using technological attributes, chronology, and
archaeological contexts using methodologies based on those pioneered by Ronald Bishop and Robert Rands. In this paper, we
present the results of our analyses, focusing on technological differences among ceramics to resolve regional problems of
chronology and processes of manufacture, as well as questions surrounding political integration and boundary making among
ancient societies in this vast region.
Jiménez, José Concepción [101] see de la Rosa, Yuri
Jiménez González, Rocío (Posgrado en Antropología)
[10]
Las figurillas de Xalla, Teotihuacan
Las figurillas cerámicas que muestran una gran diversidad de apariencias son testimonios silentes pero tangibles de las maniobras
culturales de antaño. Podríamos decir que son un repositorio de memoria. En ellas se expresan ideas convencionalizadas durante
un tiempo específico, lo que las vuelve un medio para estudiar la sociedad que las creo. Los rasgos corporales, los tocados, los
peinados, los atuendos, los tratamientos a los que fueron sometidas, así como el contexto en el que fueron depositadas, nos ayuda
a identificar normas sociales y diferentes prácticas cotidianas. En este trabajo se analiza la presencia de diferentes tipos de
figurillas cerámicas y su relación con las variadas formas de inhumación en Xalla. Se identificarán las permanencias y los cambios
impresos en estos materiales durante las fases Tzacualli, Tlamimilolpa y Xolalpan, con la finalidad de distinguir dinámicas de
cambio y transformación social, intentando a la par, definir el uso/función de las figurillas en este conjunto palaciego, a partir del
depósito en el que fueron colocadas y por el tipo de tratamiento al que fueron sometidas.
Jiménez Pasalodos, Raquel (University of Valladolid / University of Barcelona), Tommaso Mattioli (University of Barcelona,
Spain), Laura Coltofean-Arizancu (University of Barcelona, Spain), Andrzej Rozwadowski (Adam Mickiewicz University in
Poznan, Poland) and Margarita Díaz-Andreu (ICREA & University of Barcelona, Spain)
[25]
The Spirits Listen: Ethnographical Accounts of South Siberian Soundscapes
Ethnographies and ethnohistorical sources invariably reveal the cultural importance of landscapes and their sacred places in
southwestern Siberia. These sacred places, which include mountains, caves, and rocks, are not always silent. Thus, mythical,
metaphoric, and real acoustic phenomena become intertwined in folktales, myths, and ethnographic accounts. Sounds and
acoustics may therefore become bridges between ecology and cosmology, creating and reinforcing myths in a process similar to
that occurring elsewhere in the world, as the research of anthropologists and ethnomusicologists has shown. The “singing”
landscapes are also closely connected with musical aesthetics, as the imitation of natural sounds is present in a varied range of
vocal and instrumental music both implicitly and explicitly. This paper aims to explore the “singing” landscapes of southwestern
Siberia, both in the past and present, in the framework of the research undertaken in the ERC Artsoundscapes Project. It will do so
by considering information gathered from travel accounts, old and modern ethnographies, as well as ethnographical interviews
carried out in the Altai Republic.
Jodry, Margaret
[170]
A Smithsonian Perspective on 40 Years of Cooperation and Collaboration with Mike Collins
This paper discusses the contributions of Mike Collins to the Smithsonian Institution’s Paleoindian Program across 40 years. Mike
was a valued colleague of Dennis Stanford in their cross-fertilized pursuit and understanding of the pre-Clovis archaeological record
of the Americas from Monte Verde in Chile to the Chesapeake Bay of Virginia and Maryland. Mike also served as a mentor and
colleague of Pegi Jodry from her studies of Folsom Archaeology in the mountains of Colorado to a re-analysis of the San Patrice
Double Burial at the Horn Shelter site, Texas. We gratefully thank and cheerfully salute this consummate scholar, supporter, and
friend by sharing views from the field, research results, and tales from the front lines.
John, Christian [189] see Mejía Ramón, Andrés
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  276
Johnen, Connor, Michael Prouty (Alpine Archaeological Consultants) and Matthew Landt (Alpine Archaeological
Consultants)
[147]
Droning On about GIS: Three Cases of Using Spatial Technology to Analyze the Past
Alpine Archaeological Consultants, Inc. has been using spatial technology to assist their studies of the past. This poster details three
case studies that detail Alpine’s use of technology to understand and visualize archaeological remains. At the Escalante Game
Drive Site in western Colorado, we used drone technology to create a fine-grained DEM overlay for the site to analyze least-cost
paths and help us understand how blinds/walls take advantage of natural corridors. At the Frances Townsite in central Colorado, we
utilized lidar data to identify potential historic features and assess the size and nature of the site. We also used least-cost path
analysis to help understand decision making along the Old Spanish Trail in western Colorado.
Johnson, Adam (Southern Methodist University), Thegn Ladefoged (University of Auckland) and Mark McCoy (Southern
Methodist University)
[262]
Settlement Pattern Archaeology Revisited: Coastal Households in Leeward Kohala, Hawai’i Island
The distribution of ancient Hawaiian households in the leeward Kohala region of the Island Hawaii has been examined for over fifty
years. The combination of academic research and applied CRM projects has provided a wealth of information about ancient
settlement patterns and how households were distributed on the landscape. Legacy data includes analog and digital records
retained by individuals and various institutions. In this paper, we discuss how analog and digital legacy data are being integrated
with new digital data from leeward Kohala first studied a half-century ago. We also discuss how early digital legacy data are being
leveraged and adapted to advance current research in the region. Lastly, we discuss how new digital technologies are being used to
gather data on coastal residences in leeward Kohala.
[262]
Chair
Johnson, Amy [167] see Peterson, Ryan
Johnson, Ann
[103]
Rediscovering the Anzick Site
More than 50 years ago, a large Clovis lithic cache with foreshafts and human skeletal material from two individuals was discovered
at the Anzick site. This is the oldest site in Montana with two radiocarbon dates (10,705+35 and 10,780+40 RCYBP), but very few
details beyond the dates and photos of the bifaces were available about the site. We report the geoarchaeological investigation by
John Albanese along with photographs and details of the University of Montana work of the site in 1969, the fall the site was
identified. Recent DNA testing of the skeletal remains indicate a relationship with group(s) crossing the Bering Land Bridge to
populate North America.
Johnson, April (Dartmouth College) and Deborah Nichols (Dartmouth College)
[5]
Near or Afar: a Source Study of Common Ceramics from Classic Teotihuacan
Teotihuacan was the most populated and influential urban center in the Basin of Mexico in Classic Period Mesoamerica. While it is
clear this city was significant, how it influenced nearby peri-urban and rural areas is still hotly debated. To untangle the complex
relationship between this city and its countryside, The Valley of Teotihuacan was surveyed extensively in the 1960s by William
Sanders. In this study, common pottery samples from Sanders’ excavations underwent Neutron Activation Analysis (NAA) from the
city, as represented by Maquixco Bajo, and its the broader valley represented by the sites of Venta de Carpio, Tlaltenco, Tenango,
and Los Cuecillos. These sites were chosen because they are located across the valley, spanning from the northern mountain
slopes to the lakefront, with the goal of obtaining a more detailed understanding of pottery exchange in this region during the Classic
period. This study focuses on Teotihuacan style pottery, as this type has largely been assumed to be locally produced. This study
utilizes the database from the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR) which contains over 10,000 Mesoamerican samples
and 2000 Teotihuacan samples to source the pottery from the Valley of Teotihuacan to likely areas of origin.
Johnson, Benjamin [203] see Cannon, Molly
Johnson, Eileen [103] see Hurst, Stance
Johnson, Eileen [165] see Jones, Lila
Johnson, Elizabeth (Thunderbird Archeology/WSSI)
[172]
Digging Out: Finding Creative Solutions to Four Decades of CRM Collections
When Wetland Studies and Solutions, Inc. purchased Thunderbird Archaeology in 2004, they found themselves responsible for
some 800 boxes of artifacts from more than four decades of CRM projects. The story isn’t an uncommon one…boxes of CRM
projects sitting in basements, sheds, storage units, or warehouses in various states of curation; however, the way WSSI handled
this responsibility was somewhat unique. Challenges were encountered every step of the way, from documenting exactly what we
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 277
had and in what condition, to locating corresponding field documentation, to bringing the projects up to current curation standards.
Just when we had resolved these issues, a recession came along that created a whole new set of legal issues involving companies
going out of business, merging, and, in some cases, questions regarding property ownership. Faced with legal, ethical, and financial
challenges, we worked to find creative solutions to finally placing these collections in permanent curation repositories.
Johnson, Heather [256] see Baxter, Carey
Johnson, James (University of Wyoming)
[205]
Bronze Age Pastoralists and Craft Production in the Southern Urals Region of the Russian Federation, ca. 2100–900 BC
In 2011, a systematic regional pedestrian survey was implemented in the Uy River valley of the southern Urals region of the
present-day Russian Federation. The research questions that motivated the survey centered on investigated the possibilities of
center-hinterland dynamics in Middle, Late, and FBA Bronze Age pastoral societies (MBA, LBA, FBA, respectively). While that
question was answered definitively, subsequent questions emerged based on the analysis of pottery sherds collected during that
survey asking how pottery was used as a means of social integration within and between the identified pastoral communities. Based
on that early ceramic analysis, clear trends in pottery production revealed that paste recipes were established, used, and reused
over more than 1,000 years by multiple iterations of Bronze Age communities. In 2019, excavations were undertaken at the late
MBA-LBA-FBA site of Chernorech’ye 2. Recovery and analysis of the pottery confirmed the presence of the paste recipes. In this
presentation, I explore the socio-political and economic contexts of these recipes and their impact on interpretations of Bronze Age
pastoral social life.
Johnson, John (Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History)
[173]
Linking the Past to the Present: Collaborative DNA Research with Native Californians
At the time of European contact, a high degree of linguistic diversity existed in Native California, implying a long prehistory of
different ethnic groups migrating into the region. Previous research, using mitochondrial DNA samples contributed by living
descendants, produced correlations between certain genetic markers and populations that spoke related languages. The advent of
ancient DNA testing not only permits an increased understanding of past genetic diversity within particular cultural groups, but also
demonstrates continuity of certain genetic lineages between ancient populations and tribal descendants today. Such studies benefit
California Indians by validating ancestral connections to tribal homelands, thereby providing a scientific basis for establishing
cultural affiliation and descendancy as defined by federal and state laws.
Johnson, Lisa (University of Nevada, Las Vegas), Felipe Trabanino (Jardin Botanico CECON-USAC), Eloi Berube
(McMaster University) and Eos López Pérez (Laboratorio de Prospeccion Arqueologica IIA-UNAM)
[211]
The Microarchaeology of Ritual at the Classic Maya City of Palenque
This paper presents the results of a series of microscopic methods including micromorphology, soil residue analysis, and
paleoethnobotany that were carried out on ritualized contexts in two mausoleum structures of an elite household of Palenque. We
propose a theoretical and methodological approach to the study of ritual that does not privilege the visible and the durable but
instead attends to a wider scope of materials often including foods, resins, fire and smoke. Central to our practice of a
microarchaeology of ritual are the concepts of ritualization and materiality, which posits that elaborated actions will produce
elaborate material signatures. We will consider the challenges we encountered when employing these methods in particular
contexts as well as strategies for improvement in future studies.
Johnson, Nadia [189] see Mejía Ramón, Andrés
Johnson, Phyllis (Vanderbilt University) and Markus Eberl (Vanderbilt University)
[232]
Using Microdebitage to Identify a Potential Non-elite Obsidian Workshop at the Late Classic Maya site of Tamarindito
In 2012, the Tamarindito Archaeological Project uncovered a cache of 224 obsidian prismatic blades and 18 polyhedral cores in an
annexed room of Structure 5PS-d in the southwest quadrant of the site. As the largest assemblage of obsidian recovered in any
excavated context at Tamarindito, soil samples were analyzed for microdebitage to test the theory that this structure served as an
obsidian workshop.
Johnson, Rachel (Tulane University) and Jason Nesbitt (Tulane University)
[5]
A Comparison of Ceramic Compositions from Canchas Uckro (Ancash) and the Cave of the Owls (Huánuco), Peru: Implications for
an Upper Amazon Interaction Sphere
Despite decades of archaeological research, Chavín de Huantar’s connections to the eastern Andes and Upper Amazon remain
underexplored. Stylistic and compositional comparison of ceramics from the sites of Canchas Uckro (ca. 1100–850 BC), a large
monumental platform situated above the Puccha River about 25 km north of Chavín de Huántar, and the Cave of the Owls, located
on the Monzón River near modern-day Tingo María, help to clarify the nature of interaction in this region during the Formative
Period. The study reanalyzed ceramics from the Cave of the Owls, housed as the Ross Collection at the University of California
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   278
Berkeley’s Hearst Museum, using a Dinolite handheld microscope to conduct descriptive paste analysis focused on mineral non-
plastic inclusions, clay characteristics, and superficial decorative elements. These results were then compared with a prior Dinolite
study of stylistically similar sherds from Canchas Uckro with zoned-hatching motifs similar to the Wairajirca style of the upper
Huallaga region. While the pottery broadly demonstrate different technological styles, the joint use of granodiorite and red sandstone
inclusions suggests access to similar raw materials that may support previous hypotheses of an interaction sphere linking the
eastern Andes of north-central Peru and the Upper Amazon during the Formative Period.
Johnson, Royce (Boise State University)
[235]
Use of Camas in Southern Idaho in Prehistory
Camas (Camassia quamash) is well documented as a traditional food source throughout the Northwest United States and Canada.
Research on the Northwest Coast has provided a vast amount of literature about the importance of camas as a traditional food
source and the potential for impressive rates of return. This research on the Northwest Coast has been used as an analogue to talk
about the use of camas in Southern Idaho. However, differences exist in the environment and the foraging patterns between these
two areas. This paper examines those differences and how they can affect the productivity and use of camas. These differences
demonstrate a need for a more critical evaluation when looking at the use of camas in Southern Idaho during prehistory.
Johnson, Sarah [264] see Mollerud, Katy
Johnson, Taryn (Texas A&M University) and Anna Linderholm (Texas A&M University)
[244]
The Prehistoric Diet: Genomic Analysis of Bonneville Estates Paleofeces, Nevada
The genetic composition of paleofeces from Bonneville Estates Rockshelter (BER) can aid environmental and dietary
reconstruction, as the genomic content of coprolites change as environmental conditions shifted from cool and moist in the
Pleistocene to hot and dry in the Holocene and as new food sources appeared locally. In order to analyse the potential shift in
taxonomic diversity and genetic biodiversity present in prehistoric diets and microbiomes of the human occupants over this
transitionary period, ancient DNA was extracted from over forty BER paleofecal samples that date between the Paleoindian and
Archaic periods of western North America (12,500–1000 years ago). Taxonomic identifications of floral and faunal, and microbial
parasite contents were given at the family and genus level. Results were compared to analyse how Archaic diets shifted through
occupation. Further research will be done to determine if additional shifts, be they cultural, populational, or otherwise occurred
alongside the dietary one. Broader applications of this study engage with the effect climate change can have on floral and faunal
populations and how humans have interacted with the biotic parts of their environment both physically and microbially, leading to
greater understanding of past and present relationships between humans and their ever-changing environment.
Johnson, Taryn [19] see Linderholm, Anna
Johnson, William [19] see Cordova, Carlos
Johnston, Elizabeth (University of Manchester, UK) and Michael Buckley (University of Manchester, UK)
[244]
Use of Proteomic Methods for Biological Age Estimation at Death
Biological age at death (AAD) is an important component of the biological profile, to aid investigators in cases with skeletal remains,
also in archaeology to aid establishing site context. Current methods rely on predictable patterns of bone or teeth mineralization,
growth, and fusion or damage over time, though these methods are often subject to inter-/intra-observer error and can only provide
adequate data for juvenile remains; leaving adult remains with wide age ranges that do not support investigators. This has led
forensics to study archaeological analytic methods of ancient biomolecules, such as DNA and proteins, which are frequently well
preserved within bone to allow a host of analytical methods. Previous research has demonstrated applicability of proteomics in
forensics and that proteins undergo age-dependent changes by comparing middle to end of long bones. In this research, we used
proteomic methods to study changing protein abundances between entire skeletal elements from rats of different ages, to view
changes over time. We also compare proteomic methods with other approaches to estimate AAD via amino acid decay, evaluating
the most appropriate for forensics. A standardized method of AAD estimation with proteomics is necessary to bring proteomics to
forensics as a validated method of age estimation.
Jolie, Edward (Mercyhurst University)
[236]
Textile Impressions in California Archaeology: Analytical Considerations and Research Potential
In the absence of exceptional preservation, data on ancient textile industries can be recovered from intentional and accidental
negative impressions of woven products left in media that are plastic or pliable initially, but which harden later. However, detailed
study of textile impressions remains uncommon across much of the western United States. In California, where surviving organic
artifacts are generally quite rare, impressions in asphaltum (bitumen) provide an alternative, complementary means of acquiring
data on textile crafts that are increasingly recognized for their potential to contribute to essential questions about daily life,
technological change, and social boundaries and identities. In this paper, I review the major analytical considerations attendant to
impressions analysis and explore the underappreciated research potential of textile impressions. Drawing on recent results from the
detailed analysis of assemblages of textile impressions in asphaltum from two sites in California, I offer methodological suggestions
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   279
and review the salient interpretive inferences from these studies that stand to enhance the research potential of similar
assemblages.
Jolly, Sarah (University of Pittsburgh)
[243]
The Use of Human Remains in Domestic Ritual at the Early Farming Village of Waywaka (Andahuaylas, Peru)
The site of Waywaka (Andahuaylas, Apurímac) in the south-central Peruvian highlands was occupied for 3500 years. During the
earlier phases of occupation, regionally known as Muyu Moqo (ca. 1700–600 BC) and Qasawirka (ca. 300 BC–AD 600), Waywaka’s
inhabitants experienced the first aggregation into a sedentary village, a growing population, increased reliance on domesticated
plants and animals, and greater craft production and specialization, trends that intensified during the Qasawirka period. Recent
excavations uncovered a minimum of 19 human burials dating to these two periods from both primary and secondary mortuary
contexts, the latter including skull offerings, foundational offerings, and the deliberate association of parts of bodies with ritual
artifacts. Through mortuary and bioarchaeological analyses of contextualized human remains, this study investigates differences
and changes in mortuary treatment and bioarchaeologically observed lifeways with particular emphasis on the use of human
remains in domestic rituals. Situated within the broader context of ritual activity at Waywaka, this analysis examines how individuals
were buried, who was considered appropriate to be interred in certain contexts, and the types of rituals that incorporated parts of
human bodies to inform on the kinds of social differentiation that developed in an increasingly complex, agricultural village.
Joly, Delphine and Robert Marchant (University of York)
[74]
Fuel Management in South American Deserts: Environmental Constraints and Cultural Choices
Studying fossil fuelwood offers a unique way to understand how humans interact with their close environment. South America
deserts are characterized by a low diversity and patchy availability of trees and shrubs; which impacts the ways humans managed
plant resources, with this significance changing over time. Excellent preservation of plant remains in desert environments allows us
to analyse charcoal and sub-fossil wood present in archaeological sites. The taxonomic identification and the observation of a range
of anatomical and environmental characteristics in anthracological studies can shed light on the use, the knowledge. and the
management of the woody environment by human societies during a long and diverse history of occupation. We present results of
the anthracological analysis of charcoal remains from a selection of archaeological sites from the Atacama desert in Chile, coastal
desert of Peru and dry puna in Argentina. The combination of sites allows us to understand how societies manage their firewood
resources, to reconstruct the woody environment and chart how this evolved in response to environmental change and human use.
Jonassen, Alexandra (University of California, Riverside) and Kenichiro Tsukamoto (University of California, Riverside)
[7]
Application of the Geospatial Method to On-Floor Assemblages: A Case Study from the Classic Maya City of El Palmar, Mexico
On-floor assemblages provide clues as to how complex administrative and domestic activities interplayed within a structure. By
combining photogrammetry, total station, and GIS, we developed a geospatial method that plotted each on-floor remain accurately
on a GIS map. This poster presents its application to horizontal excavations that took place at the Guzmán Group, an outlying group
of the Maya archaeological site of El Palmar, Mexico. During the 2019 summer season, the excavations uncovered the south room
of Structure GZ7 with new glyphic texts carved on a curtain holder. The texts suggest that this room was occupied by a young
member of non-royal elite lakamob (banner-bearers) who played critical roles in dynastic alliances during the Late Classic period
(AD 600–800). After the excavations, attributes of these on-floor materials were connected to their locations in the GIS map which
allowed for in-depth artifactual and spatial analyses of the structure. The results provide new insight into our nuanced understanding
of Classic Maya banner-bearers’ ritual, administrative, and daily practices.
Jones, Ashley (Moore Archeological Consulting Inc.), Kristen Hickey (Rice University) and Stephanie Orsini (Moore
Archeological Consulting, Inc.)
[241]
Pigs to Possums: Foodways at Plantations in Louisiana and Texas
The material culture at plantation sites in Texas and Louisiana provides data on the lifeways of both plantation owners and the
enslaved. Plantations in Texas were established in the 1830’s, by planters immigrating from the Southeast. After emancipation,
freedmen continued to live and work on some plantations as tenant farmers through at least the 1890’s. Although much as been
learned from the material culture assemblages at these sites, the faunal assemblages from Texas sites have not been subject to in-
depth analyses. Data from plantation sites in Texas will be compared to analyzed assemblages in Louisiana in order to understand
dietary choices of enslaved and tenant farmers. The faunal assemblages illuminates the utilization of both domestic and wild
animals by slaves and tenant farmers. Domesticated species are represented largely by pigs, cows, and chickens. Wild fauna
identified includes possum, rabbits, squirrels, turtles, fish, and birds. This diverse representation of species, paired with age and
butchering data from domesticated species, suggests self-provisioning of enslaved and, later, tenant communities.
Jones, Bradford (Texas Historical Commission)
[89]
Discussant
Jones, Bradley Chase [242] see DeOrbegozo, Mary Emma
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   280
Jones, Brain [11] see Phillips, Natasha
Jones, Catherine (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee)
[80]
Grave Anatomy: Dissecting Bodies of Meaning in Historic Burials
Commingled and multiple burials from historic era cemeteries contain a large volume of potential data which can contribute to a
richer interpretation of site practices. Burial grounds such as the Milwaukee County Poor Farm Cemetery often contain interments
comprised of multiple individuals represented by both complete and partial remains. While the basic tenants of mortuary theory push
us to find cultural meaning in the placement and arrangement of the commingled dead, archaeologists must also be cognizant of the
pitfalls inherent in reading intentional treatment in the arrangement of partial human remains. Utilizing archaeological, spatial, and
osteological evidence, this research examines the microcosm of a single commingled burial assemblage in an effort to determine
the variable layers of meaning that can and cannot be observed, as well as the potential for one burial to reflect the composition and
complexity of burials in the wider site.
Jones, Douglas, Melanie Damour (Bureau of Ocean Energy Management) and Jason Chaytor (U.S. Geological Survey)
[18]
X Marks the Spot . . . For Now: Subsea Mudflows and Moving Shipwrecks on the Mississippi River Delta Front
On May 12, 1942, the 500-foot-long, steel-hulled tanker Virginia was sunk by the German U boat U-507 off the Mississippi River’s
Southwest Pass. The shipwreck was discovered in nearly 300 feet of water during a 2001 oil and gas survey and was investigated
by a remotely operated vehicle in 2004. A 2006 geophysical survey found that the shipwreck had moved more than 1,200 feet
downslope in only two years. A 2017 survey by the U.S. Geological Survey in collaboration with the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management found that Virginia had moved another 200 feet. The Mississippi River Delta Front is a highly dynamic environment
prone to mudflow events triggered by hurricanes, winter storms, river floods, and other less-understood processes. Oil and gas
infrastructure and submerged cultural resources in this area can be impacted by these events, and Virginia is not the only historic
shipwreck that appears to be moving across the seafloor. This paper will address the challenges of managing submerged cultural
resources that do not stay in one place and will discuss emerging questions, technologies, and future research opportunities to
study this phenomenon.
Jones, Douglas [18] see Damour, Melanie
Jones, Emily Lena (University of New Mexico) and Jonathan Dombrosky (University of New Mexico)
[171]
Environmental Risk and Culture Change in the Middle Rio Grande Valley of New Mexico
The archaeology of the Pueblo IV or Classic Period (AD 1350–1600) Middle Rio Grande Valley is marked by significant change.
Population aggregation, new subsistence patterns, and new iconography distinguish Pueblo IV sites from those that came earlier.
Shifting environmental conditions, notably improved aquatic habitat quality, may be the key to understanding the development of
new risk management strategies during this time. In this paper, we assess the role environmental risk management played in
precipitating the changes observed in the Pueblo IV Middle Rio Grande archaeological record. We use three lines of evidence—
settlement patterns, the mammalian zooarchaeological record, and the ichthyofaunal zooarchaeological record—to assess the
relationship between environmental change, risk management, and Pueblo IV culture change in the Middle Rio Grande Valley.
Jones, Emily Lena [119] see Bethke, Brandi
Jones, Emily Lena [129] see Kirk, Scott
Jones, George (Hamilton College) and Charlotte Beck (Hamilton College)
[253]
Biface Life History and Measurement Efficacy
Elements of technological organization methodology began to coalesce nearly five decades ago. With TO’s application to stone
tools, lithic analysis moved from an under-appreciated component of archaeological study to one on a par with ceramic and faunal
studies. Bill Andrefsky was in the vanguard of archaeologists whose contributions to this methodology brought a fuller understanding
of lithic variation as well as improved measurement of that variation. Such progress was possible because of the TO framework
focus on process, conceiving it as artifact life history. Thus, lithic tools and by-products of tool production were visualized along
sequences or trajectories of material acquisition, manufacture, transport, use, and discard, to borrow from Schiffer’s seminal model
of the life cycle of durable artifacts. Where a TO focus has been most influential in our research has been with the biface, the
dominant class of formal tool in the Western Stemmed tradition of the intermontane region. Here we consider how biface life history
is represented by typological and attribute scale measurement, how measurement efficacy is evaluated, and how insights
concerning terminal Pleistocene/early Holocene land use derive from analysis of bifacial tool production.
Jones, John [175] see Franklin, Jay
Jones, John [221] see Siegel, Peter
Jones, Kaylee [66] see Hart, Isaac
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  281
Jones, KC (University of Georgia), Ashley Smallwood (University of Louisville), Thomas Jennings (University of Louisville)
and Jerald Ledbetter (Southeastern Archeological Services Inc.)
[232]
Raw Material Procurement Patterns as Proxy for Evaluating Hunter-Gatherer Mobility in the Paleoindian-to-Early Archaic Transition
in Georgia
Major changes in human settlement occurred from the Paleoindian to Early Archaic periods in the Southeast. These include
widespread population growth, decreased group mobility, and increased inter- and intra-group interactions resulting in a
fluorescence of distinctive biface stylistic traditions and lithic raw material utilization. We use the Georgia point record in the
Paleoindian Database of the Americas (PIDBA) and compare it to diagnostic Early Archaic biface raw material locations generated
from cultural resource management (CRM) reports and site locations in Georgia’s Natural, Archaeological, and Historic Resources
GIS (GNAHRGIS). Combined, these databases include locational and raw material information for over 5,300 diagnostic materials
for the periods in question. We then test for evidence of changes in landscape use during the Paleoindian-to-Early Archaic
transition. Based on differences in point frequencies, distributions, raw material types, and transport distances, we suggest that
significant changes in landscape use and group mobility occurred during this time. These changes correspond, at least in part, to
shifting adaptive strategies by hunter-gatherers during this period of marked environmental change, including the utilization of
smaller fauna and the emergence of a generalist foraging strategy across the Southeast.
Jones, Lauren, Anna Linderholm (BiG Lab, Texas A&M), Lori Baker (Baylor University, Waco, Texas), Colleen Zori (Baylor
University, Waco, Texas) and Davide Zori (Baylor University, Waco, Texas)
[51]
Ancient DNA from Etruscan Tombs and Beyond: Case Study from San Giuliano
The origins of the Etruscans are a heavily debated research question. Modern DNA in conjunction with ancient mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) has been used to try an answer this problem. Because of the limitations of mtDNA, single genetic marker, no consensus
has been reached. It is still debated whether the Etruscans had a local Italian origin (the ancient mtDNA have similarities to modern
Tuscan population frequencies) or an ancestry further east in Anatolia. To seek an answer to the question of the Etruscan origins,
we have investigated archaeological samples from San Giuliano, a site situated in southern Etruria (northern Lazio, Italy), once the
heartland of the Etruscan city-states. This site has been inhabited for millennia, from before the Etruscan civilization emerged until
the High Middle Ages when the site was abandoned. Ancient DNA has been extracted from 20 individuals focusing on the Etruscans
but also on individuals who lived at the site before and after. Using shotgun sequencing we are looking at questions like the
Etruscan origin and kinship among and between the Etruscans and their surroundings both in time and space.
Jones, Lila (Museum of Texas Tech University) and Eileen Johnson (Museum of Texas Tech University)
[165]
Interpreting a Mid-Eighteenth-Century Vertebrate Assemblage from a Probable Comanche site on the Southern High Plains of
Texas
Whiskey Flats is a mid-eighteenth-century probable Comanche site on the Southern High Plains in Midland County, Texas. Ongoing
excavation in Mustang Draw of the now dry Mustang Pond uncovered evidence of occupation along a terrace and a bone bed within
the pond basin. A modern bison periotic from the bone bed dates to the mid-1700s. Artifacts from both areas include lithics, metal,
and a glass bead. The collection primarily is composed of a vertebrate assemblage that includes culturally modified modern bison
and modern horse, along with remains of local fauna. Attention has been focused on the analysis of faunal remains to create a
better understanding of the nature of the deposit and inhabitants of the site. Taxonomic assessment and taphonomy have been
used to interpret the assemblage in terms of ecological community and the order of the events that may have taken place during the
accumulation of the assemblage. The methods applied have been successful in reconstructing the environmental conditions,
butchering process, and aggregation of the assemblage during and after the occupation of the site. The data gathered contribute to
the general knowledge of the people and environments of the Southern High Plains and its changes over time.
Jones, Matthew [140] see Maher, Lisa
Jones, Mica [171] see Brandt, Steven
Jones, Richard [196] see Day, Peter
Jones, Travis (University of Georgia, Center for Applied Isotope Studies)
[264]
Navigating New Fields: A Chronology of Coalescent Immigration along the Middle Missouri River
This paper uses Bayesian techniques and radiocarbon data to establish a preliminary chronology for the occupation of the earliest
Coalescent villages in the Middle Missouri region of the Northern Plains. Groups referred to collectively as the Coalescent Tradition,
likely ancestors of the Arikara, migrated into the southern Middle Missouri Trench (south-central South Dakota) between the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, AD. Upon arrival, these groups entered into a complex sociopolitical landscape already occupied
by village societies identified archaeologically as the Middle Missouri Tradition. Extant architectural and ceramic data suggests this
immigration event generated novel fields of social and political interaction between incoming Coalescent groups and established
Middle Missouri locals involving both integrative and oppositional practices. However, an understanding of how this process played
out on the ground is hindered by poor chronological resolution. In order to understand the tempo and timing of Coalescent arrival(s)
and subsequent interactions with Middle Missouri villagers, Bayesian analyses of new and extant radiocarbon dates are used to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      282
create a regional chronology for the establishment of the earliest Coalescent villages. New AMS radiocarbon dates for four Initial
Coalescent villages and extant radiocarbon dates from other Coalescent villages are incorporated into this new settlement
chronology.
Jöns, Hauke [238] see Segschneider, Martin
Jonsson, Maria [214] see Brown, Erin
Joplin, Jerry [147] see Schwindt, Dylan
Jordan, Jillian [168] see Awe, Jaime
Jorgensen, Alex [124] see Ladefoged, Thegn
Jorgenson, Matthew [55] see Harris, Matthew
Jorgeson, Ian (Southern Methodist University), Ryan Breslawski (Southern Methodist University) and Matthew Boulanger
(Southern Methodist University)
[55]
A Bayesian Model for Dating Pipestems
English pipestem diameters decreased regularly over time and are thus a potentially useful metric for dating historic sites in eastern
North America. Binford quantified this relationship with a linear regression model, but his approach reduced pipestem diameters to a
single mean value, predicted a mean date of occupation, rather than a likely range of occupation, and failed to acknowledge that the
relationship between pipestem diameter and time is not strictly linear. Pipestem data also have measurement error issues:
diameters are recorded as discrete rather than continuous values, and “known date” pipestem ages are ranges as large as over 100
years. To resolve these issues, we fit a Bayesian measurement-error model to over 90,000 pipestems from well-dated contexts.
Bayesian inference provides conservative parameter estimates for the modeled age-diameter relationship, and the fitted model
allows us to forecast the full distribution of likely dates given known stem-diameters. Thus, a Bayesian approach provides a more
realistic and informative estimate of site occupation; importantly, it provides a probabilistic estimate of the likelihood that a site was
occupied over a range of dates and quantifies the uncertainty of those estimates. We apply this model to estimate likely date
distributions for previously poorly-dated historic sites.
Jorissen, Philippa (University of Oregon), Traci Ardren (University of Miami), Michelle LeFebvre (Florida Museum of Natural
History), Victor Thompson (University of Georgia) and Scott Fitzpatrick (University of Oregon)
[59]
Resilience and Paleo-Climate Proxies in the Prehistoric Florida Keys
The Florida Keys are among the most vulnerable coastal locations to the effects of climate change in the continental United States.
Home to almost 100,000 people and composed of over 1,700 low-lying islands arcing west from the southern tip of peninsular
Florida, the “Keys” are surrounded by the world’s third largest coral reef tract and are one of 15 national marine sanctuaries in North
America. The Keys also have an array of upland and coastal environments that are home to several vulnerable habitats and
animals. Global sea level changes and regional storm events are among the most pervasive climate-induced threats to the region,
with variable impacts across local marine and terrestrial ecosystems, and the people dependent on them. Here we discuss the
Matecumbe Chiefdom Project and its focus on elucidating cultural and historical ecological relationships spanning the Keys and
southern peninsular Florida. Drawing on recent GIS modeling of Glades Period (1000 BC–AD 1700) settlement patterns, historical
reviews of freshwater availability, and ongoing zooarchaeological analyses, we demonstrate the critical need for archaeologically
derived paleo-climate proxies and argue for the concerted integration of archaeological data within transdisciplinary climate
reconstructions and models of local scale human and biodiversity resilience in the region.
Joseph, J. (New South Associates)
[58]
Discussant
Joseph, J. (New South Associates), Andrea Farmer (USACE St. Louis), Andrea Gregory (USACE St. Louis), Alaina Harmon
(USACE St. Louis) and Jasmine Heckman (New South Associates)
[132]
From Mass Graves to New Lives: The Veterans Curation Program
Dr. Michael “Sonny” Trimble’s experience on the excavation of Saddam Hussein’s mass burial sites in Iraq exposed him to the
challenges the U.S. military faced in the Iraq conflict and heightened his appreciation for the women and men of our armed forces.
Returning to his role as Director of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Mandatory Center of Expertise for the Curation and
Management of Archaeological Collections, “Sonny”, saw the opportunity to repay our military service members by seeking
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act funding to establish a program that would employ veterans in the rehabilitation of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       283
archaeological collections. Now in its tenth year of operation, this paper reviews the operations of the Veterans Curation Program
(VCP) and the benefits it brings to both military veterans and our archaeological heritage.
[132]
Chair
Joy, Shawn (Florida State University)
[18]
Coastally Adapted: A Model for Eastern Coastal Paleoindian Sites
Predicting the cultural material typology of Gulf of Mexico coastal Paleoindians is a challenge due to sea-level rise since the LGM. In
the Americas, archaeologists have identified only a handful of unequivocal coastal Paleoindian sites. The location of these sites are
on the west coast of the Americas, where the sea-level rise was less invasive due to the steep coastal topography. However, not a
single unequivocal coastal Paleoindian site has been identified on the Eastern continental shelf. This research investigates
Pleistocene hunter-gatherer sites with coastal materials from regions around the world. These regions contain evidence of marine
subsistence patterns spanning 150,000 years in settings similar in climate, submerged coastal plain profile, and subsistence
resources along the Gulf of Mexico. I present here a model utilizing these data and anthropological uniformitarianism of subsistence
patterns, coastal mobility ranges, and lithic tool technology through time as the proximity to the sea changed due to fluctuating sea-
levels.
[18]
Chair
Joy, Shawn [18] see Smith, Morgan
Joyce, Arthur (University of Colorado at Boulder), Sarah Barber (University of Central Florida), Guy Hepp (California State
University, San Bernardino), Jacklyn Rumberger (Washington State University) and Mathew Sponheimer (University of
Colorado Boulder)
[189]
Isotopic Evidence for Human Dietary Change in the Lower Rio Verde Valley of Oaxaca from the Formative to the Postclassic Period
This paper presents the results of an isotopic study of human dietary change in the lower Rio Verde Valley, Oaxaca, Mexico. Stable
isotope analysis was carried out on a total of 122 individuals from Early Formative to Early Postclassic (3900–740 cal BP) burials.
δ13C and δ15N values were determined for collagen in human and animal dentine from archaeological excavations, while δ13C values
were determined for enamel apatite in teeth, primarily third molars. Modern plants, as well as bone and hair from living animals,
were also sampled to provide additional contextual data. Enamel δ13C values are consistent with increased consumption of C4
plants from the Early Formative to the Early Postclassic period. The greatest increase in δ13C occurs from the Late Formative to the
Terminal Formative, or between 150 BC and AD 100. Moreover, Ba/Sr ratios from an earlier study and collagen δ13C and δ15N from
a subset of the samples are not consistent with the significant exploitation of marine foods. The dietary evidence is consistent with
the results of paleoenvironmental research indicating an expansion of the lower Verde’s fertile floodplain during the Formative
period resulting in an increased emphasis on maize agriculture by people in the region.
Joyce, Kaley [236] see James, L. Brock
Joyce, Kaley [235] see Louderback, Lisbeth
Juarez, Santiago (Colgate University)
[189]
Cosmology at Home: Centering Rituals within the Residences of Late Preclassic Noh K’uh, Chiapas, Mexico
The Late Preclassic (400 BC–AD 200) site of Noh K’uh is located in the Mensäbäk basin, 30 km west of the Usumacinta River. Noh
K’uh was a small ceremonial center composed of several residential groups centered around a ceremonial plaza. Noh K’uh’s
location near the western edge of the Maya lowlands placed residents near contemporary civilizations in the Isthmian sphere and
the highlands of Chiapas. Preliminary data from the excavations demonstrates household ceremonial materials and practices that
may have been influenced by multiple contemporary civilizations. This research reveals how the people of Noh K’uh integrated
cosmological beliefs and practices within their domestic routines.
Judkins, Abigail (University of New Mexico)
[71]
The Persistence of Traditional Hunting Strategies in Northern Alaska
Northern Alaska (here defined as the North Slope Borough) was not visited by Europeans and European-Americans until much later
in history, despite the presence of Russian fur traders in the southern region of Alaska in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
However, the presence of fur traders and other colonists to the south may possibly have influenced Northern Alaskan lifeways
relatively early on. How did traditional Arctic hunting methods change, if at all, in the early historic period in this far northern region?
Previous accounts (Murdoch 1892) suggest that the patterns seen in the Thule tradition persisted into contemporary times, with
maintenance of a traditional seasonal round in the Point Barrow region into the late nineteenth century. In this paper, I use results
from my study of the historic zooarchaeological assemblage from the Walakpa site in northern Alaska to evaluate these questions. I
consider the taxonomic frequency and culinary processing patterns to examine how the harsh climate in this region affected foraging
strategies and archaeological bone preservation. Finally, I compare these data to those from the late Thule period to examine the
persistence of traditional foraging strategies into the historic period.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    284
Junco, Roberto [18] see Horrell, Christopher
Junge, Justin (National Park Service), Andrew Tremayne (Forest Service) and Thomas Urban (Cornell)
[64]
Home Is Where the Hearth Is: Re-assessing Occupation Histories of the Earliest Use of the Beach Ridges at Cape Krusenstern
National Monument
The beach ridges at Cape Krusenstern holds a unique place in Alaskan Archaeology with a long history of research and excavation
to understand the 5,000 year history of the area. Building off work from the 1960s until the early 2010s, surveys during the summers
of 2017 and 2018 with the use of geophysical surveying provides exceptional understanding of features and chronologies on the
earliest beach ridges. Based on magnetometer research and testing, we explore the accuracy of methods in finding buried intact
hearths, compare the precision of the legacy data with discovered features, and discuss the findings of recent research.
Junker, Laura [188] see Monaghan, John
Juptner, Derick and Jordan Pratt (Texas A&M University)
[75]
Insights from the Faunal Distribution at the Weed Lake Ditch site (35HA341) in Southeastern Oregon
Weed Lake Ditch is an open air site located on the shores of Pluvial Lake Malheur in the Harney Basin of southeastern Oregon.
Excavations by the University of Nevada, Reno and the Center for the Study of the First Americans have revealed multiple stemmed
points and crescent lithic technology in buried contexts. Faunal remains from the site were numerous but heavily fragmented in
nature and in medium to poor condition. Distribution of the bone was not even throughout the site and was concentrated heavily in
turbated soils about 20 cm below the surface in a layer that is associated with a pronounced cultural layer of lithic artifacts. Here we
analyze the fragmented faunal remains following Stiner and Kuhn (1995), to assess the degree they may have been altered by fine.
Additionally, we assess the faunal distribution, and how it is correlated with the lithic assemblage, as well as stress the effectiveness
of our excavation methods for recovering more of the overall faunal materials.
Jurado, Erik, Mario Córdova Tello (CINAH Morelos), Carolina Meza Rodriguez (CINAH Morelos) and Gerardo Gutierrez
(University of Colorado Boulder)
[150]
Recent Research at San Ignacio, Morelos: A Regional Center in the Teotihuacan Hinterland
San Ignacio is located in the Amatzinac valley of Morelos approximately 10 km south of the Formative center of Chalcatzingo. San
Ignacio was the largest center in eastern Morelos during the Classic period. Previous research has suggested that during its
apogee, San Ignacio may have functioned as a Teotihuacan administrative center. The Proyecto Arqueológico Mapeo y
Prospección de San Ignacio (PAMPSI) was launched over the summer of 2019 to investigate this hypothesis. Fieldwork included
mapping, surface collections, test excavations, and ceramic analysis. This poster presents preliminary findings regarding the site’s
occupation, stratigraphy, and internal organization. Directions for continued research of the site and its relationship to Teotihuacan
are proposed. The study of San Ignacio is key for improving our understanding of the Classic period in Morelos as well as Classic
period societies outside of the Basin of Mexico.
Jurgens, Christopher [68] see Koenig, Charles
Kabata, Shigeru [128] see Murakami, Tatsuya
Kaeding, Adam and Eleanor Harrison-Buck (University of New Hampshire)
[14]
The Maya at Spanish Contact in the Lower Belize River Watershed
Throughout the colonial period the Mérida-based Spanish administration organized and launched multiple entradas headed south
into the Petén. These entradas ranged from relatively small groups of religious missionaries and their envoys, to private armies
funded by opportunists seeking a reward of prestige and political power. The goals of these advances included the conversion of
Maya people living as non-Christians in the areas beyond the reach of the colonial church network, toppling what has been deemed
the “Last Maya Kingdom,” capturing Maya laborers who had fled their colonial circumstances, and securing the untamed area
beyond the southern border of administrative control. For over a century, these largely unsuccessful entrada efforts left their mark
on the historical and archaeological record. Many of these journeys traversed the survey area of the Belize River East
Archaeological Project (BREA). This paper presents the results of the ongoing BREA efforts to gather the documentary and
archaeological evidence for these earliest European incursions into this portion of Belize and characterize the landscapes and
communities they encountered.
Kaeding, Adam [14] see Murata, Satoru
Kahn, Jennifer (The College of William and Mary)
[88]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  285
Kaki, Moureen [179] see Hard, Robert
Kamenov, George [159] see Briggs, Emily
Kamenov, George [240] see Fry, Megan
Kamenov, George [80] see Williamson, Kylie
Kamph, Molly [185] see Hill, Catherine
Kamp-Whittaker, April (Arizona State University)
[29]
Are Communal Facilities Indicators of Neighborhoods? Applying Network Data to a WWII Japanese American Incarceration Center
Socially defined neighborhoods develop through frequent face to face interactions among residents and their self-identification as
neighbors. In contrast, archaeological identification of neighborhoods is dependent on artifact frequencies, boundaries, or shared
features. There is an implicit assumption that the presence of communal facilities or features can act as indicators of social
interaction. But how effectively do the prevalence of these features correspond to levels of personal interactions among
neighborhood residents? Network data drawn from historic newspapers published by internees at Amache, a WWII Japanese
American Incarceration Center is used to create networks of interaction between residents of a block, generally viewed as a
neighborhood. Within a sample of residential areas these interpersonal networks are compared to the frequency of community
landscape features to see how well archaeological remains correspond to network data in identifying socially defined neighborhoods
archaeologically.
[29]
Chair
Kanezaki, Yuko (Graduate School of Humanities and Sociology, University of Tokyo), Takayuki Omori (University Museum,
University of Tokyo) and Eisei Tsurumi (University Museum, University of Tokyo)
[182]
Early Pottery Development in a Frontier: A New Chronology of Wairajirca Pottery from the Huánuco Region, Peru
We present a high-resolution chronology of Wairajirca pottery in the Early Formative period, one of the earliest pottery traditions in
the Central Andes, which developed in a region between the Andean Highlands and the Amazonian rainforests. Fine-grained pottery
and radiocarbon analysis at the Jancao site in the Huánuco region revealed a five-staged ceramic sequence from the mid-
eighteenth to the late eleventh century cal BC. The ceramic sequence demonstrated that Wairajirca pottery developed rather
radically, featuring a diversification of vessel forms, the occurrence of two distinctive styles within an assemblage, and technological
innovations. Various elements of the pottery traditions of the highlands and the lowlands had been introduced selectively in different
periods, alongside continuing local traditions. All these features strongly suggest that this development occurred in situ rather than
through simple diffusion from other regions, stimulated by the fluid interaction among different ecological zones in the second
millennium BC. That is, the sociopolitical movements in the Huánuco region as a frontier had a close relationship with the
development of Wairajirca pottery, indicating that frontier dynamics played an important role in the social process of the emergence
and development of pottery in the Central Andes.
Kangas, Rachael [146] see Miller, Sarah
Kansa, Eric [183] see Wells, Joshua
Kanungo, Alok [249] see Abraham, Shinu
Kanungo, Alok [249] see Fenn, Thomas
Kaplan, Emily
[258]
Chair
Kaplan, Emily [258] see Katz, Monica
Kappelman, John (University of Texas, Austin), Lindsey Trombetta (Austin Community College), Laure Dussubieux (Field
Museum), Agazi Negash (Addis Ababa University) and Lawrence Todd (University of Texas, Austin)
[249]
Beads and Burials in the Lowlands of Northwestern Ethiopia
The lowlands of northwestern Ethiopia are inhabited by horticulturalists who occasionally practice seasonal fishing and hunting. In
2018 archaeological survey located site GQ165 with an abundant and diverse surface assemblage of ceramics, chipped and ground
stone, and faunal remains. The site also includes two human burials, an adult and young adult based on dental eruption and wear.
AMS 14C dating of a tooth from each burial yielded a mean age of 1344 cal AD. The burials include glass and stone beads and a
single ostrich eggshell bead. A total of 17 glass beads were analyzed by ICP-MS at the Field Museum of Natural History. The beads
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 286
are uniform in composition Their relatively high concentrations of magnesia, potash, and alumina place them in the high alumina
soda plant ash (v-Na-Al) glass group, and their lower zirconium concentrations fall within the range of Mapungubwe oblate (MO) v-
Na-Al glass known from southern African sites of similar age. Although iron implements have not been found, the documented
assemblage of artifacts suggests the presence of a horticultural group using a combination of chipped and ground stone and
pottery. The absence of variety in the bead types suggests limited inter-regional trade connections.
Karastamatis, Kallista, Ashley McKeown (Texas State University, San Marcos) and Courtney Siegert (Texas State
University)
[215]
The Down and Dirty: Differential Preservation of Burials from Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century Cemeteries on Sint Eustatius,
Dutch Caribbean
This study explores the markedly different preservation of skeletal remains from two historic cemeteries situated within 500 m of
each other on the Dutch Caribbean island of Sint Eustatius. The burials of eighteenth-century enslaved Africans are located along
the coast and are eroding onto the beach below. The nineteenth-century graveyard was associated with a nearby leper colony,
known as the Lazaretto, and despite being nearly a century younger, the skeletal remains are in far worse condition. Qualitative and
quantitative analysis of the differential preservation present in the cranial elements and long bones was performed, and ArcGIS was
used to visually depict the taphonomic differences between the two sites. Several variables were evaluated, including grave depth,
soil attributes, and funerary practices to explain the variation observed.
Karbula, James (Quanta Environmental Solutions Inc.)
[55]
A Critical Reevaluation of Radiocarbon Ages from the Berdoll Site (41TV2125), in Support of Refined Site Spatial and Contextual
Analyses
The Berdoll site (41TV2125) is a deeply buried early Archaic campsite in the floodplain of Onion Creek in Travis County, Texas. The
site presents direct evidence of plant food processing at approximately 7606–8291 BP (conventional). Seventeen charred botanical
remains including onion bulbs from earth ovens were submitted to two different radiocarbon labs for analysis. Considered critically,
six burned rock features utilized on a temporarily stable terrace landform were assigned a temporal span of approximately 367-
years from 7736–8103 BP. Using modern Bayesian statistical techniques, recalibrations and calendar conversions in OxCal 4.3
(IntCal 13), these radiocarbon ages are reexamined for accuracy, and then utilized as another line of archaeological evidence to
determine the sequence of, to separate out, and to narrow the age ranges of the occupations at the site. Updated calibrations and
conversion to calendar ages suggests two primary periods of site use from ca. 6600–6800, and 7000–7150 BC. At least one “single-
use” event is identified from 6600–6800 BC. These studies demonstrate how the use of Bayesian inference can narrow the range of
site radiocarbon ages, assist in the vertical and horizontal spatial and contextual analyses of archaeological features, occupations
and components, and provide correlations to known events in history.
Kardamaki, Elina [196] see Tsai, Che-hsien
Kardulias, Paul Nick (College of Wooster), Konstantinos Trimmis (University of Bristol), Stavros Paspalas (University of
Sydney), Lita Tzortzopoulou-Gregory (The Australian Archaeological Institute at Athens) and Timothy Gregory (The Ohio
State University)
[36]
Quartz Artifacts from Kythera, Greece, and Human Migration in the Aegean during the Paleolithic
While long-term permanent occupation on Mediterranean islands did not occur until the Neolithic, a growing body of evidence over
the past decade demonstrates human presence in the preceding Paleolithic and Mesolithic. In the Aegean region, the discovery of
Acheulian style stone tools on Crete spurred investigations that identified Paleolithic remains on a number of other islands, including
Naxos, Zakynthos, Kephalonia, and Lesvos. This material has raised questions about the nature of hominin dispersal into the
Mediterranean and Europe. One way to think about this spread is by means of “bridge” islands that lie close to continental shores, to
which Paleolithic people would have ventured first, followed by excursions to more isolated pelagic locations. Over the past three
years, survey on Kythera, lying just south of the Peloponnesos, has recovered an assemblage of quartz artifacts from the
Koupharika-Krotiria site with similarities to material found in Paleolithic contexts on other islands. A cleaver and scraper bear a
strong resemblance to quartz tools from Plakias in southwestern Crete that have been dated to the late Lower Paleolithic. These
recent discoveries by the Australian Paliochora-Kythera Archaeological Survey add to the list another location that may have been
visited by humans in the Pleistocene.
Karkanas, Panagiotis (Takis) [195] see Holcomb, Justin
Karle, Martina [107] see Wolters, Steffen
Karsten, Jordan [244] see Blohm, Tre
Karthauser, Chelsea [5] see Martin, Erik
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     287
Karty, Jonathan [169] see Newell, Savannah
Kassabaum, Megan (University of Pennsylvania), Arielle Pierson (University of Pennsylvania) and Erin Spicola (University
of Pennsylvania)
[254]
Connecting Past and Present Landscapes through Museum Education and Public Archaeology
Native American mound sites and their inhabitants are often misunderstood by local communities and are severely
underrepresented in educational curricula despite being a primary research focus for North American archaeologists. These
monuments stand as testament to the creativity and skill of their builders and provide important, material touchstones between
modern populations and the ancient past, yet they are rapidly disappearing due to erosion, farming, development, and looting.
Education aimed at populations who interact with mound sites as part of their quotidian landscape is key to their protection and to
engendering respect for past and present Native communities. During Summer 2019, in pursuit of this goal, we opened an exhibit
focusing on Native American moundbuilders in the Wilkinson County Museum in rural southwestern Mississippi. The exhibit’s goal is
to connect visitors with the past inhabitants of their land by emphasizing how a shared landscape has led to similar lifeways though
time (e.g., hunting, fishing, and cooking similar game, use of familiar natural resources, and construction of communal and ritual
structures). This paper will describe the methods we used to achieve this goal and evaluate its effectiveness as well as discussing
future steps necessary to expand its impact.
Kassabaum, Megan [222] see Graham, Anna
Kataoka, Osamu [100] see Ono, Rintaro
Kate, Emily (Pennsylvania State University), J. Heath Anderson (Minnesota State University, Mankato), Douglas Kennett
(University of California, Santa Barbara) and John Krigbaum (University of Florida, Gainesville)
[150]
A Study of Epiclassic Human Mobility at Hilltop Settlements in Hidalgo, Mexico, Using Stable and Radiometric Isotope Analyses and
Radiocarbon Dating
We present preliminary mobility data for individuals recovered from the Epiclassic hilltop settlements of Cerro Magoni, La Mesa,
Pahñú, Huesamenta, and El Zethe. For decades it has been hypothesized that the Tula region of Hidalgo and surrounding areas
may have experienced an influx of immigrants from northwestern Mexico during the Epiclassic period, and that these newcomers
played an important role in the rise Tula Grande. Results presented here provide an important step forward toward testing the long-
held migration hypothesis. Analyses of environmental materials were conducted to establish local baselines for oxygen (δ18O) and
radiometric strontium (87Sr/86Sr) and lead (20nPb/204Pb) ratios for the study regions. These baseline values were then compared
to human δ18O, 87Sr/86Sr, and 20nPb/204Pb values, derived from the analysis of tooth enamel, to identify individuals who may
have migrated to the study sites during the Epiclassic. For all individuals included in this study, bioarchaeological, mortuary, AMS
radiocarbon and stable carbon (δ13C) and nitrogen (δ15N) data are also assayed to contextualize the migration data. These new
mobility data, in conjunction with other bioarchaeological results, will provide further insight into the population patterns of the pre-
Toltec Hidalgo especially when compared with data from other Epiclassic sites.
Katz, Jared (Denver Art Museum)
[25]
Ancient Maya Soundscapes: How Music Impacts People’s Experiences
From the cacophonous noise of wooden cart wheels on ancient Roman roads to the thunderous sound of trumpets, drums, and
shouting emanating from ancient Maya ball courts, sound had a direct and significant impact on the lives of ancient people around
the world. This talk will discuss the various genres of music used in the ancient Maya area and the resulting soundscapes that were
created. The musical instruments found archaeologically, with few exceptions, are not depicted in artistic renderings of musical
groups. This demonstrates that the instruments used in a household context were very different than the instruments played in large
ceremonial contexts, and for good reason. To have the Bonampak band playing in an ancient Maya household courtyard would be
like bringing a marching band to a cookout. The instruments selected needed to be appropriate for the space and scale of the event.
This talk will rely on phenomenological theory, musical artifacts, and depictions of musical groups to shed light on how music was
intentionally used to shape peoples experiences and the manner in which events were perceived.
Katz, Monica (Hispanic Society of America), Emily Kaplan (National Museum of the American Indian) and Catalina Ospina
(Dept. of Art History University of Chicago)
[258]
Unresolved Questions in the Study of Mopa-mopa: History, Geography, and Chemistry
Mopa-mopa is the collective name given to the resin from a species of the plant genus Elaeagia (family Rubiaceae) that grows in
regions of Peru, Ecuador and Colombia. The resin has been used from prehispanic times to the present day to decorate a range of
objects from colonial Inka qeros to highly-decorated and prized luxury colonial wooden objects such as chests and writing desks
represented in museum collections around the world. The resin is used today by master artisans in Pasto, Colombia, for a folkart
style called barniz de pasto. The study of mopa-mopa is beset with apparent contradictions due to the scant archaeological record,
inconsistently interpreted historical accounts and limited ethnohistorical and art historical research. Challenges for experimental
archaeology and the study of the chemistry of the resin have included the difficulty of obtaining botanical reference standards with
which to compare samples from collections objects, and the relatively rare nature of the plant source and limited geographic access
to raw material. Here we review original source material, attempt a timeline, and consolidate the current information on botanical
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   288
dispersion of the plants and published chemical analyses to provide a road-map for future study
Kaufman, Brett [240] see Edington, Stacy
Kaul, Urvi, Paloma Cuello de Pozo and Jose Peña
[240]
Lab Methodologies for Looted Mortuary Sites
Looted archaeological sites hinder proper analysis due to destruction of in situ contextualized information limiting the type of data
retrieved. Historically, looting includes archaeologists hoping to build either museum or private collections. The discipline has been
evolving through the refinement of field methodologies and the adoption of interdisciplinary practices. Today, archaeologists often
work in tandem with the local population and institutions to restore their history and give back to the community. In this project we
focus on difficulties that arise when developing lab methodologies for cataloging looted mortuary sites. At the El Campanario
Project, in Huarmey, Peru, all interments had been removed from their original context due to looting practices (huaqueos). Remains
were strewn across the superior and surface layers causing irreparable damage from sun-bleaching and other surface agents. Here
we focus on exploring a lab methodology that operates within the confines of our resources, time, and materials. The difficulties of
examining looted archaeological material arise from the lack of standardized cataloguing techniques, therefore our attempts have
followed a trial and error process. We have designed several methods for cataloging and comparing the remains, and determined
the need for a standard lab technique to properly study looted mortuary sites.
Kavich, Gwenaelle [180] see Gingerich, Joseph A. M.
Kay, Marvin (University of Arkansas)
[69]
Dalton Point Engineering Design
For more than a thousand years lanceolate Dalton points increasingly favored greater blade element length while sacrificing haft
length. Even so, tool function did not change. The Breckenridge Dalton, at the end of this sequence, developed a novel, notched
hafting approach and dramatically reduced haft lengths.
Kealhofer, Lisa [168] see Stark, Miriam
Keef, Sean [66] see Thompsett, Neil
Keenan, Benjamin [128] see Douglas, Peter
Keene, Joshua (Baylor University)
[19]
Archaeological Surface Survey of the Hall’s Cave Site (41KR474): Preliminary Results
The Hall’s Cave site, located in Kerr county, TX, was initially identified as a paleontological site. However, later investigations
identified the presence of stone tools and other lithic debris in and around the cave entrance. Hall’s Cave (originally Klein Cave) was
officially recorded as an archaeological site in the 1990s, with an initial assessment identifying a dense lithic concentration over 200
m wide surrounding the entrance. However, at that time, little was done to map and characterize the extent or composition of this
surface assemblage. In addition to archaeological excavations of sediments within the cave in 2017–2018, a survey and surface
mapping project was conducted in the summer of 2019 to provide high-resolution GPS data of all prehistoric artifacts located on the
ground surface outside of the cave, with the goal of identifying discrete activity areas with associated time-diagnostic projectile
points. With this information, it is possible to compare the rough chronology of site use and human subsistence outside of the cave
with evidence found in stratified contexts within, providing a more complete, comprehensive picture of site use and diachronic
subsistence change at Hall’s Cave throughout the terminal Pleistocene and Holocene.
[19]
Chair
Keene, Joshua [19] see Laughlin, Tyler
Kehoe, Alice
[31]
Moderator
Kehoe, Alice
[103]
Ruthann, the Leader-Hearted Woman—Inawa’sioskitsipaki
The Blackfoot, in whose territories Ruthann Knudson worked, recognize some women as inawa’sioskitsipaki, a “leader-hearted
woman.” Such a woman is strong, intelligent, highly moral, outstandingly capable in the tasks she carries out, kind, and generous.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  289
She is deeply respected, and listened to. Oscar Lewis, in a classic paper, introduced the phrase but translated it as “manly-hearted
woman.” Contemporary Blackfoot speakers say “leader-hearted” is closer to its meaning. Ruthann didn’t act macho; she was calm,
steady, collegial, and clear-headed on what good science required. Wherever she worked, she was the leader people needed. This
presentation will highlight some of her fearless empiricism, breaking out of boxes, the power of an inawa’sioskitsipaki.
Keller, Chad [186] see Harris, Brendan
Keller, Hannah (Yale University), Fabio Negrino (University of Genoa), Naomi Cleghorn (University of Texas, Arlington) and
Jamie Hodgkins (University of Colorado, Denver)
[38]
A Taphonomic Comparison of Two Late Pleistocene Zooarchaeological Assemblages in Northwest Italy and the Western Cape of
South Africa
A driving question in paleoanthropology is the extent of behavioral divergence in hominin species, particularly Anatomically Modern
Homo sapiens (AMH) and Neanderthals. Generally, direct comparisons are restricted to Europe, where both hominin species were
interacting within the same environmental constraints. However, obtaining species-level site use patterns should also consider non-
European groups of AMH for comparison with Neandertals. Coastal South Africa offers an optimal record for such a comparison— a
human population that was likely among the most distantly related to contemporary AMH in Europe. This study compares the faunal
taphonomy of two late Pleistocene cave sites: the Mousterian deposits at Arma Veirana (AV) in northwestern Italy (≥45,000 BP) and
Knysna Eastern Heads Cave 1 (KEH-1) in coastal South Africa (46,000 BP-19,000 BP). Both sites are located in temperate zones.
Our goal is to understand how the different geological contexts of these two caves will impact faunal taphonomy, particularly bone
surface visibility, and thus comparisons of behavior. Approximately 900 (AV) and 500 (KEH-1) faunal specimens from both
assemblages were analyzed using standardized zooarchaeological methodologies. We assessed extent and frequency of acid
destruction and fragmentation. Subsequent studies will compare anthropogenic taphonomy between the sites to identify potential
species-wide behavioral divergences.
[38]
Chair
Kellett, Lucas (University of Maine, Farmington)
[224]
A Preliminary Look at Inka Imperialism on the Eastern Frontier of Paucartambo, Peru
This paper offers a preliminary look at the Inka occupation of the Paucartambo area, located at the eastern edge of the greater
Cusco highland region. Recent reconnaissance work in the region confirms a strong Inka presence in the Quencomayo and
Paucartambo River valleys. Previous and current work confirm the presence of numerous Inka roads entering the valley from all
directions reflecting the importance of the region for the movement of goods, especially coca, from the eastern ceja de selva. The
presence of large, fortified hilltop sites, as well as corral and chullpa complexes in the upper suni and puna zones suggests a
sizeable Late Intermediate Period (~1000–1400 CE) population in the region before Inka incursion. A series of Inka fortresses (e.g.,
Watoqto, Inka Raqay) and tambos in the valley indicate the high imperial investment in the region and the subjugation and
resettlement of local populations during the Late Horizon (~1400–1532 CE). In sum, Paucartambo was a strategically and
economically valuable region of the eastern quarter of Antisuyu, and holds high potential for continued interdisciplinary research.
Kelley, Alice, Arthur Spiess (Maine Historic Preservation Commission) and Bonnie Newsom (University of Maine)
[9]
Maine Midden Minders: Citizen Science and Coastal Erosion
As climate change impacts the coast, the shear numbers of affected archaeological sites are staggering. Maine’s coastline hosts
over 2000 recorded shell middens, as well as additional pre-European and historic sites. Virtually all are being eroded by climate
change related sea level rise and shifting weather conditions. In the case of shell middens, professional evaluation and monitoring of
each location is impossible with current resources. The Maine Midden Minders project is working closely with the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission to provide a stronger basis for shell midden cultural management decisions by creating a database of
citizen science generated data that documents site degradation and erosion rates, in addition to existing SHPO site significance
data. The program is organized through conservation organizations and a website, and welcomes local and tribal community
member participation. This collaboration has required some revised procedures for using archaeological data, such as limited
sharing of site locations and the creation of a specially designed database to shield site locations from the general public. Volunteer
involvement provides opportunities for public education, appreciation of the threatened nature of these sites, and local advocates for
cultural heritage preservation.
Kelley, Alice
[220]
Discussant
Kellner, Corina [21] see Conlee, Christina
Kellner, Corina [184] see Ekdahl, Amanda
Kelly, Dylan [33] see Howey, Meghan
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   290
Kelly, John (Washington University)
[166]
The Square within the Circle: Plazas as Stages of Symbolic Performance at Cahokia and Environs
My first encounter with Kent Reilly was at the SAAs in Nashville in April 1997. Kent was the senior author on a paper with James
Garber, “Unlocking the Iconographic Systems of the Mississippian Period Southeast: The Origins and Purpose of the Southeastern
Ceremonial Complex (SECC) Working Group.” I don’t recall any of the details of their paper, however, I do vividly remember Kent
suddenly flowing in a choreographic manner about the stage. I assume his performance was all in reference to the symbolism
portrayed in the indigenous dances so eloquently captured in some of the artwork of the ancient Mississippians. One of my primary
interests is the manner in which the plans of native settlements are cosmograms embedded with numerous symbols and symbolic
messages similar to those portrayed in the portable and non portable corpus of what we call art. This presentation reflects back on
Kent’s dance and the plazas within these ancient cosmograms where dance activity occurs and the manner in which these places
embody many symbolic elements of the SECC especially the basic building blocks of the square and circle.
Kelly, John
[218]
Discussant
Kelly, John (Public Archaeology Laboratory Inc.) and Daniel Forrest (Public Archaeology Laboratory Inc.)
[232]
Between the Shores and the Hills: Precontact Boundaries and Behavior along the Housatonic River in Southwestern Connecticut
Archaeological investigations by the Public Archaeological Laboratory along a natural gas pipeline right-of-way in southwestern
Connecticut have identified a cluster of pre-contact Native American sites in Newtown, situated along Rodericks Brook, a tributary
stream to the Housatonic River. The sites include the Canopy Site (97-101), the Alberts Hill Road Site (97-102), and the McLaughlin
Vineyard Site (97-106). Rodericks Brook runs along a previously documented lithic watershed and inferred territorial boundary
separating the coastal pre-contact peoples of the lower Housatonic drainage from the interior-oriented groups of the upper river
drainage. While the assemblages from these sites contain stone raw materials typical of sites from similar periods in the Lower
Housatonic Valley, the large volume of burned and heat-treated vein quartz and the caching of bifacial cores is unusual and appears
to be unique to the Rodericks Brook drainage. The authors propose that the unusual assemblages may be associated with
boundary maintenance between distinct Archaic populations along a shared frontier.
Kelly, John [56] see Goldstein, Lynne
Kelly, Kenneth [239] see Wallman, Diane
Kelly, Mary Kate [223] see Freidel, David
Kelly, Nigel (Bruker Nano Analytics), John Patterson (Bruker Nano Analytics), Robert Shannon (Bruker Nano Analytics)
and Lee Drake (Decision Tree LLC)
[203]
I Is It Time for an Open Discussion about Calibrations in Portable XRF Analysis?
The introduction of handheld X-ray Fluorescence (pXRF) instruments, and the proliferation in their use due to both financial
accessibility and field portability, has significantly influenced archaeological science. However, individual user understanding of
pXRF application, including the function of calibrations (as factory installed or user defined), has not kept pace with the uptake of the
technique. This paper will discuss the fundamentals of pXRF calibrations, differences between factory and type calibrations, and the
limitations of each approach. Included will be the importance of sample type, sample preparation, and their effect on the calibration,
which is misunderstood in some published literature. Building on an existing and extensive body of work by community leaders in
archaeological science, we will also present a framework for best practice in common areas of pXRF analysis in the field or the lab
to serve as a discussion for community-wide methodological standards.
Kelly, Robert [26] see Robinson, Erick
Kelso, William [173] see Owsley, Douglas
Kemp, Brian [129] see Conrad, Cyler
Kendall, Bryan (University of Iowa Office of the State Archaeologist) and William Whittaker (University of Iowa Office of the
State Archaeologi)
[8]
Relocation and 3D mapping of the Amana Fish Weir 13IW100
The Amana Fish Weir is one of the most well documented Native American fishing structures in the Midwest. The V-shaped stone
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    291
weir was visible in the bed of the Iowa River during periods of drought since at least 1844. Due to a northward migration of the river,
no portion of the structure has been observed since the fall of 1999. A 2017 investigation of the site location has resulted in
relocation and 3D mapping of weir, now preserved intact below about 2.5 m of silt and sand.
Kendall, Bryan [78] see Waterman, Anna
Kendall, Iain [61] see Miller, Melanie
Kennedy, J Ryan (University of New Orleans) and Christopher Grant (University of Chicago)
[129]
“Spoils of the forest”: Toward an Archaeology of Birds, Millinery, and Fashion
Bird feathers have long been used as decorations on clothing, hats, and the human body. The varied colors and shapes of feathers
make them attractive and sought-after objects, and the efforts required to obtain them can transform feathers into luxury items. This
was particularly the case in the late nineteenth century, when bird feathers, and even whole birds, became such common
decorations on ladies’ hats and other accessories that some bird populations crashed or were even driven to extinction. Our paper
examines the use of bird feathers in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century millinery and fashion. We weave together historical
accounts of the collection and trade of bird feathers with zooarchaeological data from two archaeological sites: (1) an eighteenth-
century plantation in New Orleans, Louisiana, and (2) a nineteenth-century mill site in Indiana. We document the capture of a variety
of wild birds whose feathers were used as decorations, and we discuss the roles that feathers played in these contexts including
underpinning local fashion trends and labor formation and contributing to global flows of animal products. Ultimately, we argue that
the use of feathers in fashion constitutes an important non-culinary aspect of human-bird relationships that remains critically
understudied in historical contexts.
Kennedy, Jaime [195] see McDonough, Katelyn
Kennedy, Jason (Central Michigan University)
[86]
Work Is the Curse of the Drinking Class: Beer, Labor, and Class in the Ancient Near East
The archaeology of beer has received significant attention in the last three decades. However, many studies focus on the special
role that beer played in sumptuous prestige feasts and for conducting commensal politics with an emphasis on elite motivations. In
this paper, I follow the approach of Susan Pollock and Reinhard Bernbeck and view the production of beer as a cornerstone of state
exploitation in the early states of Egypt and Mesopotamia. I will briefly outline the archaeological and glyptic evidence for beer
production in the early historic periods of the ancient Near East and its role in providing for the workforce of the early state. The
consumption of beer as payment for state sponsored labor projects changes the commensal dynamics of society. Repeatedly
consuming daily rations of beer at the location of labor creates an identity as worker and subject, i.e., one who works for someone
else for their subsistence. In this sense, beer may have been crucial in creating both class identity for the worker, as well as
providing the means of subjugation for the elites in society who controlled its production and distribution.
Kennedy, Kendra [254] see Bradley, Benjamin
Kennedy, Kendra [184] see Wescott, Konnie
Kennett, Douglas (UC Santa Barbara)
[15]
Discussant
Kennett, Douglas (UC Santa Barbara)
[23]
Experimentation, Domestication, and Intensification in Mesoamerica Prior to 3000 cal BP
The “Archaic Period” is an awkward normative category that obscures important behavioral ecological variability in Mesoamerica
during the last 10,000 years. This cultural historical concept developed when little was known about the archaeology of
Mesoamerica prior to the Classic Period (~2000 cal BP), but even today textbooks quickly dispense with this ~7,000-year interval as
a period of gradual cultural change. We now know that Mesoamerica’s staple crop, maize, was domesticated during this interval
along with a range of other important tree and field crops. Agricultural systems intensified and maize became a staple crop of major
dietary importance. Experimentation with the cultivation of tree-crops and other plants also occurred prior to 3,000 cal BP and
became the basis of economies in the neotropical lowlands. There is also increasing evidence for the intensive exploitation of
resources (e.g., fish and shellfish) from coastal environments that parallel agricultural intensification. I synthesize data from across
Mesoamerica with an emphasis on the neotropical lowlands. Ultimately, I argue that normative categories like the “Archaic Period”
undermine our understanding of adaptive variability and cultural evolutionary change in Mesoamerica and that greater emphasis
should be placed on behavioral ecological variability through time.
Kennett, Douglas [270] see Alsgaard, Asia
Kennett, Douglas [237] see George, Richard
Kennett, Douglas [76] see Hixon, Sean
Kennett, Douglas [150] see Kate, Emily
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     292
Kennett, Douglas [15] see McCool, Weston
Kenoyer, Jonathan Mark [62] see Cameron, Asa
Keohane, Scott [38] see Murray, John
Kerchusky, Sarah (International Archaeological Research Institute Inc.)
[21]
Symbolic Behavior in Household Archaeology: A Study of Late Nasca Period and Loro Period Figurines from Zorropata, Nasca,
Peru
Fifty-four fragmentary figurines, including 53 human and one animal forms, were recovered from archaeological domestic contexts
at the site of Zorropata, located in the Las Trancas Valley, Nasca, Peru. Zorropata was a large domestic site with likely ceremonial
function occupied from the Late Nasca period (ca. AD 450–600) until the early Middle Horizon/Loro period (ca. AD 600–1000).
During the Middle Horizon (AD 750–1000) period the highland-centered Wari Empire established at least three colonies (Pacheco,
Pataraya, and Inkawasi) in the Nasca Valley and its tributaries (Edwards 2010). Current research directed by Christina Conlee and
Corina Kellner suggests a probable forth Wari colony and imperial administrative center at Huaca del Loro ca. 5 km down valley
from Zorropata. The overarching aim of research at Zorropata has sought to elucidate the potential impact of Wari encroachment on
Nasca society. This paper focuses of a facet of that relationship and investigates the use of figurines found in household contexts.
While many questions remain regarding ritual and symbolic behavior in ancient Nasca, research supports that figurines probably
had a ritual function, that they changed stylistically between the Late Nasca and the Loro periods, and that they may portray at least
female and male gender identities.
Kern, Travis [214] see Brown, Erin
Kessler, Nicholas (University of Arizona), Gregory Hodgins (University of Arizona), Matthew Guebard (United States
National Park Service) and Lucas Hoedl (United States National Park Service)
[135]
Wiggle-Match Dating at the Montezuma Castle Cliff Dwelling
Most radiocarbon measurements informing Bayesian models of cultural sequences are obtained from short-lived organisms such as
annual plants and animal bone. Short-lived organic material from plateaus in atmospheric 14C production have a calibrated error
which corresponds to the duration of the plateau. This fact hinders Bayesian modeling’s ability to produce long-term, high-resolution,
cultural chronologies. Sequential 14C measurements at known time intervals (wiggle-matching) can solve this problem. We present
results of a recent wiggle-matching study from Montezuma Castle National Monument, an ancestral cliff dwelling in central Arizona.
Historical looting has destroyed contexts for reliable ceramic cross dating, and dendrochronology is of limited utility for historical and
ecological reasons. Previous attempts to radiocarbon date the site produced confusing results. Utilizing wiggle-matching, we
produced high precision dates from the mid-twelfth and late thirteenth centuries AD, and infer an occupational history that involves
early construction, partial destruction and disuse, followed by restoration and reoccupation. Significantly, this is the first high-
precision chronometric sequence for a structure of this type in the area. Our results demonstrate that a combined approach to
archaeological dating, using tactics from dendrochronology and radiocarbon dating, can objectively enhance Bayesian models of
archaeological events, phase boundaries, and time spans.
Kestle, Caleb [188] see Monaghan, John
Kettunen, Harri [164] see McClean, Xavier
Key, Abigail [37] see Way, Phylicia
Khounani, Alireza
[267]
Trade as a Social Activity: Eastern Sigillata A and Its Near Eastern Emulation
The recent scholarly discourse places a great emphasis on social components that fostered ancient trade as a form of exchange.
This paper attempts to utilize both technological and conceptual approaches to trade found in processual and post-processual
paradigms in order to explore the socioeconomic evidence from the pottery tradition at Arsacid Seleucia on the Tigris; a tradition that
denotes a certain bond between kin groups in the Mediterranean and Near East during the early centuries of the common era. The
striking similarities in production method and forms of Eastern sigillata A tableware (ESA) and red-burnished ware (RBW), its local
‘emulation’ at Seleucia, indicate a close social interaction in the realm of exchange beyond the paradigm of disconnected producer
vs. consumer. This interaction provided the ground for both cultural and technological dialogue between groups while allowing
opportunity for local differentiation and innovation. Using fabric and typological analysis while maintaining an interpretive approach,
this study aims to demonstrate that trade as a social activity moves beyond the existing cultural and political boundaries.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       293
Khym, Do and Todd Ahlman (Texas State University)
[215]
Water Cisterns as Indispensable Elements for Prosperity of Eighteenth-Century St. Eustatius
This research examines the importance of cisterns in the development of St. Eustatius as one of the most prosperous free ports in
the eighteenth century and to produce a user-friendly 3D images of a plantation big house, cistern, and water catchment structure.
The island is home to about 3,500 residents today, but it once supported up to 9,000 people in its commercial heyday in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries as a center of trans-Atlantic slave trade and trade hub for the Caribbean and Western
Hemisphere. Aptly named “The Golden Rock” for its role as a prominent global free port, the prosperity of St. Eustatius was aided by
94 cisterns that the colonists built because the island lacks fresh water sources such as streams or lakes. Cisterns use has declined
as the local utility company, STUCO, supplies more running water to island residents. This research utilizes photogrammetry to
highlight the water catchment and storage facilities at a plantation. Photogrammetry is a technology that processes photographs into
3D digitized renditions that facilitates propagation of archaeological knowledge to general public.
Kiahtipes, Christopher [235] see Perrotti, Angelina
Kibii, Job [232] see Waweru, Veronica
Kidder, Barry (University of Kentucky) and Scott Hutson (University of Kentucky)
[54]
Social Marketing and Provisioning the Populace along an Intersite Sacbe in the Northern Lowlands during the Late Preclassic
During the Late Preclassic in the Northern Plains of the Yucatán Peninsula, a long-distance causeway linked together two
micropolities, Ucanha and Uci, both of which concomitantly experienced demographic increases, several monumental constructions,
and the foundations of institutionalized authority. While this landscape has nuanced ecological differences, this region lacks the
“managed mosaic” of exploitable resources seen elsewhere in the Maya world that would have acted as centripetal forces coaxing
settlement. Nevertheless, data from households at Ucanha and Uci indicate economic distribution patterns similar to that of small-
scale marketing provisioned the majority of people with decorated ceramics, thereby augmenting their quality of life. Given that both
of these sites included access to sacred landscapes linked by intrasite causeways, it is likely economic transactions occurred in
conjunction with larger communal processions and pageantries that helped forge a sense of generalized trust wherein economic
practices were rooted in the moral authority of emerging political institutions. However, the rise of Izamal as a regional superpower
during the Protoclassic coincides with the dissolution of rulership; new ceramic distribution patterns that highlight exclusionary
networks rather than more widespread provisioning of the populace; and population decline at Ucanha and Uci.
Kidder, Barry [128] see Plank, Shannon
Kidder, Tristram (Washington University)
[146]
Climate Change, Resilience, and Transformation in the Yellow River Floodplain, China
Geoarchaeological research in China’s Yellow River floodplain demonstrates the complex interplay of climate change and socio-
political transformation in state-level societies. Using data from Anshang and Sanyangzhuang, Henan Province, this paper
investigates the ways local communities evolved their behaviors as climates changed and as socio-political circumstances shifted
from ca. 4500–2000 cal BP. Resilience at local scales was driven by bottom-up requirements to respond to climate; however, more
importantly, local populations were responding to top-down political impositions from outside the community itself. Our work shows
how resilience at the local level in these state-level societies required balancing climatic, environmental and socio-political
challenges. Episodes of integration and fragmentation in these small communities mirror larger historical events, which exemplifies
how these processes are linked at different scales.
Kiefer, Victoria [192] see Galloway, Tori
Kielhofer, Jennifer (University of Arizona), Joshua Reuther (University of Alaska Museum of the North), Charles Holmes
(University of Alaska, Anchorage), Vance Holliday (University of Arizona) and François Lanoë (University of Arizona)
[82]
Geoarchaeology at Swan Point, Central Alaska: Insight on Past Environments and Site Formation Processes since the Late Glacial
Period (~15,000 cal BP to Present)
We synthesize geoarchaeological research at Swan Point, one of the oldest (~14,000 cal BP) archaeological sites in North America.
Numerous publications summarize Swan Point’s archaeological importance, yet few address its geoarchaeological significance. Early
geoarchaeological work from the 1990s outlined a stratigraphic sequence of aeolian sediments and identified weakly developed buried
soils associated with archaeological occupations. Fining-upward from sand to calcareous loess reflects dramatic landscape change
since the last glacial period, and recent work refines initial models of environmental change and site formation. Micromorphology
analysis indicates little to no soil formation during the deglacial period, but instead freeze-thaw processes may have preferentially
concentrated organic matter into thin bands. Anthropogenic input may also have contributed to increased organic carbon concentrations
within the sediments. Radiocarbon and luminescence ages document the depositional chronology at the site. Hand coring across the
site landform reveals variation in sedimentation and deposit thickness, with the thinnest deposits at the knoll’s apex. Finally, analysis of
both small and large mammal remains demonstrates change also, from more open to more forested environments from the deglacial
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    294
and throughout the Holocene. This geoarchaeological synthesis enhances our understanding of environmental change within a
dynamic, high-latitude landscape at Swan Point.
Kilby, David (Texas State University) and Marcus Hamilton (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[101]
New Dates for Bonfire Shelter, a Multicomponent Rock Shelter in West Texas
Bonfire Shelter is a well-known but imperfectly understood multicomponent rockshelter site located in a short tributary canyon of the
Rio Grande in West Texas. The site is particularly known for three “bone beds” deposited between about 14,000 BP and 2,500 BP,
two of which appear to represent mass bison kills. Three years of renewed investigation by Texas State University’s Ancient
Southwest Texas Project has resulted in new observations on the complex shelter stratigraphy including additional radiocarbon
dates. This paper combines new and previous dates with stratigraphic observations in an attempt to generate a chronostratigraphic
model that goes beyond the bone beds to include lesser known occupations and deposits in the rockshelter, and to provide a more
comprehensive overview of depositional history and site formation at this classic site.
Kilby, David [68] see Koenig, Charles
Kilgore, Gertrude (University of Kentucky) and Claire Novotny (Kenyon College)
[228]
Coloring Outside the Lines: Engaging Diverse Audiences through Community-Based Archaeological Outreach in Belize
Archaeology education in the public sphere seeks to enrich understandings of the past by situating it in the present. Learning
environments span multiple different environments and reach audiences with unique pedagogical interests. As researchers working
outside our own communities, archaeologists conducting research abroad must work to develop public programming that provokes
conversations about the past that are collaborative and accommodate diverse lived experiences. Using case studies from outreach
programs initiated by the authors at sites in northwestern and southern Belize, we examine the strengths and weaknesses of
various strategies for community engagement that acknowledges the interests of audiences of different age groups. Public
programming developed for both sites sought to encourage dialogues within the respective communities around studying and
preserving heritage. We seek to compare discussions conducted in meeting-style public programming targeted more toward adult
audiences with educational tools developed specifically for children, such as coloring books and activities. We will explore the tools
for developing sustainable public programming that is adaptable enough to engage the primary target audience and to appeal to
broader audiences. Finally, we will use these experiences to inform a broader dialogue surrounding the impacts and contexts of
effectively promoting community engagement through educational heritage outreach.
Kilikoglou, Vassilis (Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece), Peter Day
(University of Sheffield), Anno Hein (Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, NCSR) and David Wilson (Western
University)
[196]
Early Bronze Age Ayia Irini, Kea: A Maritime Crossroads of Ceramic Traditions?
Over two key phases of the Early Bronze Age, the sheltered harbour of Ayia Irini, Kea formed an important link in the chain of sites
across the Aegean, the backbone for the movement of resources, material culture and people that Renfrew characterised as the
‘International Spirit’ during the period before the emergence of early state organization in Crete. An extensive programme of
petrographic and chemical analysis details a picture of ceramic exchange spanning the emerging centers of mainland Attica,
Cycladic islands and the island of Crete. While these important findings of widespread trade are important in themselves, of
significance to the current session are two aspects of the Period II and III ceramics at Ayia Irini, spanning the middle of third
millennium BCE. Firstly, it offers the chance to examine technological continuities or disruptions with the arrival of the Anatolianizing
‘Kastri’ group in Period III, often suggested to herald the arrival of newcomers or demographic incursions. Secondly, its pottery
straddles what were previously thought to be stylistic and culturally separate zones. In the large amount of ceramic imports from
nearby Attica, does Ayia Irini offer a window on potters in mainland centers producing stylistically varied pottery specifically for
export?
Killebrew, Ann [234] see Skinner, Jane
Kim, Alexander (Harvard University), Tatyana Savenkova (Krasnoyarsk State Medical University), Yevgenia Reis
(Arkheologicheskoye Proyektirovaniye i Izyskaniya), Nikolai Makarov (Krasnoyarsk Regional Museum) and David Reich
(Harvard Medical School)
[173]
Ancient Human Genomes Illuminate the Nonagricultural Neolithics of Central Siberia
The Eurasian steppe and its neighboring uplands and aridland oases have become the foremost stage of the past five years of
genome-wide human ancient DNA research (Haak et al. 2015; Allentoft et al. 2015; Damgaard et al. 2018; Jeong et al. 2019; Wang
et al. 2019; Narasimhan et al. 2019), with strongest focus resting on profound transformations that were propelled demographically
and culturally by food production and domesticated ungulates (farming and pastoralism). The population histories of these regions
articulate in still poorly-understood ways with the still vaster expanses of boreal Asia, where ancient DNA research remains far
patchier (Sikora et al. 2019; Flegontov et al. 2019), and concepts like “Neolithic” that were first shaped on Near Eastern and
European templates refract and dissolve in challenging ways. We present some of the first archaeogenetic explorations of the
Central Siberian hunter-gatherer Neolithic and Early Bronze Age, with genome-wide aDNA data from the critical forest-steppe
ecotone of the middle reaches of the Yenisey River—North Eurasia’s greatest by length and discharge and a crucial border between
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   295
eastern and western Siberia—where the past century of archaeological research remains constrained by limited investigation and
major relational uncertainties (Makarov 2005, 2013).
Kim, Jieun [244] see Shin, Dong Hoon
Kim, Lynn (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[200]
Chair
Kim, Lynn (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[224]
The Negotiated Yunga-Inka Landscape of the Camata-Carijana Valley
The Camata-Carijana Valley is situated on the eastern frontier of the Inka Empire in the Kallawaya domain and was inhabited by
Chuncho groups from the tropical piedmont. To assess the relationships between these groups, the distribution of three key
landscape features (community settlements, road network, and agrarian terracing) is placed on a spectrum of possible colonial
landscapes from a state-controlled landscape (Model 1) to a locally-produced landscape (Model 2). Particular focus is paid attention
to the architectural construction of settlements, their location on the prehispanic roads, and their association with types of agrarian
terraces. It is concluded that the inhabitants were able to form local spaces of agency and take advantage of their Inka ties while
living within largely a state-directed landscape. The locals established a new identity that tied them both to the lowland groups and
to the highland Inka.
Kim, Sun [244] see Shin, Dong Hoon
Kindschuh, Sarah (Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency Laboratory)
[153]
Discussant
King, Adam (SC Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology) and Johann Sawyer
[47]
Pipes, Pots, and Swirling Poles (Oh My!): Centered Worlds and the Legacy of First Man
First Man is a name we use for the male creator in Native American narratives of the Upper Midwest and Prairie Plains. He and his
lineage are known by many different names, but their ritual associations are visible in the Braden styles and their historical
successors. In epics such as the Red Horn cycle, these figures play foundational roles in the creation of the cosmos and the
distribution of powers among lineages and genders. In this paper, we explore key aspects of First Man and his line through imagery
involving the Earth Pot, smoking pipes, and the striped center pole.
[47]
Chair
King, Eleanor (Howard University)
[43]
Moderator
King, Eleanor (Howard University) and Michael Brennan (SEARCH, SEARCH 20)
[53]
Practical Pathways: Limestone Procurement and Ritual at Maax Na, Belize
Researchers have found that the limestone bedrock at prehispanic Maya sites in the Three Rivers Region of northwestern Belize
crumbles easily and weathers badly. As a result, caves, which were central to Maya ritual, are few, and those that are present are
small and prone to instability and internal collapse. In addition, the rock is of such poor quality that few carved monuments survive.
We hypothesize that the local stone disintegrated too easily to be carved, so most of the altars, stelae, and other ritual markers were
painted instead. Inhabitants of this area did not just do the best they could with the materials at hand, however. At the large site of
Maax Na, geochemical evidence has suggested that they deliberately selected specific types of stone for some—not all—of their
monuments. Maax Na is centered on the largest known extant cave in the area, whose offerings included speleothems imported
from elsewhere. This paper explores the connection between limestone selection, monuments, and caves in the ritual and economic
life of Maax Na in the Late Classic (C.E. 600–850), the period of peak site occupation.
King, Eleanor (Howard University)
[93]
Discussant
King, Jason [264] see Doubles, Catherine
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   296
King, Julia
[251]
Bridging the Divide: A Study of Fourteenth–Eighteenth-Century Native Settlements in the Middle Chesapeake
Archaeologists (including the author) investigating seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Native sites in the Chesapeake point out
how materially different these assemblages are from those recovered from contemporary colonial sites. Characterized by materials
almost wholly produced by Native hands with some objects of European manufacture, they are indeed different and have been used
to argue that Native people in a colonized land resisted colonial control in part through the maintenance of Native practices. These
assemblages, however, are rarely examined vis-à-vis assemblages from earlier Native sites or from contemporary Native sites,
resulting in a not-so-subtle reinforcement of the deep history/colonial divide along with the assumption that the template (the “norm”)
for this period is the European colonial site.
[251]
Chair
King, Matt (University of South Florida), Davide Tanasi (University of South Florida), Kaitlyn Kingsland (University of South
Florida), Stephan Hassam (University of South Florida) and Reece Combs (University of South Florida)
[104]
Resurrecting Islam in Medieval Malta using 3D Digital Methods
Muslims have been an integral part of Maltese history from the ninth century onward. However, scholars have long ignored or
minimized the role of Muslims on the island in keeping with the nationalist, pro-Christian identity of the modern nation of Malta. The
history of these people is poorly recorded in the written record, but the discovery and digitization of over forty tombstone fragments
from a Muslim cemetery, found in the are of the Roman Domus of Rabat, promises to shed light on this otherwise lost community.
These fragments, which were unearthed during excavations in the 1920s, provide a testament to a substantial community of
Muslims whose wealth and technical expertise allowed for the patronage of tombstones containing ornate Kufic script and geometric
designs. When put in dialog with written sources, these archaeological finds testify to the enduring presence of Muslim communities
in Malta during the medieval period. In the Summer of 2019, 38 Muslim tombstones associated with the site of the Roman Domus
were scanned. Seven of these tombstones were captured using digital photogrammetry and the remainder were captured using a
close range structured light scanner for the purposes of global digital dissemination and research.
Kingsland, Kaitlyn (University of South Florida), Reece Combs, Davide Tanasi, Stephan Hassam and Paolino Trapani
[104]
The Digital Afterlife of a Prehistoric Cemetery: The Case of Cozzo del Pantano (Siracusa, Italy)
The Middle Bronze Age (1450–1250 BCE) cemetery of rock cut chamber tombs of Cozzo del Pantano, located in the south-western
hinterland of the territory of Siracusa, was excavated in 1892. The report of the excavation was published in 1893 but the
rudimentary system of data recording and illustration of the many architectural features offered by the site and the coincise form of
the report of the excavation relegated it in the category of the “minor sites”. However a recent overall reappraisal of the materials
collected in the tombs has proved the its great cultural relevance and also clear traces of post-prehistoric phases of reuse, which
were never highlited before. In summer 2019, an extensive terrestrial laser scanning effort was carried out on the south-western
slope of Cozzo del Pantano, in order to document in a more accurate way all the archaological features still visible, categorizing
them all on the basis of the chronology so as to find a correspondence between the funerary assemblages and the tombs. The 3D
model obtained will be used to create threedimensional diachronic maps of the site in other to study eventual patterns and spatial
distribution of the archaeological features related with later phases of reuse.
Kingsland, Kaitlyn [104] see Bonacini, Elisa
Kingsland, Kaitlyn [104] see Cali, Denise
Kingston, John [76] see Feak, Angela
Kintigh, Keith (Arizona State University)
[96]
Discussant
Kintigh, Keith (Arizona State University)
[115]
Discussant
Kipnis, Renato (Scientia Consultoria Científica), Solange Caldarelli (Scientia Consultoria Científica), Letícia Muller (Scientia
Consultoria Científica), Andrey Castro (Scientia Consultoria Científica) and Aguinaldo Marques (Scientia Consultoria
Científica)
[161]
A Historical Perspective on the Nature of Precolonial Settlements in the Middle Xingu River Basin
In order to understand the processes that generated the rich, complex and diverse cultural and environmental history present in
Amazonia, and specifically along the Xingu River basin, it is crucial that we generate information on when, where, and how small-
scale foraging societies changed to more sedentary lifestyles and complex social arrangements based on agriculture. Here we
present and discuss the archaeological record generated by research carried out within environmental licensing process of the Belo
Monte Hydroelectric Power Plant in the Middle Xingu River, state of Pará, Brazil, which involved systematic regional survey and the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     297
study of closely to 200 archaeological sites. It shows continuous human occupation dating back to the late Pleistocene throughout
the Holocene period; with great variability in space and time of archaeological sites and material culture. The high-resolution
archaeological data presents the potential to discuss issues such as the antiquity of human occupation; the emergence, or not, of
hierarchical organized systems; changes in mobility and settlement pattern; gaps in the archaeological record during the middle
Holocene period; the spread of agricultural practices, and dispersion of Tupi and Koriabo ceramic in the region.
Kirakosian, Katie (UMass Amherst)
[56]
Dena Dincauze: The Matriarch of New England Archaeology
Dena Dincauze (1934–2016) made a great impact throughout her archaeological career, not only in New England, but also
throughout North America, more broadly. As one of the first women to receive her PhD from Harvard University, Dena was also one
of the first tenured female archaeology professors in the state of Massachusetts. She also took professional service very seriously,
serving as the first female editor of American Antiquity from 1981 to 1984, for example. Her service did not go unrecognized, having
received the SAA’s Distinguished Service Award in 1997 and a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Massachusetts Historical
Commission in 2001, for her support of cultural resource management. Dena also mentored many graduate students and worked
with countless avocationals throughout her career, who continue to expand her legacy in the field of archaeology.
[56]
Chair
Kirgesner, Samantha (Ohio State University) and Julie Field (Ohio State University)
[76]
An Analysis of Marine and Riparian Mollusks from Sigatoka Valley, Fiji
Modern concerns about the health of Fiji’s coastal environment are increasing, especially following recent climate events (2016–
2017) that resulted in coral bleaching and mass die-offs of reef fish. This study attempts to identify past interactions with aquatic
environments in Fiji through the analysis of archaeological assemblages of marine and riparian mollusks. Assemblages generated
from excavations in the Sigatoka Valley of Viti Levu in 2001–2002 reveal different combinations of marine and riparian species.
Quantitative analyses are employed here to assess subsistence changes and whether there was a focus on one type of mollusk
over the other. Mapping the corresponding habitats of each species, size and frequency of individuals, and the distances involved in
their transport can identify possible incentives for foraging for particular species during times of environmental stress. Tracing the
interactions of humans with the environment allows for the identification of periods of overutilization, which may have prompted a
switch in focus on subsistence strategies. By classifying past interactions with these aquatic resources and understanding changes
these past people conducted we may be able to better understand what future changes can be made to protect the aquatic
environments in Fiji.
Kirk, Scott, Jonathan Dombrosky (University of New Mexico), Cyler Conrad (University of New Mexico) and Emily Lena
Jones (University of New Mexico)
[129]
Tracking Exchange through Stable Isotope Analysis: A Preliminary Study of the Turkeys from Tijeras Pueblo, New Mexico, USA
The substantial turkey assemblage from Tijeras Pueblo, occupied between 1300 and 1425 CE, has provided important information
about variability in turkey management in the American Southwest/Mexican Northwest. While many studies have suggested that
genetically domestic prehispanic turkeys across the region were consistently penned and fed a maize diet, the turkeys recovered
from Tijeras Pueblo do not follow this pattern (see Jones et al. 2016). Here, we use previously published carbon and nitrogen stable
isotope data in conjunction with new hydrogen and oxygen stable isotope data to explore questions about trade, environment, and
connectivity in the Pueblo IV (Classic Period) Middle Rio Grande. Our combined analysis shows that the Tijeras turkey diets may
have been a function of local exchange systems. Our study tests the practicality of combined hydrogen and oxygen isotope data as
measure of resource exchange as well as the importance of trade in managing turkeys at Tijeras Pueblo.
Kirkland, Brenda [237] see Peacock, Evan
Kisielinski, Caroline [244] see Potter, Bethany
Kisielinski, Caroline [100] see Stone, Jessica
Kistler, Logan [229] see Gaffney, Isabella
Kitchel, Nathaniel (Dartmouth College)
[30]
Getting It Right for the Wrong Reasons: Using ED-XRF to Characterize Red Munsungun Chert
Distinctive red chert attributed to the Munsungun Lake geologic formation of northern Maine appears frequently in terminal
Pleistocene fluted point period sites in New England. Despite the macroscopic visual similarity of red chert artifacts across the
region no large-scale effort had been made to evaluate these visual identifications through geochemical techniques. To address this
situation, in 2013 I employed laboratory-based ED-XRF to analyze over 200 artifacts from 24 separate fluted point sites or activity
loci from Maine to Connecticut. This analysis indicated that that virtually all the red chert artifacts in this analytical assemblage arose
from one or two closely related outcrops. Subsequent geoarchaeological prospection and geochemical analyses have supported
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   298
these results. While the findings of the original study appear sound, I believe these positive results arose not from rigorous sampling
design and careful selection of analytical methods but rather from the specific geologic characteristics of Munsungun Lake “chert”. In
this presentation I will discuss why Munsungun chert proved amenable to sourcing by the methods I employed to illustrate how
geology came to the rescue of my initial study, and how in this case my research design was more lucky than good.
[30]
Chair
Klassen, Sarah (University of British Columbia) and Alyssa Loyless (University of York)
[26]
Urban Scaling and Agricultural intensification: A Case Study from Angkor, Cambodia
Angkor was the heart of the Khmer Empire for over five centuries from the ninth to thirteenth century CE. During this time, a
polycentric metropolis emerged that, at its height, may have been home to nearly one million people. These people lived in two
distinctive areas: densely occupied urban cores and suburban agricultural zones. The rice production in the suburban agricultural
zones was a key element of the Angkorian economy with rice fields covering over 1,000 km2 of the Greater Angkor region. Among
the rice fields were over a thousand small temples that formed the economic and social loci of communities, including rice
production. Spatial and chronological advances, using remote sensing and semi-supervised machine learning, have now allowed
archaeologists to place these temple communities and their associate rice fields in time and space. In this paper, we investigate the
diachronic relationship between the urban population density of Angkor and land productivity. This analysis provides valuable insight
into the relationships between urban scaling and agricultural intensification with implications far beyond medieval Cambodia.
Klassen, Sarah [28] see Attorre, Tiago
Klaus, Haagen [105] see Shimada, Izumi
Klaus, Haagen [131] see Turner, Bethany
Klehm, Carla (University of Arkansas) and Laure Dussubieux
[249]
Why Indian Ocean Beads in the Southern African Interior Matter: Linking Global Objects to Local and Regional Change
The dispersal of Indian Ocean glass beads has helped archaeologists reconstruct over 1,500 years of prehistoric and historic trade
links across multiple continents. These beads play a particularly important role for including places where written documents of this
trade do not exist nor cover. For example, glass beads provide material proof of linkages from the Middle East and India to areas a
thousand miles into the southern African interior, where peoples engage in this global economy through trade in exotic animal skins,
ivory, gold, and other products. Rather than using beads to simply delineate the “peripheral regions” or “peripheral peoples” of
Indian Ocean trade connections, this presentation will center on the sociopolitical and economic changes taking place in the
southern African interior: the circumstances in which glass beads are being incorporated into peoples’ lives. Glass beads from
multiple sites in the Bosutswe region of east-central Botswana will be discussed in context with other artifacts, and used to build a
narrative of changing social identities, economic tensions, political centralization, and regional power struggles among competing
factions for control over resources associated with this long-distance trade. The case study will demonstrate how global objects may
elucidate local and regional-scale societal dynamics.
Klein, Kerri (Cardno)
[213]
Clothing at Fort Brooke: Buckles, Buttons, and Fabric (Oh My!)
Organic materials are rarely represented in the archaeological record in subtropical, sandy Florida. The city of Tampa grew around
what was originally Fort Brooke, a military outpost in the swamps of Florida that was occupied from 1824–1882. Surprisingly little is
known not only about the fort, but about the individuals who lived there. Tiny scraps of fabric, the largest of which is smaller than a
postage stamp, attempt to aid in our understanding of textile choices and availability. A study of recovered artifacts of clothing,
mainly buttons and belt buckles, compares recently excavated materials with those recovered from a previous Fort Brooke
excavation in an attempt to pinpoint similarities and differences in clothing choices across the entire Fort Brooke site. These artifacts
and textiles can help shed light on the trading networks surrounding a military outpost in frontier Florida.
Klein, Terry
[115]
Discussant
Klenck, Joel (Yes), Mohammed Sahib (Centre of Samoan Studies, Archaeology & Cultural H) and Seiuli Temese (Centre of
Samoan Studies, Samoan Language & Cultur)
[252]
Archaeology of Luatele Crater: Ritual and Prestige of the Tuimanu’a, Ta’u Island, American Samoa
An archaeological survey covering 50 acres was conducted in and around Luatele or Judds Crater, an extinct volcano, on Ta’u
Island, Manu’a District, American Samoa. The project identified twenty-four precontact sites comprising 101 archaeological features
and a 142 m cave associated with the Samoan demi-god Vaatausili. These features include star mounds, oval boulder mounds,
platforms, rock walls, and terraces associated with Solo Tagata or “line of people.” At the base of the crater is a large mound, with
small stone mounds and walls, surrounding this central edifice. The archaeological features and cultural histories of Luatele suggest
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       299
ritual and socio-political sources of mana or prestige for the persistent dynasty of the premier chief, Tuimanu’a, in addition to
intensification of agricultural production.
Kles, Maranda (Archaeological Consultants Inc)
[153]
Discussant
Klesner, Catherine (University of Arizona) and Pamela Vandiver (University of Arizona)
[261]
Reconstructing Production Technology of Medieval Lead-Glazed Ceramics from Central Asian Silk Road Sites
Central Asia has long been the connecting bridge facilitating the long-distance trade of goods across Eurasia. While Central Asian
communities have served as trading centers, they were also producers of specialty goods and centers of technological innovation
themselves. In this study we examine the technological variation within and between locally produced Central Asian glazed
ceramics and imported Islamic lead-glazed wares during the Early Islamic Period. Compositional analysis of ninth–twelfth cenuries
CE ceramics excavated from seven Silk Road sites located along the northern edge of the Tien Shan mountains in southern
Kazakhstan has demonstrated local production of lead-glazed ceramics and the concurrent presence of imported ceramics from
Southwest Asia. Twenty-four ceramics were characterized by scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-
EDS), and electron microprobe analysis (EPMA) including examples of locally produced ceramics (n=7), imported ceramics from
Southwest Asia (n=12), and lead-glazed ceramics whose origin was unidentified by compositional analysis (n=5). Through electron
microscopy we are able to reconstruct Central Asian production technologies for lead-glazed ceramics as well as define the range of
variation seen between the Central Asian and Southwest Asian Islamic ceramic traditions.
Klessig, Barbara (Humboldt State University)
[228]
Integrating Archaeological Textiles into Mainstream Archaeology/Anthropology Curriculum
The study of textiles has a lower profile in archaeological research than many other artifact classes. Possible reasons include the
current and past devaluation of women’s work and/or the relative rarity of this find-class. This presentation looks at how textiles
could be better integrated into the teaching of archaeology at universities, as a step toward joining the mainstream. To accomplish
this, educators must emphasize the importance of textiles to the next generation of archaeologists and researchers, what should be
included in primarily textile-focused courses, how archaeological textile studies can be incorporated into other courses, and how
textile studies can fit within the goals of university and department courses and curricula, diverse teaching styles, and research foci.
Most of us do not think of where the textiles we wear every day came from, how they were created, and the technologies that are
used in creating textiles for our use. Studying textiles, both modern and ancient, can provide us with better understandings of
traditional craft production; the technologies and tools that go into the creation of textiles; how textiles fit into trade, exchange, and
commerce; and the roles of textiles as cultural/societal indicators.
Klimaszewski-Patterson, Anna (California State University, Sacramento)
[117]
Discussant
Klokler, Daniela (Universidade Federal de Sergipe, UFS)
[252]
Sharks, Rays, Monkeys, and the Modified Fauna from Piaçaguera
Pre-colonial groups used various types of raw materials for manufacture of tools and adornments: rocks, clay, fibers, bones, shells,
among others. In general, lithic and ceramic assemblages gain more focus from researchers due to their ubiquity and better
preservation. Shell mound sites, however, provide a context in which faunal remains are the main components of the matrix and the
study of their modifications is facilitated. The study of the social and symbolic use of artifacts and adornments made with faunal
remains allows a glimpse on the understanding of human societies relationships with the animal world. In this paper I present
findings about the worked bone and shell assemblage from Piaçaguera site, a shell midden (sambaqui) from eastern Brazil. The
faunal assemblage includes over a thousand tools and adornments recovered from excavations. Bone points (gorges) and modified
teeth (from sharks and monkeys) are the most dominant types of artifacts at this site, and the majority of pieces are associated with
burials. The results appear to show a preponderance of aquatic animals (sharks and rays) in tools manufacture and terrestrial
animals (particularly monkeys) for adornments.
Kmiec, Theodore (Texas State University)
[47]
Kings, Gods, and the Cosmos: A Revisitation of Olmec Monumental Art Styles
During the Middle Formative Period on the Gulf Coast, the Olmec culture created monumental art that was heavily influenced by
interaction with other Mesoamerican cultures and influenced later Mesoamerican cultures. The two major art styles found in Olman are
the San Lorenzo Style (1200–900 BC) and the La Venta Style (900–400 BC). The San Lorenzo Style focused on human/ archetypal
figurines and larger monuments such as the famous robust Olmec heads. The La Venta Style also focused on large monumental
heads, altars, and the first stelae recorded in Mesoamerica. This presentation will focus on the re-examination of La Venta stelae and
show new iconographic analyses of these stelae. The goal of these analyses is to show evidence that these Olmec stelae recorded the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    300
first examples of ideological narratives, cosmological events, and kingship that are found in later Mesoamerican cultures’ artistic
corpora.
Knell, Edward (California State University, Fullerton)
[253]
The Organization of Terminal Pleistocene–Early Holocene Lithic Technology around Pluvial Lake Mojave
This paper describes how the prehistoric occupants who camped along the terminal Pleistocene-Early Holocene (TP-EH) shorelines
of pluvial Lake Mojave, Mojave Desert, California organized their lithic technology. Specifically, an overview is provided of the lithic
raw material procurement and land use, tool production, use, and discard strategies. Data to assess these technological strategies
derive from 16.7 km2 of pedestrian survey along the shorelines of Lake Mojave and the analysis of approximately 1,750 artifacts of
TP-EH age (approximately 1,600 chipped stone artifacts were analyzed in the field and another 150 artifacts from extant
collections). The artifacts include projectile points, bifaces, uniface tools, cores, and debitage. The artifacts were analyzed to assess
the flow of lithic raw materials and tools into and through the various sites that comprise the TP-EH record of human occupation
around Lake Mojave, and to ultimately establish how Lake Mojave’s TP-EH inhabitants organized their lithic technology.
Knoerlein, David
[132]
Digital Photography: From Mass Graves to the VCP
This paper will demonstrate how forensic digital imaging techniques developed in Iraq transitioned into the Veterans Curation
Program to create a new standard for artifact photography. Under the command of Sonny Trimble, Dave Knoerlein, a certified
forensic photographer, created and managed a complete digital imaging solution for documenting mass grave investigations in Iraq
to prosecute Saddam Hussein. Sonny insisted that the image quality had to be of the highest standard to show fine details of the
trauma to skeletal elements and all the artifacts associated with the remains. Developing and enforcing a stringent protocol for
photography was crucial because the images would be considered evidence in world court hearings. In 2009 Sonny asked
Knoerlein to create and manage multiple digital photography labs for the Veterans Curation Program utilizing the same techniques
and standards used in Iraq. Since day one of the VCP, Knoerlein has trained every single veteran and lab manager how to
photograph artifacts using the latest digital technologies to produce museum quality images consistently without performing any post
processing.
Knox, Corey, Sara Chavarria (University of Arizona), Barbara Mills (University of Arizona) and Stanley Bond (National Park
Service)
[160]
Effective Experiential Learning Strategies That Critically Engage High School Students in Archaeology and Heritage
The Linking Southwest Heritage through Archaeology project (LSWTHA) is a program funded by the National Park Service at the
University of Arizona, that centers National Parks and Heritage sites and archaeology field experiences as places for Latinx and
Native American high school students to explore their own heritage, cultural knowledge, and assumptions, and learn about the
possibilities for higher education and careers. The LSWTHA has designed a framework entitled ArchP4, which connects
Archaeology to practice, personal exploratory spaces, professions and career options, and people and places. Through program
activities such as exploring cultural heritage resources in national parks, participating in archaeology field schools, and learning from
experts in various archaeology fields, students experience and interpret the rich cultural history of the Southwest and the practices
used by historians and archaeologist to tell the story of the Indigenous and Hispanic presence in the Southwest. In this presentation
we will share the processes, outcomes, and effective practices of this multidisciplinary partnership between the National Park
Service, the Department of Archaeology, the College of Education, and our many partners in the community.
Knox, Corey [184] see Viola, Tony, IV
Knudson, Kelly [134] see Alonzi, Elise
Knudson, Kelly [134] see Hall, Sarah
Knudson, Kelly [61] see Martinez, Marcos
Knutson, Jennifer [193] see Malo, Erika
Koenig, Charles (University of Wyoming), Christopher Jurgens (Texas State University), David Kilby (Texas State
University), Kevin Hanselka (Texas Department of Transportation) and Lorena Becerra-Valdivia (Oxford Radiocarbon
Accelerator Unit)
[68]
Multidisciplinary Investigations of a Folsom-Age Bison Butchery Event in Eagle Cave, Texas
Eagle Cave is one of the largest rockshelters in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands of southwest Texas. Archaeologists previously
excavated Eagle Cave in the 1930s and 1960s; however, they reported no evidence indicating Paleoindian occupation of the site,
even though Bonfire Shelter (located ~400 m upstream) demonstrates Paleoindian use of the immediate landscape. From 2015–
2017 the Ancient Southwest Texas Project of Texas State University conducted new excavations in Eagle Cave. In addition to
sampling 3 m of stratified Holocene sediments, we exposed and sampled Paleoindian deposits ranging from 10,300–13,100 cal BP.
The largest Paleoindian feature was a dense scatter of fractured, cut, and burned Bison antiquus bones. Amongst the bones were
chipped stone debitage, lithic tools, decomposing plant remains and one surface hearth containing charred bone, ash, and charcoal.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   301
Radiocarbon assays from organics date the assemblage to ~12,500 cal BP, which places this feature into the time span of Folsom.
The unique Folsom-age rockshelter assemblage provides well-preserved suite of ecofacts rarely preserved in Paleoindian sites, and
based on preliminary analyses, represents the secondary processing of a juvenile Bison antiquus. This paper summarizes the
ongoing spatial, faunal, macrobotanical, chronometric, and lithic analyses being conducted on this Paleoindian assemblage.
Koetje, Todd (Western Washington University)
[27]
Chair
Kohler, Tim (WSU/SFI/CCAC) and J. Daniel Rogers (National Museum of Natural History)
[26]
The Theory of the Adjacent Possible and Settlement Scaling Theory
The Theory of the Adjacent Possible (derived mostly by Stuart Kauffman) generates expectations for the rate of growth of the
number of functional tool types through time. These are examined using data from the Old World and from the U.S. Plains (River
Basin Survey). We review apparent congruencies between the foundations of TAP and settlement scaling theory.
Kohler, Tim (WSU/SFI/CCAC)
[171]
Discussant
Kohler, Tim [229] see Bird, Darcy
Kohler, Tim [125] see Gillreath-Brown, Andrew
Kohut, Lauren (Bowdoin College)
[32]
Discussant
Kohut, Lauren (Bowdoin College)
[200]
Centering the Provincial in Inka Provincial Landscapes: A Case Study from the Colca Valley (Arequipa, Peru)
Studies of Inka architecture and settlement planning in provincial regions often convey an image of Inka power emanating across
the empire through the creation of a new political and spatial order. The reconfigured landscape of administrative centers, relocated
communities, and terraced hillsides connected by networks of roads, storage facilities, and waystations is understood as the means
through which the empire cemented control over conquered populations both ideologically and spatially. And yet, Inka provincial
landscapes were never solely Inka constructions, but instead emerged in relation to existing local norms and practices. Rather than
examining provincial landscapes from the perspective of the order the Inka imposed, this paper explores how Inka spatial practices
were made to contend with existing practices, norms, and built landscapes. Here, research from the site of Auquimarka, a Late
Intermediate Period hilltop fortification turned minor Inka administrative center, in the Colca Valley (Arequipa, Peru) provides a case
study for examining the articulation of imperial and local spatial logic.
Kolak, Tatjana [35] see Zavodny, Emily
Kolar, Miriam (Visiting Scholar, Amherst College)
[25]
Archaeoacoustics of an Elite Inca Setting: Sonic Dynamics atop the Central Plaza Platform at Huánuco Pampa, Peru
Archaeoacoustical fieldwork enables empirical testing, measurements, and documentation of sonic dynamics in archaeological
sites, and provides experiential demonstrations useful in emplaced human perceptual contextualization of acoustics. Enlivening
archaeological materials and settings via acoustical reconstructions facilitates physics-based and psychoacoustical understandings
of cultural materials and site features that are more typically characterized via static representations and non-sensory interpretative
paradigms. At the Inca administrative center, Huánuco Pampa, a highland complex along the Inca Road (Qhapaq Ñan), we
conducted an acoustical field survey on and around the well-preserved central plaza platform (colloquially known as its “ushnu”), the
largest of such known structures. My methodological framework for cross-comparing systematic and repeated human performance
of a sequence of archaeologically appropriate soundproducers and musical instruments across all survey points, employed in that
study, revealed specific interdynamical affordances of emplaced soundmaking, refining functional hypotheses of site architecture,
and offering realistic parameters through which to assess past-use scenarios and experiential potentialities. Here, I discuss the
platform-top acoustics revealed by our study and the implications of these features for communication on and around the platform,
and I relate these findings to discourse about Inca sonic technologies and music making.
Kolar, Miriam (Visiting Scholar, Amherst College)
[266]
Discussant
[266]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     302
Kolb, Charles (National Endowment for the Humanities, Retired)
[152]
Discussant
Kolb, Charles (National Endowment for the Humanities, Retired)
[181]
Discussant
Kolb, Michael (Metropolitan State University of Denver), Christine Pink (Metropolitan State University of Denver) and
William Balco (University of North Georgia)
[169]
Late Bronze Age Reuse of a Late Copper Age Chamber Tomb in Western Sicily
Western Sicily was a locus of significant social and technological transformation during the second and first millennia BCE. Local
populations adopted new metallurgical skills alongside feasting and mortuary traditions, attesting to a broad social transformation.
This paper explores archaeological and demographic evidence of this transformation as collected from a reused Late Copper Age
tomb at Contrada Pitrazzi, near modern Salemi, Sicily.
Kolega, Matija (Eckerd College) and Allan Meyers (Eckerd College)
[197]
A Window into Landscape Inequality: Architectural Contrasts at Newfield Plantation, Cat Island, Bahamas
Britain’s policy of taxing residential windows in the eighteenth- and nineteenth-centuries accelerated a form of class-based
architectural inequality. Elites distinguished their homes by featuring an ever-increasing proportion of exterior windows. At the same
time, the relative frequency of windows in working-class dwellings declined. The window tax did not extend to British colonies
overseas, so the extent to which this type of material inequality would appear in contexts of colonial stratification and unfree labor
remains an open question. The well preserved ruins of Newfield Plantation, a nineteenth-century estate on Cat Island, Bahamas,
provide an opportunity to examine the issue. Recent investigations there employ a window-to-wall ratio (WWR) calculation to gauge
the percentage of exterior wall area devoted to window openings at each dwelling. Empirical findings suggest a strong correlation
between WWR and other measures of architectural inequality. Although plantation management had no immediate tax incentive to
reduce the presence of windows in the dwellings of enslaved tenants, the evidence suggests that a conspicuous window disparity
was still part of the built environment. WWR thus has the potential to be an insightful measure of social inequality in the study of
British colonial landscapes.
Kolhatkar, Manek (Université de Montréal)
[6]
Contexts of Contexts: Using Palimpsests to Reevaluate Archaeological Concepts, Methods, and Stories
Archaeologists have begun in recent years to look more closely at the structure of the archaeological record as archaeological
palimpsests challenge them to do. What stories they can tell with such materials remains problematic, however, given how alien
they are to the familiar and lived experience of the world as we have come to know it. This study draws from such narrative
materials to reevaluate some of the analytical concepts and methods currently used in archaeological research. The limits of the
chaîne opératoire are emphasized, as the plowed field from a remote site in Quebec becomes the context where such limits can be
revealed and assessed. As a chaîne opératoire becomes constrained within a blank, how should we work with what lies beneath a
blank? As a plowed field renders mnemonic, genealogical or adaptive frameworks of understanding useless, how should we relate
dispersed blanks with one another? In forcing us to take a closer a look at the way we know the world, plowed fields may help us in
creating other ways of knowing it. One such possible way is addressed here.
Kollias, George (Brandeis University)
[130]
Operationalizing Debt in the Context of Ancient Maya Political Economies
The notion of debt pervades anthropological discussion of political economy and exchange. Often used as a descriptor of unequal
relationships it also embodies notions of reciprocity, expectation, and mutuality. Debt carries with it a charged negativity in many
contexts, conveying experiences of precarity and violence, pressure and visibility. However, debt can be considered as an important
tool in the production of social cohesion, the maintenance of relationships, and the reproduction of economic networks. Here debt
will be discussed as a factor in the development of authority, the creation of stratified hierarchical relationships, and as a function in
economies of reciprocity which characterize ancient communities. This discussion applies an anthropological notion of debt in the
archaeological study of ancient Maya political economies, hierarchical relationships, community integration, and commodity
exchange. This discussion aims to posit how we may incorporate anthropological notions of debt and embedded concepts of
morality and sociality as a means to understand underlying factors in the social dynamics of hierarchical societies in the ancient
past. Of particular import is the role social and economic indebtedness, and expectations of reciprocity, may have played in
integrating the countryside surrounding major polities and mediated relationships with the hinterlands between ancient kingdoms.
Kollias, George [265] see Scherer, Andrew
Kolpan, Katharine (University of Idaho)
[91]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         303
Kolpan, Katharine (University of Idaho)
[153]
Moderator
[153]
Discussant
Kolpan, Katharine [188] see Passalacqua, Nicholas
Kolvet, Renee [199] see Simmons, Alan
Komp, Rainer (German Archaeological Institute)
[107]
The Roman Auxiliary Camp “Augusta Praetoria”
A large scale geomagnetic survey performed by the German Archaeological Institute in collaboration with the University of Pécs
discovered details of a Roman auxiliary camp in the Carpathian Mountains. Known as ‘Augusta Praetoria’, it was built in the time of
the Roman emperors Trajan and Hadrian and existed until the middle of the third century AD as a fortress of the Dacian Limes,
which was part of the Roman Empire’s pan-European fortification wall. Although the volcanic stone material used for construction
impedes geomagnetic data aqcuisition, the survey provided an exact layout of the walls and important architectural features of the
interior space. Up to four phases of wooden and stone fortification walls and the corresponding construction of gates with towers
can be identified. This corresponds to inscriptions, preserved on reused stones, specifying repairs and extensive rebuildings at the
end of the second century and in the middle of the third century AD. The complete new development of the walls each time
suggests, that the castrum has been severely damaged or even destroyed, then probably abandoned, but reclaimed several times
during its function as auxiliary castle for the limes.
Komp, Rainer [107] see Ruby, Bret
Komulainen-Dillenburg, Nancy (USACE)
[256]
USACE St. Paul District Regulatory (Corps) Commitment to Open and Transparent Communication and Consultation with Tribes, In
Review
Following a multi-year effort called the Tribal Assessment and Consultation Planning Project (TAP), St. Paul District Regulatory
(Corps) implemented robust and innovative measures for consultation and coordination with our Tribal Nations. The TAP Initiative
launched in 2018, in an effort to ensure early, open, and transparent communication of the Regulatory Program, utilizing new and
innovative tools and educational materials developed specifically for Tribes. Overall, the TAP Initiative has demonstrated
significantly more transparency and relationship-building, shown in more frequent and open communication, information sharing,
and building trust between the Federal agency and Tribes. Today’s discussion focuses on the successes and lessons learned
during the initial one-year pilot of the TAP Initiative and the subsequent long-term establishment and commitment of the TAP
Initiative within the St. Paul District Regulatory Program; and, the export of the TAP Initiative to other Corps Districts across the
Nation.
Kong, Deming [94] see Liu, Yu
Konsitzke, Charles [188] see Jamison, Gregg
Konsoer, Kory [9] see Britt, Tad
Kooiman, Susan (Southern Illinois University, Edwardsville) and Aaron Comstock (Ohio State University)
[264]
Environmental and Culinary Relationships in the Northern Great Lakes
Shifting culinary traditions observed among Woodland-period Indigenous groups in the northern Great Lakes region have prompted
inquiry into the factors that influence an array of food-related behaviors. Exploration of the relationship between the environment and
foodways constitutes one dimension of modeling for culinary change. The Living Blended Drought Atlas provides fine-grained data
on past moisture availability that could impact food availability and distribution. The nature and timing of rainfall fluctuations in
northern Michigan between AD 750–1500 are compared to previously observed shifts in food selection and cooking habits between
the early Late Woodland (ca. AD 900–1000), late Late Woodland (ca. AD 1200–1300), and Late Precontact/Iroquoian (ca. AD
1300–1500) occupations of the Cloudman site (20CH6), located on Drummond Island, Michigan, in Lake Huron. The results
facilitate identification of the roles of environment, cultural traditions, and social interactions in influencing the diachronic trajectories
of foodways and cuisine.
Kooiman, Susan [235] see Albert, Rebecca
Kooiman, Susan [233] see Frederick, Kathryn
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                304
Koons, Michele (Denver Museum of Nature & Science)
[43]
Discussant
Koons, Michele [156] see Baxter, Erin
Koons, Michele [198] see Mandel, Rolfe
Koontz, Rex (University of Houston)
[141]
Chair
Koontz, Rex (University of Houston)
[227]
Classic Veracruz Sculptures and Bodies in Fragments
As part of a larger study on Classic Veracruz fragmented bodies and sculptures, I sketch two case studies of contexts in which
fragmented yokes, decapitated heads, and figurine body fragmentation come together in Protoclassic and Early Classic Tres
Zapotes and Cerro de las Mesas.
Kornfeld, Marcel (PiRL - University of Wyoming) and Mary Lou Larson (University of Wyoming)
[103]
Ruthann Knudson: Colleague, Friend, Mentor, and Much More
Ruthann Knudson’s career in archaeology began with work on Midwestern ceramics in 1963 at the University of Minnesota and
spanned nearly six decades. During that remarkable time, she taught at academic institutions; engaged in contract archaeology;
conducted much research focused on Paleoindians and lithics; surveyed, excavated, and analyzed material from throughout North
America; coordinated Native American consultations; developed public museums; lobbied for archaeology at the national level;
mentored students and colleagues; and much more. In this presentation, I illuminate some of Ruthann’s contributions to
archaeology.
[103]
Chair
Kornfeld, Marcel [103] see Larson, Mary Lou
Kornfeld, Marcel [180] see Mahan, Chase
Kosiba, Steve (University of Minnesota)
[272]
Discussant
Koski-Karell, Daniel [271] see Pestle, William
Kostic, Aleksandar [173] see Plattner, Paige
Koszkul, Wieslaw [128] see Zralka, Jaroslaw
Kosztura, Juan Miguel [257] see Sánchez Mosquera, Amelia
Kotegawa, Hirokazu (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras)
[191]
Esculturas monumentales como herramientas políticas en la sociedad olmeca: Una perspectiva desde el sitio Estero Rabón
Las esculturas olmecas muestran un alto desarrollo estético desde su aparición. Sin embargo, estas esculturas no fueron sólo
obras del arte sino también tenían una gran importancia socio-económica en la sociedad olmeca. Por ello, se piensa que estas
esculturas monumentales fueron otorgados por las elites olmecas. Otro lado, el sitio arqueológico Estero Rabón se encuentra en el
sur de la costa del Golfo de México. Apareció y jugaba el papel importante como un centro secundario de la capital olmeca San
Lorenzo y también posiblemente de La Venta durante la época de la cultura olmeca. En este sitio se han encontrado las ocho
esculturas olmecas de gran tamaño y en distintas formas. En el presente estudio se intenta buscar la función de estas esculturas
de Estero Rabón a través de la comparación de las formas y/o de los temas representados con otros sitios olmecas.
Kotis, India (Kenyon College) and Karinne Robbins (Kenyon College)
[77]
Between Mind and Matter: Patterns of Discourse in Desktop Graffiti
This research examines 2,400 samples of desktop graffiti (pictures or words that are drawn or etched into the wood of a writing
desk) collected from an Ohio liberal arts college study space, establishing chronology when possible. Much of what is written in the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    305
graffiti approximates patterns of discourse on social media websites like Facebook, Reddit and Twitter. We therefore use
archaeological theories of materiality to probe why modern college students, as digital natives, choose to express themselves on
material surfaces when they can easily express the same things online. Many graffiti samples follow a similar pattern: A central
phrase or drawing (“locus”), and one or multiple “answers” to that locus. These answers can take the form of words or sentences
responding to the locus via arrows, as well as revisions of the locus itself. Revisions usually either reify or change the meaning of
the locus, and provide evidence of the uncensored sociopolitical values held by the student body. We conclude that students
engage in desktop graffiti to cultivate an uncensored community. Because it is anonymous, desktop graffiti affords a space for frank
expression of the taboo, whether that be vulgar sexuality or unpopular politics.
Kouba, Jamie
[213]
Finding Traces of the Past by Using Archaeological Excavations and Penetrometer Data
The site of Newport, Pennsylvania is a ghost town; almost no traces of the once vibrant transportation hub still exist above the
ground. Newport, founded in 1787, was abandoned by 1840, but traces of it still exist below the surface. Through archaeological
survey, the students of Indiana University of Pennsylvania increased their knowledge and understanding of Newport, and more
specifically, two of its roadways. The project attempted to answer three research questions that pertained to the roads of Newport:
1) Can it be determined if the current landscape feature that traverses north to south is the remnants of a nineteenth-century public
road? 2) If the feature is a road, can the location of Newport Road be determined in relation to the first road? 3) If both roads have a
clear definition, are the roads contemporaneous to each other and the town, and what are the potential ages of both? Analysis of the
material culture that was recovered during the excavation and of the penetrometer data indicated that two separate roads were
located during the excavation.
Kovacevich, Brigitte (University of Central Florida)
[20]
Discussant
Kovacevich, Brigitte [54] see Callaghan, Michael
Kovacevich, Brigitte [39] see Crawford, Dawn
Kovacevich, Brigitte [5] see Waite, Danielle
Kowalski, Jessica [222] see Nelson, Erin
Kracht, Emily [196] see Bloch, Lindsay
Krasinski, Kathryn (Adelphi University), Charles Holmes (University of Alaska, Fairbanks) and Barbara Crass (University of
Alaska, Fairbanks)
[82]
Fourteen Thousand Years of Food Preparation at Swan Point, Tanana Valley, Alaska
Evidence of past meals offer specific information useful for reconstructing site function, paleo diets, and strategies for adapting to
changing food landscapes. A zooarchaeological analysis identified species utilization, skeletal element representation, degree of
fragmentation and burning to reconstruct 14,000 years of meal preparation at Swan Point. Adaptive strategies were employed
following mammoth, horse, elk, and bison extinctions went extinct in the valley. Small mammals became increasingly important in
the late Holocene and abundant gastroliths indicate birds were consistently hunted throughout prehistory at Swan Point. Butchering
techniques, along with material culture traits, lend support to the premise that indigenous Athabascans were present throughout the
late Holocene occupation and into the modern Euroamerican period.
Krasinski, Kathryn [82] see Holt, Evan
Krasinski, Kathryn [184] see Tullo, Dominic
Krasinski, Kathryn [82] see Wygal, Brian
Kraus, Geneva and Joanne Goodsell
[256]
Exploring the Effects of Operational Changes on Archaeological Sites at Folsom Lake, California
Dam construction causes direct and immediate impacts to archaeological sites from heavy machinery, blasting, and other activities;
the formation of the artificial lake causes additional effects diffused across time and space. Numerous studies have considered the
impact of erosion, deposition, vandalism and other factors on sites as a result of inundation and dam operations, but few studies
have addressed how changes in operational regimes can exacerbate or reduce those effects. This question is directly pertinent to
the federal obligation to identify, quantify, and assess these effects for National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) compliance. The
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Sacramento District, recently implemented a new Water Control Manual to guide the seasonal flood
control operation of Folsom Dam, located 20 miles northeast of Sacramento. Operational changes can potentially intensify impacts
to sites in the reservoir that are already affected by dam construction and past operations. Cultural Resources and Engineering staff
created a model of hypothesized reservoir levels and releases under then-current and new operations to identify areas that would
experience increased inundation frequency. This paper describes how the Corps identified effects, streamlined the NHPA
compliance process, and built a mitigation program to explore changing operations and future effects.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   306
Krause, Johannes [244] see Ferraz da Silva, Tiago
Krause, Johannes [173] see Naegele, Kathrin
Krause, Samantha (Texas State University), Timothy Beach (Univeristy of Texas, Austin), Sheryl Luzzadder-Beach
(Univeristy of Texas, Austin), Emely Hernandez (Sewanee University of the South) and Eleanor Harrison-Buck (University
of New Hampshire)
[14]
Geoarchaeological Investigations of Wetlands and Waterways in Crooked Tree, Belize
The lagoon system around the island of Crooked Tree in northern Belize provides a compelling hydrological landscape with a
strongly seasonal flood regime. The area also presents evidence of long occupation and use by the Maya. Ongoing investigations
include geoarchaeological testing within a series of linear cultural features throughout the Western Lagoon. In addition, we
conducted sediment coring within nearby perennial marshes. The linear canal features within the lagoon, first reported by Pyburn in
2003, and later expanded on by Harrison-Buck in 2014, extend 600–800m east-west across the lagoon and may have served to
regulate annual floodwaters in the system. This system holds research promise for a variety of reasons, and may help to answer
questions regarding Maya landscape modification, hydrological engineering, subsistence strategies, and cultural resilience/response
to environmental changes. Here we present preliminary geochemical, paleoecological and chronological results from the 2019 field
season from wetland coring and key test excavations in the canal features of the Western Lagoon. Results from our ongoing
analyses will provide robust information on hydrologic and geographic landscape patterns as well as human use of wetlands during
cultural transitions.
Krause, Samantha [59] see Beach, Timothy
Krause, Samantha [14] see Flanagan, Kelin
Krause, Samantha [206] see Luzzadder-Beach, Sheryl
Kreutzer, Daniel (Metropolitan State University)
[239]
From Hacenderos to Smallholders: Cultural Conflicts between Anglo Colonists and the Mexican Government on the Nineteenth-
Century Texas Frontier
When the Mexican government opened Texas to settlement by foreigners during the early nineteenth century, Mexico’s expectation
was that these colonists would use the generous allotments of land that were provided to them to help to expand the system of self-
sustaining haciendas that had allowed Spain to develop and control much of Mexico. However, those Anglos who had emigrated
from the United States were entirely unfamiliar with this system, which neither the Mexican government nor the empresarios who
brought them to Texas ever adequately explained to them. Instead, the colonists established the smaller family farms that were
culturally more familiar to them. Despite the Mexican government’s attempts to integrate foreign colonists into Mexican culture
through legislation, Mexico’s inability to enforce these laws allowed Anglos to maintain their cultural connections with the United
States. This lack of acculturation by the colonists was a major factor in the build up toward rebellion against their host country and
their eventual declaration of Texas as a sovereign nation.
Krigbaum, John (University of Florida)
[153]
Discussant
Krigbaum, John [159] see Briggs, Emily
Krigbaum, John [240] see Fry, Megan
Krigbaum, John [150] see Kate, Emily
Krigbaum, John [80] see Williamson, Kylie
Krigbaum, John [35] see Zavodny, Emily
Kriss, Dawn [258] see DeLeonardis, Lisa
Krug, Andrew (University of Oklahoma), John Carpenter (INAH-Sonora), Guadalupe Sánchez-Miranda (INAH-Sonora) and
Matthew Pailes (University of Oklahoma)
[79]
Multiculturalism in the International Four Corners: Recent Excavations in the Fronteras Valley, Sonora, Mexico
Archaeologists have explored migration and the consequences of population aggregation throughout the North American
Southwest. The International Four Corners—the common borders of Arizona, New Mexico, Sonora, and Chihuahua—offers a
unique setting to study the emergence of multiculturalism in the late pre- and proto-Contact period. Recent excavations by the
Proyecto Arqueologico de Sahuaripa y Sierra Central, a joint field project between INAH-Sonora and the University of Oklahoma,
revealed the juxtaposition of Casas Grandes and Rio Sonora sites in the Fronteras Valley of Sonora, Mexico. We propose the
emergence of multicultural practices, as indicated by polychrome and textured ceramics, copper artifacts, and pueblo and ranchería
architecture. We demonstrate multiculturalism by comparing recent archaeological data from the Fronteras Valley to previous
research in the Animas, Bavispe, and Moctezuma Valleys. These shared practices may reflect the social and political reorganization
in Northwest Mexico following the collapse of Paquimé in the fifteenth century.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       307
Krupa, Krystiana (Indiana University Bloomington)
[49]
Ancestors Cannot Give Consent: The Need for Consultation in Ancient DNA
Ethical issues in ancient DNA (aDNA) have slowly been gaining attention in scholarly and public media. Concerns about data
interpretation, sampling methods, and consultation with descendant communities are just a few of those often highlighted. NAGPRA
does not prohibit research on archaeological collections held by institutions, but academics and tribal nations alike are pushing for
the necessity of consent from descendant communities for these types of projects. aDNA, like other specializations within
anthropology, has historically excluded tribal members in the research design process—where consultation should begin—and often
tribes are completely unaware of research projects until the data are published. Research involving ancestors should require
consent from their descendants. This presentation shares examples of aDNA research collaborations done both poorly and well,
and suggests strategies for building collaborative projects between academic institutions and tribal or other descendant
communities.
[49]
Chair
Krupa, Krystiana [49] see Thomas, Jayne-Leigh
Krus, Anthony (University of South Dakota), Timothy Rieth (International Archaeological Research Institute), Derek
Hamilton (University of Glasgow SUERC Radiocarbon Dating Lab) and Robert DiNapoli (University of Oregon)
[135]
Multiscalar Island Colonization Estimates through Bayesian Calibration Models
Archaeologically, island colonization may be estimated at different geographical and temporal scales. Whereas behaviorally,
colonization is a single landfall event, identifying the location of this initial landing in the archaeological record is not always possible
due to site preservation, taphonomic, and sampling issues. Further, unambiguously confirming a particular site as the colonization
area is often problematic. Bayesian calibration modeling provides a means to develop colonization estimates at site-, valley-, region-
, island-, and archipelago-scales. Such a multiscalar approach allows the development of multiple hypotheses on the temporal and
spatial dimensions of colonization, and the evaluation of different models offers sensitivity analysis for the overall approach. We
present estimates for the Polynesian colonization of the Hawaiian Islands to illustrate this method.
[135]
Chair
Kruse, Andrea (University of Nebraska, Lincoln)
[236]
Tool Analysis of the Spring Creek Site (25FT31), an Early Archaic Site on the Great Plains
The few Early Archaic sites within the Great Plains that have been excavated have been minimally studied. The Spring Creek Site
(25FT31) located in southwestern Nebraska has now been more fully documented through my own evaluation of flaked stone tools,
ground stone, and debitage, which complements the thorough analysis of faunal remains conducted in the 2000s by Widga. I have
analyzed the lithic assemblage from the Spring Creek site in order to better understand the role of the site across the Plains
landscape during the Early Archaic. I have previously suggested the site functioned as a base camp (Kruse 2019). This presentation
will present the methods used to complete the tool analysis, along with the low power use-wear technique used to better analyze the
artifacts. In this presentation I demonstrate how the lithic tool assemblage from Spring Creek provides insights into the Plains
landscape during the Early Archaic, and I identify patterns that might have been taking place within the Great Plains during the
Middle Holocene.
Kuckelman, Kristin (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center)
[131]
Seminal Research on Ancestral Pueblo Violence in the Northern Southwest
Although violence among ancestral Pueblo peoples of the northern Southwest was proposed by Euro-Americans as early as the late
1800s, compelling evidence of such interaction was not recognized in the bioarchaeological record and in associated archaeological
contextual data until the 1990s. In the past 25 years, Debra Martin’s recognition and meticulous documentation of perimortem
trauma and other human-caused damage on ancestral Pueblo remains, as well as Martin’s collaborative, innovative, interdisciplinary
study and interpretation of the occurrence and significance of violent events in the northern Southwest, permanently and
fundamentally altered our understanding of the mosaic of Pueblo prehistory.
Kuennen, Kathryn (University of Iowa)
[63]
What’s Deer to You? Exploitation of White-Tailed Deer from a Late Woodland River Valley Site
Woodpecker Cave (13JH202) is a Middle to Late Woodland rockshelter site located in southeast Iowa. It served as the location for
The University of Iowa’s Archaeological Field School from 2012–2018. Seven seasons of excavations has resulted in over 24,000
faunal specimens. These faunal remains were sorted by element and assigned their appropriate genus and species. Care was also
given to identify evidence of butchery, including cut marks and breakage morphology. Although over 30 species have been identified
from Woodpecker Cave, the quantification analysis indicated that subsistence efforts were focused primarily on the hunting of white-
tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus). Woodpecker Cave has three clear layers of occupation. Previous seasonality analyses of the
most recent layer have indicated that Woodpecker Cave was occupied in the winter, and further analyses of the remaining layers
will evaluate whether the seasonality is the same as the later the occupations.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     308
Kuijt, Ian (University of Notre Dame) and Arkadiusz Marciniak (Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland)
[199]
How Many People Lived in Early Villages? Reconsidering Neolithic Demography at Çatalhöyük
Archaeologists have divergent options as to how many people lived at different Neolithic villages. Near Eastern Neolithic settlements
have been historically interpreted as being occupied by thousands of people. This interpretation is founded on several observations:
that excavations at settlements often reveal the remains of the densely packed mud-brick buildings, at times with buildings being
reconstructed multiple times, and that settlements are defined by deep stratigraphic deposits with some degree of continued use.
The frequency and tight packing of buildings is of course familiar to archaeologists living today, for both visually and spatially this
pattern echo’s our personal experiences within urban contexts of confined space, restricted access, and bounded social worlds. The
most contesting issue at Neolithic villages, however, is how to best estimate population levels, and how long people lived in
individual buildings. Revisiting the hitherto dominant picture of the mound occupation and employing the Bayesian modeled
estimates of the length of individual house use, we argue that any one time between 1,000 and 1,200 people were living on the
mound of Çatalhöyük rather than by 3,500 to 8,000 people, as proposed by Cessford (2001). The evolutionary development of
Neolithic villages is reconsidered vis-à-vis these revised estimates.
Kulaga, Nicole (California State University, Northridge)
[236]
Interpreting Settlement and Mobility Patterns of Terminal Pleistocene and Early Holocene Archaeological Sites on Santa Rosa
Island, California
The Northern Channel Islands off the coast of southern California have played a pivotal role in understanding some of the earliest
archaeology in North America, going back at least 13,000 years. Together, the islands of Anacapa, Santa Cruz, Santa Rosa, and
San Miguel have one of the highest density of Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene aged archaeological sites. While the
Paleocoastal archaeology has been the target of much research, there are still many aspects which have not been thoroughly
explored, including settlement and mobility patterns of Paleocoastal peoples. This research interprets these patterns after
conducting an intensive artifact analysis on arguably one of the most intensively excavated Paleocoastal sites, CA-SRI-997 on
Santa Rosa Island, and comparing the results to other contemporary Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene sites on the islands. The
collected data was compared to well-known settlement and mobility hunter-gatherer models. The results of this research will be able
to inform archaeologists about different aspects of one of the earliest cultures in North America, including site function, site
organization, and settlement and mobility patterns.
Kulick, Rachel (University of Toronto), Kevin Fisher (University of British Columbia) and Francesco Berna (Simon Fraser
University)
[263]
Geoarchaeology of Terraces and Building XVI at Kalavasos-Ayios Dhimitrios, Cyprus: Evidence for Site Formation and Settlement
Activity
Geoarchaeological research conducted in 2019 as part of the Kalavasos and Maroni Built Environments (KAMBE) project focused
on collecting multiscalar and high-resolution geoarchaeological data from the Late Bronze Age city of Kalavasos-Ayios Dhimitrios in
south-central Cyprus. The aim of the geoarchaeological project is to determine the uses of space in and around the city’s structures
and activity areas as well as to connect site formation processes with social activities and environmental transformations occurring
in the surrounding landscape. This paper discusses the results from two key aspects of this geoarchaeological research: (1) the
investigation and coring of field terrace systems surrounding the site, and (2) the thin section micromorphological analyses of floor
context samples from Building XVI. The results demonstrate how multiscalar, high-resolution geoarchaeological and environmental
data, examined in conjunction with archaeological contexts revealed by ongoing and previous excavations, can contribute to
understanding the structure and transformation of this major urban center in its broader socio-environmental landscape.
Kumm, Ethan, John Dudgeon (Camas, Idaho State University) and Amy Commendador (Idaho Museum of Natural History)
[236]
Obsidian Utilization in the Snake River Plain, Southern Idaho: The Dean Site and Its Importance for Understanding Lithic
Procurement Strategies in the Northern Great Basin
There are numerous archaeological sites on and adjacent the Snake River Plain (SNP) in southern Idaho. Artifact catalogs include
utilized flakes, debitage, broken points, and intact points. Owing to the SNP’s volcanic history, many artifacts are made from
obsidian, and over two dozen geographically restricted obsidian sources were utilized prehistorically. SNP obsidian sourcing studies
are primary data for archaeological research questions including mobility patterns, use-frequency of different obsidians, and material
preference. This study focuses on material from the Dean site (10TF01), a long-term occupation site in Twin Falls County, southern
Idaho. Previously described as a hunting and tool manufacture site, numerous lithics have been previously excavated or surface
collected and are curated in the Earl Swanson Archaeological Repository, Idaho Museum of Natural History. A total of 392 obsidian
projectile points were analyzed by portable XRF and compared with elemental data on artifacts and obsidian sources performed
with LA-ICP-MS. We perform sourcing analysis to determine which sources were being used at the Dean site and if any observable
preferences in obsidian utilization occurred through time. Our results show that local obsidian was primary, but obsidian from more
distant sources was also utilized at the Dean site.
Künne, Martin [189] see Costa, Philippe
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    309
Kupsch, Mary
[99]
Soul Concepts of Postcolonial Woodland and Plains Indians: A Systematic Survey of Specific Ideas in Oral Narratives as a
Foundation for an Archaeology of Souls
The potential for accurately and more fully reconstructing prehistoric Woodland and Plains Indian societies’ notions of human soul-
like essences using symbolically rich mortuary remains and art can be improved when analogous, comparative ethnohistorical
information is collected systematically and with sensitivity to tribal and regional variations. Literature on 49 historic Woodland-Plains
tribes from nine language families produced 643 cases informing on nine subjects, five reported here: the number and locations of
souls in an individual, the number of souls that leave the body in life and death, and where and when soul(s) exit. Three geographic
areas are compared for the ideas of their tribes: the Northeastern Woodlands, the Southeastern Woodlands, and the Plains. Ideas
varied considerably but patterned in their frequencies and geographic distributions. For example, the number of souls an individual
was thought to have varied from one to four, and these differed in where they were thought to reside among nine bodily locations.
Five distinct bodily locations were held to be where souls exited the body at death. Their times of departure differed from before
death to much later or never. The data show that researchers cannot apply historic analogies from one region to archaeological
remains in another.
Kurin, Danielle [224] see Black, Valda
Kurnick, Sarah (University of Colorado, Boulder)
[46]
How Marginalized Voices Are Rewriting History
It is common for outsiders to depict the history and culture of marginalized groups, and often in a manner that sustains, rather than
challenges, inequality. If you fly into Cancun and head south, for example, you pass through the Maya Riviera. You can stay in
Maya-themed hotels, eat at Maya-themed restaurants, and shop in Maya-themed stores. You can even spend the day at Maya-
themed amusement parks, some of which are named after, and located next to, archaeological sites. But, contemporary Maya
peoples—of which there are approximately seven million—generally have no say in how Maya history and culture are represented
to tourists and do not benefit financially from this lucrative tourism industry. What if Maya and other marginalized groups presented
their own histories and cultures to outsiders, including tourists? What effects might such self-representation have? And, how might it
challenge our understanding of the present and change our perception of the past?
[46]
Chair
Kuruçayirli, Emre [175] see Martin, Samuel
Kuzminsky, Susan [172] see Domeischel, Jenna
Kwoka, Joshua (University at Buffalo) and Thomas Guderjan (University of Texas, Tyler)
[230]
Lidar and the Longue Durée in Northwestern Belize
For at least 3,500 years, societies from across the sociopolitical spectrum have called northwestern Belize home. The footprints of
these occupations are not uniform due to variation in population levels, technology, and environmental worldviews. In 2016, this
panoply of human-environment interactions was recorded in a single day by a 40 km2 lidar survey centered on the ancient Maya site
of Xnoha. Shortly thereafter, a digital survey of archaeological resources was initiated that quickly expanded to include historical and
contemporary land use data. This paper details preliminary results of these efforts with an emphasis on the impact of lidar data
within three domains. First, how has the lidar data impacted established regional models of ancient Maya settlement patterns, land
use, and population dynamics? Second, what can be learned about contemporary and future (i.e., planned) land use, particularly in
relation to deforestation? And third, to what extent do contemporary agricultural practices impact the visibility of archaeological
features? These topics will be accompanied by a description of methods, including the utility of multiple raster visualizations.
Kwoka, Joshua [230] see Guderjan, Thomas
Kyaw, Pyiet Phyo [28] see Iannone, Gyles
La Rocca, Luigi [104] see Chiffi, Maria
LaBelle, Jason (Colorado State University)
[68]
Lindenmeier’s Neighborhood: Folsom Site Distribution among the Foothills of Northern Colorado
Base camps such as the Lindenmeier Folsom site (5LR13) of northern Colorado likely served as the focal point of a regional
settlement system. It follows then that there should be additional small camps and bison kills scattered throughout the surrounding
area. Archaeologists have documented at least a dozen Folsom find spots (points, preforms, and/or channel flakes) from Larimer
County, gathered from site records, museum and private collections, and recent fieldwork. Few are in close spatial association with
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   310
Lindenmeier. However, the locales are distributed nearly exclusively within the foothills, which is a relatively small area within a
region containing diverse ecosystems (short grass plains to alpine tundra) and with elevations ranging over 2300 m in vertical relief.
This presentation critically reviews the dataset and assesses what the distribution might say about Folsom settlement systems, or
instead about issues related to exposure of late Pleistocene surfaces.
Labrada-Ochoa, Marcos Octavio [257] see Castro-Priego, Manuel
Ladefoged, Thegn (University of Auckland), Rod Wallace (University of Auckland), Alex Jorgensen (University of
Auckland), Paul Augustinus (University of Auckland) and Matthew Prebble (Australian National University)
[124]
Gardening and Niche Construction at Waitetoke, Ahuahu (Great Mercury Island), New Zealand
Polynesian settlers of Aotearoa New Zealand faced a serious challenge adapting their tropical horticultural systems to Aotearoa’s
temperate conditions. Initial settlers were drawn to Ahuahu, a small offshore island, from the early fourteenth century in part by its
warm microclimate and the relative ease with which the native forest could be cleared and transformed into a productive horticultural
landscape. At Waitetoke on Ahuahu our ongoing archaeological, geophysical and palaeo-ecological research has documented the
transformation of the area from virgin native forest to a raised bed taro complex, and later to an intensified sweet potato garden. The
taro complex included a series of channels and check dams that directed water within the small drainage and from a nearby spring,
and had anthropogenic soils that were deliberately constructed by bringing in topsoil and incorporating charcoal, shell midden and
rock to improve soil texture and fertility. The presence of taro pollen in these soils suggests perennial production to maximise corm
size. The later sweet potato garden was defined by surface rock alignments demarking cultivation plot boundaries with gardening
layers containing sweet potato starch granules. We present the results of recent research and future plans to document the
ecodynamics of Māori horticultural strategies.
Ladefoged, Thegn [262] see Johnson, Adam
Ladefoged, Thegn [124] see McCoy, Mark
Ladrón de Guevara, Sara [191] see Bernard, Henri
Ladrón de Guevara, Sara [227] see Budar, Lourdes
Laguer-Díaz, Carmen [271] see Pestle, William
Lahaye, Christelle [36] see Holliday, Trenton
Lai, Celine
[94]
Shang Perspectives for Animals: Evidence from Archaeological and Inscriptional Records
Relationships between human and animals vary in different cultures. The Shang treated animals with both awe and a sense of
superiority. The Shang kings and his noble members presented many animal motifs on their bronze vessels, which were intended
for presenting food and drink offerings during religious worships. But animals would not have been not as central and important as
an imaginary beast they created—the taotie, about which we hardly know anything. The Shang’s animal world was rather
complicated and that has not been fully explored in light of their objects and written materials. The purpose of the paper gives an
account of animal records as found in their visual culture, paired with an analysis of the inscriptional accounts regarding hunting,
weather forecasts, and mentions of military booties as left by the Shang kings and his noble members on their fortune-telling
devices.
Lain, Andrea [190] see Lothrop, Jonathan
Lalo Jacinto, Gabriel [54] see Paris, Elizabeth
Lalo Jacinto, Gabriel [203] see Williams, Megan
Laluk, Nicholas (Northern Arizona University) and Robert Preucel (Brown University)
[41]
Pragmatism in Native North American Archaeology
Archaeologists have recently discussed the possibilities of pragmatism within archaeological theory and practice. They hold that
pragmatism links archaeology to meaningful social action and can in this way contribute to broader dialogues concerning the social
challenges humanity faces at this point in its history. However, what is often left out in such discussions are its relevance to Native
American and Indigenous experiences and perceptions. Native American communities have a deep history concerning many
concepts found within Western pragmatic reasoning that have been their own since time immemorial. But how might we define an
“Indigenous pragmatics”? What components from Indigenous epistemologies might lead us to better understandings of pragmatics?
How might these insights contribute to contemporary Indigenous communities and the discipline of archaeology? This paper
attempts to address these questions through our continuing research with Native American communities in the U.S. Southwest. We
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   311
think the answers to the questions contribute to a more democratic, inclusive, decolonial archaeology for the future. Moreover, such
a focus contributes to dismantling and demystifying the foundations of the discipline through direct Indigenous experience and the
intricate interweaving of Indigenous epistemologies that provide much needed social action to address community needs within
Native North American contexts.
Laluk, Nicholas [184] see Castleberry, Cala
Lam, WengCheong (Chinese University of Hong Kong Department of Anthropology) and Shengqiang Luo (Chengzhou
Municipal Museum)
[94]
Distribution and Supply Network of Bronze Mirrors in the Southern Frontiers of the Han Empire
Bronze mirrors have been widely found in Han tombs and were a major type of contemporary daily items. But it has not been
systematically investigated how bronze mirrors were manufactured and supplied to various parts of the Han empire, especially in the
southern frontiers of the Han empire in which the traffic system was still primitive. To address the issue mentioned above, this
presentation collected bronze mirrors discovered in the southern Jinzhou and Lingnan regions. Through a statistical analysis of the
types of bronze mirrors and a review of legacy data in previously published works, this presentation suggests that most bronze
mirrors might have been manufactured in several centralized production centers outside the southern frontiers, while small-scale
local manufacturing coping the products manufactured from the North co-existed at the same time. Also, the supply of bronze
mirrors via inter-regional transportation was more sufficient in major centers regardless of the distance between those centers in the
South and potential production workshops in the North, suggesting that a relatively integrated network existed in the Han empire.
This new understanding may provide a piece of evidence enhancing our understanding about the “globalization” of material cultures
occurred in the Han period.
Lambach, Toni [122] see Whisenhunt, Mary
Lambert, Shawn (Mississippi State University)
[166]
Iconographic and Organic Residue Evidence for Datura-Making in Central Arkansas River Valley
This paper presents research to identify Datura residues (a flowering plant with hallucinogenic properties) in late prehistoric
composite bottles from the Central Arkansas River Valley. The bottles are incredibly unique because ceramic disks with a series of
concentric perforations were incorporated into the bottles at the juncture of the bottle neck with the globular portion of the body. The
organic residue analysis revealed that these bottles contained high concentrations of Datura. The internal clay disks likely served as
strainers or filters, separating the psychoactive properties from the Datura flower to create a powerful liquid concoction.
[166]
Chair
Lambert, Shawn [47] see Ford, Paige
Lambert, Spencer (Southern Methodist University) and Mark McCoy (Southern Methodist University)
[262]
How to Catch Fish with a Digital Net: Creating a Geodatabase for Marine Fauna in the Hawaiian Islands
The remains of fish, shellfish, and other marine creatures are among the most common type of material recovered from
archaeological sites on the islands of the Pacific. But, in the Hawaiian Islands, like other places, most marine faunal data are
presently confined to gray literature or unpublished dissertations, with even more still awaiting analysis among museum collections.
In this paper, we discuss a protocol for generating a comprehensive marine fauna geodatabase for coastal sites in the Kona and
Kohala Districts of Hawai’i Island. Fish data was extracted from documents using optical character recognition and an open-source
search application. Locational data was generated by georeferencing sites using maps from articles and reports. The distribution of
recovered marine fauna is discussed relative to the coastal environment, the spatial distribution of fishponds, and the efficacy of
data mining verses reanalysis of collections. We address several pitfalls encountered while obtaining usable data and offer some
advice on how these complications can be avoided in future research.
[262]
Chair
Lambert, Spencer [148] see Bryce, Joseph
Lamie, Katherine (SDSHS Archaeological Research Center) and David Williams (SDSHS Archaeological Research Center)
[172]
Dusting Off “Legacy” Projects: Collaboration and Compromise to Complete 30-Year-Old Projects
Repository and contract managers have different priorities and funding structures, and while they share many legal and ethical
concerns, it is sometimes difficult to balance their perspectives during complicated projects. At the South Dakota Archaeological
Research Center, reports for several large-scale contract and outreach archaeological field projects that were initially conducted
over the past 30 years have not been completed. Time, budget, and personnel constraints were all contributing factors to these
“legacy” projects. Now, a powerful combination of renewed research interests, re-aligned priorities, upgraded project management
policies, and a framework of support and collaboration has facilitated the completion of final excavation reports and collection
processing tasks. The ARC Repository and Contracts Managers will discuss three main points: the factors that created legacy
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     312
projects, the plan to address them today, and how to avoid a backlog into the future. Importantly, completing legacy projects
satisfies several legal and ethical requirements, allows for the sharing of professional results with federal, tribal, state, and academic
stakeholders, and leads to better long-term curation solutions.
Lamothe, Michel [81] see Forget Brisson, Laurence
Lamoureux St-Hilaire, Maxime (Davidson College)
[93]
Moderator
Lamoureux St-Hilaire, Maxime (Davidson College)
[209]
Discussant
Landau, Kristin (Alma College)
[130]
The Dynamics of Maya State Process: An Integrated Perspective from the San Lucas Neighborhood of Copán, Honduras
Recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, the ancient city of Copán was a major center of Maya settlement and ideology
during the Classic Period (AD 250–900). While archaeologists have been traditionally concerned with Maya rulers and their top-
down despotic power, I show how over Copán’s history, infrastructural power—the ability of the state to affect the everyday lives of
its residents—waxed and waned. The outlying urban neighborhood of San Lucas was remapped and excavated to accurately
construct its dynamic life history. I focus on changes at four San Lucas households, attending to episodes of landscape engineering,
architectural construction, and trends in material culture. I consider household and neighborhood changes together with royal
political events recorded in hieroglyphic writing at Copán center. Such events show whether and which state policies altered the
daily lives of city residents. By incorporating a bottom-up perspective from San Lucas, the intermediate scale of neighborhoods
provides a balanced assessment of citywide political dynamics, autonomy, and power.
Landazuri, Heather (University of Maine, Orono) and Daniel Sandweiss (University of Maine, Orono)
[8]
New Kid on the Block: El Niño-Modoki in Peru, Past, Present, and Future
During the climatological phenomenon referred to as El Nino Modoki, warm sea surface temperatures (SSTs) in the central Pacific
are flanked on the east and west by cooler SSTs. Over the last century, El Niño-Modoki has increased in frequency, but a long-term
sequence has yet to be established prior to the last four centuries. At least on the north coast of Peru, El Niño-Modoki is associated
with reduced river discharge resulting from lower precipitation and/or temperature in the adjacent Andes mountains. Much
paleoclimatological and archaeological research has focused on the effects of canonical El Niño along the Peruvian coast, however,
almost no attention has been paid to El Niño-Modoki in this region even though the associated reduction in water flow must have a
major, recurring effect on the irrigation-based societies that inhabit the area. Considering the societal and environmental gravity of
ENSO phenomena, improving our understanding of previous events is essential not only to anticipating them, but also to mitigating
their effects on human populations. In this poster we present the paleoclimatological research potential of El Nino Modoki on the
northern coast of Peru with specific focus on potential proxy sources, prehistoric adaptive strategies, and modern applications.
Landivar, Tamara [257] see Ordoñez, Maria
Landt, Matthew [147] see Johnen, Connor
Lane, Brian (University of Oregon)
[77]
Defining Human Territories: A Case from Rapa, East Polynesia
Competition as a human behavior is frequently studied in archaeology. Research often focuses on aspects of competition that are
highly visible in the archaeological record such as violent conflict, often in regards to evidence for direct or indirect conflict and
physical remains of fortifications. Despite the focus on conflict as an outcome of competition, there are other competitive behaviors
that are also visible in the archaeological record such as differential degrees of interaction between adjacent groups through stylistic
analysis of artifacts, the signaling behavior, and establishing of group territories, just to highlight a few. Despite the ongoing
discourse concerning human competition, research often lacks measurable units to define or explain data, often relying on an
absence/presence approach to the data. This research focuses on measurably defining territories of human groups on the island of
Rapa, Austral Islands, French Polynesia. Rapa is often used as an example of human conflict in the Pacific due to the presence of
more than a dozen fortified villages situated on the island’s ridge line. The purpose of this poster is to highlight spatial analytical
techniques that are intended to indicate specific territories associated with individual fortifications.
Lane, Brian [258] see Lentz, David L.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     313
Lange, Frederick (Smithsonian Institution Department of Anthropology)
[126]
INAA Identification of Greater Nicoya’s Ceramic Schools, Families, and Their Stability
The author met Ron Bishop on a research outing in Guanacaste, Costa Rica in 1979. As a results of conversations during the
research visit, the author selected approximately 100 Middle Polychrome (Mora Polychromes) samples from multiple sites on the
Nicoya Peninsula (Guanacaste Province), Costa Rica. A high level of homogeneity among the analytical results presented two
alternative interpretations (1) a single production site, source, or region, or (2) homogeneity resulting from similar volcanic-based
clays. We realized that, in the case of homogeneous clays the ability to distinguish finite regional patterns would be greatly reduced.
Therefore, we increased the sample to include all principal 38 types from the four major time in the Greater Nicoya sequence. The
homogeneity observed in the Mora Polychrome suite was duplicated in the 37 additional suites from the four chronological divisions;
by 1988 over 1,200 samples had been analyzed, with the established homogeneity for different types continually reinforced. Based
on the confidence in the homogeneity of the elements of the sample, this author has developed models for long term stability in
localized “schools” and the production by tightly knit families of potters with stability of production over as many as 1000 years.
Langford, Theresa [172] see Wilson, Douglas
Langis-Barsetti, Dominique [175] see Martin, Samuel
Langlais, Mathieu [30] see Sánchez de la Torre, Marta
Langlie, BrieAnna (Binghamton University), John Wilson (University of Arkansas), Jacob Frank (Binghamton University)
and Matthew Chmura (Binghamton University)
[124]
Finding Terraces in the Lake Titicaca Basin, Peru
Driving through the Lake Titicaca basin of southern Peru travelers are often struck by terrace covered hillsides rising from the plain.
Nearly every hillside encountered has been transformed from steep faced rocky hillsides into arable land. These ancient fields were
constructed and farmed millennia ago to help farmers adapt to the high-altitude, arid ecosystem, an ever-oscillating climate, and
dynamic cultural regimes. However, very little is known about the extent of these terraces, when they were built, or who built them.
The vast extent might be one of the reasons why terraces have not been systematically studied in the region. In this paper, we
discuss producing an integrative GIS database to 1) locate and examine the extent of agricultural terrace complexes; 2) associate
terrace complexes with known archaeological sites; and 3) characterize terrace typologies as visible from satellite data. Remote
sensing allows us to quantify and characterize terraces in a way that is not possible from terrestrial survey methods.
Langlie, BrieAnna [180] see Chen, Jennifer
Langlie, BrieAnna [61] see Folk, Maureen
Langston, Jada (Hamilton College), Colin Quinn (Hamilton College), Lacey Carpenter (Hamilton College) and Horia
Ciugudean (Muzeul National al Unirii Alba Iulia)
[35]
Interaction, Integration, and Inequality: Geospatial Analyses of Bronze Age Settlement Networks in Southwestern Transylvania
The Bronze Age (2700–1500 BCE) was a time of unprecedented scales of social interaction, integration, and inequality in
Transylvania. Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and spatial analysis techniques continue to increase our understanding of
socio-economic institutions, such as trade and labor, and interregional connections. In this poster, we present the results of GIS and
network analyses designed to examine how the organization of metal procurement, trade, and mobilizing labor structured settlement
networks in Bronze Age Southwestern Transylvania. We present multiple ways of reconstructing Transylvanian social networks and
test these geospatial models using archaeological survey data. Our results demonstrate that the development of institutionalized
inequality with elite control of economic production occurred in fits and starts. This case study contributes to our broader
understanding of the relationship between interaction and inequality in the past.
Lanier, Hayley [244] see Rayfield, Kristen
Lanoë, François (University of Arizona), Joshua Reuther (University of Alaska Museum of the North), Charles Holmes
(University of Alaska, Fairbanks), Ripan Malhi (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign) and Ben Potter (University of
Alaska, Fairbanks)
[82]
Late Pleistocene Large Canids (Dog/Wolf) at Archaeological Sites of the Middle Tanana Valley, Alaska
Large canid remains are a rare occurrence in Late Pleistocene archaeological sites throughout Beringia and the Americas. Their
significance stems in their potential to help understand human-canid relationships at that time, particularly issues related to (1) dog
domestication and (2) the ecological impact of human hunting on ecosystems and associated megafauna. Here we report the recent
discovery and/or analysis of large canid remains at the sites of Swan Point, Broken Mammoth, and Hollembaek’s Hill, in the middle
Tanana valley of central Alaska. Large canid remains at these sites date to 14,000–12,000 cal BP; one of them may have been buried
intentionally within the archaeological occupation. Ongoing and future excavations, zooarchaeological, and DNA analyses will clarify the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  314
archaeological context of these specimens, their taxonomic affiliation, and their potential to inform current archaeological and
paleontological debates.
Lanoë, François [82] see Kielhofer, Jennifer
Lanoë, François [23] see Zedeño, María Nieves
Lanos, Philippe (CNRS (IRAMAT-CRP2A)) and Philippe Dufresne (CNRS (IRAMAT-CRP2A))
[24]
A New Bayesian Approach for Estimating Chronological Events and Phases with ChronoModel
Many issues in archaeology concern the issue of phasing—the beginning, end and duration of a given period. We define a “Phase”
as a group of Events (Event dates) that share common features. Currently used Phase models implemented in many software
packages employ statistical models that concentrate posterior Event dates. Alternatively, we introduce a new statistical definition for
“Phase,” which does not require additional parameters (Phase boundaries) and is based directly on the Event model—a new, robust
Bayesian statistical model combining contemporaneous dates, stratigraphic constraints, and the temporal ordering of phases that
will act on Event dates. A posteriori, the beginning, end and duration of a Phase are estimated from posterior Event dates using
MCMC techniques. Moreover, we introduce a new means for characterizing the temporal characteristics of Phases via calculations
of their time range, gap range and transition range at a given confidence level. Furthermore, this framework allows one to calculate
the cumulative frequency of archaeological events (e.g., 14C measurements) within a given Phase, and these tempo plot trajectory
curves illustrate the mean number of dated events prior to a given date within a Phase. The Bayesian statistical methods described
above are implemented in the ChronoModel software package.
Lanos, Philippe [24] see Banks, William
Lapp, Jennifer
[154]
Moderator
Laqualia, Jennifer (Fort Huachuca Cultural Resource Specialist)
[214]
Through the Looking Glass: Glass Bottle Typology and Analysis on Historic Fort Huachuca
Fort Huachuca is one of the oldest military posts in the country. From the infamous 10th Cavalry “Buffalo Soldiers,” to the 40th
Signal Battalion, to civilian ranchers, to the Apache Scouts, Fort Huachuca has been home since the late 1800s to many on this
harsh but beautiful landscape. We can see this rich history through the thousands of artifacts littered across the post. This poster will
look at historic glass bottles, both military and civilian, that have been recorded and collected on Fort Huachuca by post
archaeologists. I have collected and analyzed various glass bottles from several different sites that show various occupations over a
100+ year time period to create a glass bottle typology for use in future analysis. I will highlight this typology and how we can
understand Fort Huachuca and southern Arizona on a deeper level.
Larios, Jennifer (University of Michigan), Jacob Bongers (University of East Anglia), Jordan Dalton (University of
Michigan), Jo Osborn (University of Michigan) and Camille Weinberg (University of Texas, Austin)
[21]
The Pottery of Chincha Revisited
Recent studies on the late prehispanic periods in the Chincha Valley, Peru have enabled scholars to obtain a better understanding
of the Chincha Kingdom. However, the pottery produced in the Chincha Valley during the Late Intermediate Period and Late Horizon
has received little attention since Dorothy Menzel’s critical studies in the 1960s. This study aims to expand our knowledge of
Chincha ceramics by revisiting recent analyses on a sample of Chincha pottery that spans various contexts and numerous sites
throughout the Chincha Valley.
Larkin, Karin (University of Colorado, Colorado Springs)
[154]
Discussant
Larkin, Karin (University of Colorado, Colorado Springs) and Michelle Slaughter (Alpine Archaeological Consultants)
[214]
Happy Trails and Speakeasies: The Archaeology of a Tuberculosis Sanatorium
Colorado Springs enjoyed a world-wide reputation as a health mecca for consumptives during the first half of the twentieth century.
Starting around the 1890s, tuberculosis sanatoriums began to spring up all along the outskirts of town. Cragmor was one of the
premier sanatoriums built in the city renowned for its healing climate. In its heyday, Cragmor housed some of the wealthiest patients
in the United States. Today, this material culture is buried under the growing campus of the University of Colorado at Colorado
Springs. As part of a survey and inventory of the cultural resources of UCCS funded by the Colorado State Historical Fund, we
identified and recorded several sites associated with the original functioning of the sanatorium. This project seeks to recover some
of the ephemeral features of the sanatorium that could help us put the history in context and better understand the alternative health
practices employed by both patients and doctors at the sanatorium. Using archaeological testing and historical records, we
illuminate institutional practices and occupants, as well as describe identifying alternative healing strategies employed by physicians
and patients at Cragmor.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  315
Larrick, Dakota (University of Oklahoma)
[66]
A Landscape Approach to the Late Paleoindian Bull Creek Camp, Oklahoma Panhandle
Radiocarbon dates and other lines of evidence from two sites on the Southern Plains, Bull Creek, an open air camp, and
Ravenscroft, a nearby large-scale bison hunting locale, point to their correlation and contemporaneity during the late Paleoindian
period. This poster will synthesize the conclusions reached through various methods of analysis at both sites including
paleoenvironmental reconstruction, lithic analysis, and faunal analysis into a reconstruction of natural resource uses within and
around the Bull Creek valley landscape by groups there during the late Paleoindian period. Such groups appear to have lived in the
valley during at least the late summer / early fall and winter and consumed animal resources differentially depending upon the
season. The camp site’s location on a terrace overlooking Bull Creek is indicative of the group’s need for a nearby water source as
well as the fauna which water sources support: predominantly bison during the winter, which were hunted en masse through use of
the creek’s adjacent arroyos, and a more diverse array of species during warmer months. Sourcing the lithic materials used for
projectile points and other tools suggests a territorial range throughout the year spanning at least 160 km due west and south.
Larrick, Dakota [103] see Ballenger, Jesse
Larsen, Andrew and Jim Railey (SWCA Environmental Consultants)
[177]
Projectile Point Frequencies as Climatic Indicators
Climatic conditions in the arid U.S. Southwest have been variable long before human induced climate change, particularly with
respect to rainfall and by extension the presence of surface water. This poster considers past climatic changes through the lens of
available surface water by examining projectile point temporal and spatial distribution within a 6000-acre study area located in west
central New Mexico. The study area has a large, and temporally varied, number of projectile points (n=84) spanning from the
Paleoindian to Late Formative periods. The study area sees a spike in temporally diagnostic projectile points in the Middle and Late
Archaic periods, totaling 63.6% of the assemblage. This time period corresponds to the previously defined Late Holocene Wet
Period (2500 BC—AD 900). Thus, we offer that projectile point data from the study area supports previous¬¬ tree ring, pollen and
geomorphic studies that indicate a period of relative wetness and increased human activity on the landscape. We also consider how
the spatial distribution of projectile points may assist future researchers studying climate change in other arid regions.
Larson, Kara (Mississippi State University)
[234]
Meat on the Hoof: A Zooarchaeological Isotopic Investigation into Administrative and Cultic Herd Management at Khirbet Summeily
Khirbet Summeily is an Iron Age II site located northwest of Tell el-Hesi in Southern Israel. Excavations conducted by Mississippi
State University have revealed a large, singular structure with an adjoining ritual space dated to the Iron Age IIA. Recent
interpretations suggest the site was integrated into a regional economic and political system and functioned as a potential
administrative outpost based on the material culture and architecture recovered from the Iron Age IIA layers. This paper presents
the carbon, oxygen, and strontium isotopic analyses of intra-tooth samples from ovicaprine and cattle remains to test herd
management strategies in connection to administrative provisioning activities. The animal remains are used as proxies to identify
political and economic ties through shared foodways and herd management patterns. The results provide information addressing
herd management and mobility patterns as well as the level and identity of the larger political network the site was integrated into,
thereby testing the hypothesis that Khirbet Summeily was an administrative outpost.
[234]
Chair
Larson, Kara [180] see Miller, D. Shane
Larson, Mary Lou (University of Wyoming) and Marcel Kornfeld (Paleoindian Research Lab, UW)
[103]
Hell Gap and Its Changing Roles
Hell Gap site excavations began in 1959; however, the bulk of the investigations occurred between 1962 and 1966. This was early
in Ruthann Knudson’s archaeological career, but the site left a lasting impression on her, as it did on others, and she returned to
write a chapter in the first monograph on Hell Gap. The second round of investigations began in the early 1990s with a substantially
different focus. Rather than chronostratigraphy, which remained an important question, the focus shifted to site formation, site
structure, and the myriad of questions on subsistence, mobility, and technology. In this presentation we focus on the recent results.
[103]
Chair
Larson, Mary Lou [103] see Kornfeld, Marcel
LaRue, Chuck [69] see Whittaker, John
Lash, Heather
[241]
Foodways of Pre- and Post-Emancipation African Americans at James Madison’s Montpelier: A Zooarchaeological Analysis of Food
Preference and Food Access
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     316
Through the production, preparation, and consumption of food, individuals create and reconstruct their worldview in relation to their
personal identity and expression of self. Therefore, the agency of enslaved and formerly enslaved individuals can be reconstructed
through an exploration into factors influencing food preference. The relationship between preference and access is evaluated in the
way exchange is facilitated within three African American communities, and one family, at James Madison’s main house, Montpelier
(1764–1844). Through zooarchaeological analysis of faunal materials from four contexts at Montpelier, agency and personal
preference in food can be examined.
Lash, Ryan (University of Notre Dame)
[272]
Cult and Cultivation: Vulnerability and Resilience on Inishark Island, Co. Galway, Ireland, in the Nineteenth Century
Critics of new materialist approaches in archaeology caution that focus on the active qualities of materials and the distributed
agency of assemblages obscures the cruelties of inequality that allow the powerful to do as they will and others to suffer what they
must. Confronting this critique, this paper examines the famines in nineteenth-century Ireland as a political ecological catastrophe
about which an assessment of the role of human (landlords, government officials, tenant farmers) and non-human actors (‘the
blight’, the lumper potato, marginal landscapes) carries considerable political stakes. Drawing upon archaeological and archival data
from the island of Inishark, I suggest that attending to the subsistence, sensory, and mnemonic affordances of diverse materials in
the landscape actually highlights islanders’ creative agency in maintaining collective identity, action, and livelihood in the midst of
adversity. I argue that islanders’ curation of medieval ritual monuments and annual commensal celebrations associated with the cult
of Saint Leo generated a shared heritage that reinforced social bonds required by their community’s collective agricultural regime.
New materialist approaches can therefore nuance understandings of vulnerability and resilience by exploring how humans operate
within material assemblages that afford and constrain patterns of subsistence, lived-experience, and social affinity and difference.
Lash, Samantha
[59]
The Mercurial Mosaic: Local Realities and Climate Change in the Mediterranean
Both environmental reconstruction and analysis of human responses to, and effect on, environmental circumstances require a fine-
grained, localized, and contextualized approach to produce high precision information. This is distinct from climatic and
environmental research that typically relies on distant proxies, which provide necessarily broad descriptions of large-scale trends.
Archaeologists employ many concepts when attempting to document how humans modify the landscape, adapt to change, and how
such changes relate to broader socio-political-economic realities. Just as the ideological and situational relationship between
humans and their environment must be addressed, so to must issues of spatial and temporal scale in data to reconcile disparate
frameworks traditionally divided by disciplinary boundaries. In the case of the Mediterranean, its intensely varied landscape and
complex climate dynamics hardly merits its classification as a region to some, while to others, it defines it. Large-scale and long-
term claims about the Mediterranean environment lack clarity, resolution, and accuracy. This paper promotes a distinctive
archaeological approach to the study of climate change: the reconstruction of inferred ancient climate change in the Mediterranean
through local signals (lipid biomarkers found in animal bones) and its distributive agency in the cultural negotiations that transformed
the rural countryside in the first millennium BCE.
Lassen, Robert (AmaTerra Environmental Inc.), Brittany McClain (AmaTerra Environmental Inc.) and Timothy Griffith
(AmaTerra Environmental Inc.)
[194]
Excavations at the Crane Dune Site (41CR61), a Prehistoric Habitation and Probable Burial Site in Crane County, Texas
The Crane Dune site (41CR61) was identified by AmaTerra archaeologists during a survey on behalf of the Texas Department of
Transportation (TxDOT) prior to the widening of Highway 385 in Crane County, Texas. The site consists of at least two components
(Late Prehistoric and Late Archaic) centered on stabilized sand dunes. The cultural occupations span a 40–50 cm thick dark anthrosol
layer consisting of charcoal-stained sandy sediments, suggesting intensive occupation. Excavations focused primarily on exposing and
recording features, which consisted primarily of rock-lined ovens in shallow basins, as well as deeper cooking pits without rocks.
Another pit feature was determined likely to be a human burial, based on the presence of a human molar and a carved bone pendant
observed in the fill sediment. Artifacts from the site include dart and arrow points, occasional ground stone and ceramic sherds, chert
and quartzite debitage, at least two obsidian flakes, faunal material ranging from rodents to bison, and a possible turquoise pendant
recovered near the burial feature. The Crane Dune site continues to provide a wealth of archaeological data in an under-studied region
of Texas. Excavations are currently ongoing, and this paper will present the preliminary results of the project.
Lassen, Robert [37] see Ramos Berrios, Alanis
Latorre, Claudio [171] see McRostie, Virginia
Latorre, Claudio [74] see Ugalde, Paula
Lattanzi, Gregory (New Jersey State Museum)
[114]
Discussant
Lattanzi, Gregory (New Jersey State Museum)
[172]
The Good, the Bad, and the Not So Great: Archaeological Curation at the New Jersey State Museum
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     317
Unlike most state museums, the New Jersey State Museum operates directly under the Department of State, and this has its
advantages and disadvantages. On the one hand, we enjoy interacting with the public through programming, exhibitions, research,
presentations and publications. Then on the other hand, budget cuts, reduced staff, and leadership changes potentially every four
years, puts tremendous strains on the professional staff. As Curator and State Archaeologist my position is mandated to care for
New Jersey’s cultural resources, direct the NAGPRA compliance, and the site registration program among other duties. It is hard to
keep up with the amount of material generated by cultural resource management, as well as having to put up exhibitions and
maintain the site registration program. This presentation lays out many of these and other issues faced by the Bureau of
Archaeology at the New Jersey State Museum.
Latychev, Konstantin [252] see Powell, Evelyn
Lau, George (Sainsbury Research Unit, University of East Anglia)
[106]
Discussant
Lau, George [174] see Chicoine, David
Lau, Jason [64] see Hodgetts, Lisa
Laughlin, Tyler (Texas A&M University), Joshua Keene (Baylor University) and Michael Waters (Texas A&M University)
[19]
Archaeological Investigations of the Late Quaternary from Hall’s Cave
Recent investigations of Hall’s Cave between 2017–2018 have revealed human use and periodic occupation since 10,500 cal yr B.
P. The fantastic preservation of the cave stratigraphy has kept multiple hearth features and burned lenses intact. Radiocarbon dates
from these features have demonstrated a comprehensive chronological record from the end of the Pleistocene through the
Holocene. A preliminary lithic analysis corroborates these dates with point typologies found in or near features. Features and lithics
are also clustered into groups at different intervals throughout the Archaic Period, indicating periods of increased use of Hall’s Cave.
The features, dates, point typologies, and density of occupation highlight key factors in understanding and developing the narrative
of central Texas during the Late Quaternary.
Laugier, Elise Jakoby (Dartmouth College) and Jesse Casana (Dartmouth College)
[124]
Agricultural Landscapes of the Mesopotamian-Zagros Borderlands
The Upper Diyala River Region in Northern Iraq has long served as a strategic political, economic, and cultural borderland between
the Mesopotamian alluvium and the Zagros Mountains. The region is also environmentally complex encompassing a steep gradient
of agro-ecological zones ranging from irrigated alluvial lowland plains, to upland dry farming valleys, and mountainous highlands.
Thus, from the Neolithic onward, the Upper Diyala has presumably hosted a variety of agropastoral traditions. Yet only the most
recent land use features, such as canals, field boundaries, and trackways, are easily resolvable in available satellite imagery.
Coupled with regionally poor preservation conditions for macrobotanical remains, we are challenged by limited empirical data for
understanding earlier periods of agricultural land use. As part of the Sirwan (Upper Diyala) Regional Project (SRP), this paper draws
on a variety of complementary datasets at multiple scales—from historic aerial imagery to phytolith analysis—to systematically
investigate this diverse and challenging agricultural landscape. Results demonstrate the necessity of integrated, multi-scale
approaches for addressing these preservation problems. Additionally, the paper discusses the critical importance of also
understanding modern land use and the ongoing challenges of reconstructing ancient agricultural landscapes in rapidly developing,
active agricultural zones.
Laugier, Elise Jakoby [147] see Hill, Austin
Laumbach, Karl (Human Systems Research Inc.)
[156]
Ritual Architecture and Landscapes at Cañada Alamosa, New Mexico
The Cañada Alamosa Project, located in southern Socorro County, New Mexico, tested four sites that yielded an array of ceramic
types that span 800 years and are associated with both Ancestral Pueblo and Mogollon ceramic traditions. The four sites are
located in a deep canyon that opens up to provide arable land. The high terraces and cliffs are in the shadow of Montoya Butte, a
defensive site for an early pithouse population. The butte is topped by a shrine that almost certainly spanned the centuries of
occupation in the canyon. Investigations in the canyon proper included the definition of ritual architecture, ancient trails, rock art and
abandonment rituals that represent several distinct periods of the pithouse to pueblo sequence. Rock art, both petroglyphs and
pictographs, are limited in number but are focused on grottos, caves and high cliffs. Most trails on the valley bottom have been
eradicated by flooding but trails on the slopes and terraces lead to the shrine and to the waters of the Ojo Caliente, three miles
distant.
Laurent, Antoine [107] see Ard, Vincent
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    318
Lauricella, Anthony
[261]
The Qusur Landscape after the Umayyads
The art historical character of many excavations at important Islamic sites has had a significant impact on the development of
Islamic archaeology as a discipline. Islamic period sites are often viewed through a narrow lens shaped by an overreliance on
frameworks derived from historical texts, poetry, and dynastic periodization. This way of viewing the Islamic past in thin temporal
slices also has spatial ramifications, which obscure the connections between sites and their place in wider landscapes and
processes. This paper discusses the Umayyad qusur, a group of typologically similar structures spread across Bilad al-Sham, as a
purpose-built landscape system. I test the various hypotheses about Umayyad occupation at the qusur by analyzing this landscape
in later periods. Analysis at these spatial and chronological scales opens new questions about the trajectory of settlement and
central control of Bilad al-Sham after the eclipse of the Umayyads.
Law Pezzarossi, Heather (Syracuse University)
[112]
Reconsidering Residence: Deprivileging Settler Landscapes in the Study of Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century Nipmuc Dwellings
This paper considers the diverse practices of “residence” (see Silliman 2005) that emerged within the Nipmuc community as a
response to colonial practices of displacement, dispossession, and confinement in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
Massachusetts. Rather than proposing a typology of Indigenous dwelling, I illustrate how Nipmuc people devised diverse strategies
of continuing to occupy their ancestral landscapes despite settler colonial imperatives of ownership and private property. I discuss
ways of residing that don’t involve land ownership in severalty at a time when Nipmuc landholdings were severely threatened. I use
local historical resources to plot the locations of Native dwellings that would not be accessible in the colonial archive due to their
temporary forms and unsanctioned locations. In so doing, this study will reveal many potential, previously unidentified, eighteenth-
and nineteenth-century Native dwelling sites that were built into hillsides, tucked into wetlands, hidden on Euro-American farmland,
and woven into urban environs that are difficult to find in official deeds and other accounts of privately held property. This work will
help to illustrate the continued residence of Nipmuc people on the New England landscape regardless of ownership, and facilitate
the study of long term Nipmuc survivance.
Lawrence, John (Cardno) and Scott Fitzpatrick (University of Oregon)
[123]
A Synthesis of Carriacou’s Networks through The Objectives of Ceramic Petrography
Ceramic petrography conducted in the southern Lesser Antilles has largely centered on the island of Carriacou. Pottery here
exhibits a wide variety of textures and compositions, but with no known native raw material sources. Along with the presence of a
high number of translocated animals, the island is thought to be a nexus point for interaction spheres in the region. Here we
synthesize current and past petrographic research in the Antilles pottery provenance and use of various raw materials. Previous
investigations have used and adapted the Dickinson method from Oceania to characterize and source raw materials seen in
Carriacou’s temper groups within the larger Caribbean region. These include Potassic, Igneous, Quartzose, Placer, and Mixed. Of
these five temper groups, only the Placer temper is thought to be native and probably derives from the Greater Antilles. The exact
source of the Igneous temper is still unknown but is speculated to be from somewhere in the Lesser Antilles. The Quartzose temper
source is likely from Barbados to the East. The Mixed temper group is believed to be sourced on nearby Union Island. These
studies demonstrate the connective nature of prehistoric Amerindian groups in the Caribbean but require further research to
satisfactorily explain.
[123]
Chair
Lawrence, Ken (SWCA-Texas State University), Charles Frederick (Consulting Geoarchaeologist-Geologist), Steve
Carpenter (SWCA), Mark Bateman (University of Sheffield, United Kingdom) and Ken Lawrence
[194]
Geoarchaeological Investigations at 41MS78, a Stratified Archaic Site on the Llano River in North Central Texas
On behalf of the Texas Department of Transportation Austin District, SWCA Environmental Consultants conducted data recovery
investigations of a stratified prehistoric site (41MS78) along the Llano River in Mason County, Texas. The site is composed of
stratified cultural components in deep alluvial sediments exposed in roadcuts along both sides of an existing roadway. Cultural
materials, mainly chipped stone tools and earth ovens composed of fire-cracked local limestone, span the Archaic (8800–2000 BP).
A major focus of these investigations was geoarchaeological investigations that examined numerous stratigraphic columns to assist
in interpreting cultural analytical units, determining site integrity, and identifying chronostratigraphy of the site deposits. This
presentation discusses the results of the site investigations, focusing on the depositional context of multiple, stratified occupational
zones correlated with extensive radiocarbon and optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) data.
Lawrence, Ken [194] see Lawrence, Ken
LaZar, Miranda (University of Arizona) and Jonathan Dombrosky (University of New Mexico)
[129]
Tracking Individual Raptors in the Archaeological Record Using Stable Isotopes: Limitations, Possibilities, and Causes of
Intraskeletal δ-Value Variation
The ability to track trade of socially valued goods made from raptor bones can give archaeologists a deeper understanding of both
human-raptor interactions and networks of exchange. Reconstructing distribution of such goods from production centers, however,
requires the ability to identify bones from an individual bird. We explore a method to track the trade of raptor remains by examining
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  319
intraskeletal variation and interindividual separation of δ13C, δ15N, and δ2H from 20 modern Cooper’s Hawks (Accipiter cooperii). Our
study is supplemented by analysis of the stable isotope signature of soft tissues from these hawks. Soft tissues have different
turnover rates, which allows us to assess the linkage between individual hawk feeding ecology and interindividual separation.
Archaeologists may be able to reconstruct networks of exchange in the archaeological record with stable isotope analysis.
Lazik, Lauren, Robert Hard, Steven Shackley, John Roney and Paige Hayhurst
[5]
An Obsidian X-ray Fluorescence Analysis of Early Agricultural and Medio Period Artifacts from Northwest Chihuahua, Mexico
This x-ray fluorescence analysis of 235 obsidian artifacts from northwest Chihuahua combines the original analysis of 89 items with
a recent analysis of the remaining 146 obsidian pieces recovered during fieldwork. The sample is dominated by artifacts from the
Early Agricultural period site of Cerro Juanaqueña (n = 198) but includes a sample from the Medio period (n = 30). The results
identify six sources, including the Selene source in the highlands of northeast Sonora, three sources from the Chihuahua basin and
range country (Ojo de Federico, Sierra Fresnal, and Los Jagüeyes), and two sources from the New Mexico Bootheel region
(Antelope Wells and Animas Mountains). The primary source locations for Selene, Sierra Fresnal, and Antelope Wells are known
while the Ojo de Federico, Los Jagüeyes, and Animas Mountains types are only known from secondary sources. The results
indicate obsidian was being procured widely during the Early Agricultural period with an apparent substantial shift by the Medio
period.
Le Bourdonnec, François-Xavier [30] see Sánchez de la Torre, Marta
Le Moine, Jean-Baptiste (Université de Montréal) and Christina Halperin (Université de Montréal)
[168]
Shifting Terminal Classic Maya Political-Economies from the Perspective of Ucanal, Petén, Guatemala
This paper, in honor or Ronald Bishop’s contributions to chemical composition analysis, examines changes in trade, political
alliances, and interaction spheres in the Southern Maya Lowlands during the transition between the Late Classic and Terminal
Classic periods. Incorporating both Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis and portable X-Ray Fluorescence analyses to identify
the chemical composition of ceramic pastes, our investigations provide evidence for a political resurgence during the Terminal
Classic period of what were formerly secondary or more subordinate political centers. Our study focuses, in particular, on the
archaeological site of Ucanal and underscores both its long-standing and new interactions with sites in Belize, the Petexbatun
region, and Yucatán.
Le Roux, Petrus [61] see Santana Sagredo, Francisca
Lebehn, Jason [100] see Ono, Rintaro
LeBlanc, Megan
[8]
Quebrada Debris Flows and Their Relationship to Agriculture at Tacahuay Tambo
This poster presents a survey of the debris flow deposits and agricultural units at Tacahuay Tambo, a Late Intermediate (1000–1476
AD) site located on south coast of Peru. Quebrada Tacahuay in combination with the Tambo, has 12,000 years of cultural history.
Therefore, there are numerous flood deposits that add to the complexity of the stratigraphy. Debris flows are especially impactful in
this area when paired with tectonic events that loosen up existing rocky material. The Miraflores Event (~14 century AD), was one of
these major disasters that impacted cultural activity in this region. These deposits can be found in the Tacahauy quebrada. Using
GPR techniques, sediment samples scanned with a handheld XRF, and geologic analysis, I studied differences in soil composition
and texture to identify continuity between debris flow units. In addition, a survey using drone footage was used to locate agricultural
terracing around to show the potential impact of flood events on the people who inhabited this area. This initial survey provides the
geologic context for future excavations at Tacahuay. Through a combination of remote sensing and sediment analysis tools, it is
possible to study the relationship between the complex stratigraphy found at this site.
Lebrun, Brice [36] see Holliday, Trenton
Lecher, Alanna [228] see Watson, April
LeCount, Lisa (University of Alabama)
[128]
The End of Chicanel: Ceramic Diversification, Categorical Identities, and Regional Networks
The onset of Maya kingship and the nature of regional networks will be described using Chicanel pottery and the language of
network analysis. The Chicanel Ceramic Sphere is noted for its enormous geographic range and its highly consistent styles. As
such, Chicanel pottery is the materialization of the “strength of weak [social] ties” (Granovetter 1973) maintained through exchange
relations and information flow from 300 BC until AD 400. However, around 100 BC Chicanel pottery began to diversify and new
subcomplexes occurred during the Terminal Preclassic to Early Classic periods. These subcomplexes are subsumed under the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     320
highly debated term “Protoclassic,” which describes two different (probably chronologically staggered) sets of decorated pottery
styles thought to be restricted to ritual contexts and certain geographical areas. I suggest Protoclassic styles signal a shared
categorical identity associated with early kingship (variously manifested in the form of corporate leaders or nascent ajawob) and the
ceremonialism that underpinned it. Households also bought into this emergent ceremonialism though the use of Protoclassic
pottery, albeit in limited quantities. Concomitantly, regional networks narrowed, evidenced by the development of locally distinct
“domestic” assemblages. These ideas will be evaluated by comparing pottery assemblages from Actuncan, Belize with other sites in
the Lowlands.
LeCount, Lisa [54] see Blitz, John
Ledbetter, Jerald [232] see Jones, KC
Ledesma Bouchan, Patricia (Templo Mayor Museum)
[109]
Getting the Archaeological Context Back: Some Principles of the Museology in Templo Mayor, Mexico
Under strict terms, every object presented in a Museum has lost its context, except maybe for the historical houses that keep the
objects in their original places and the spatial relationship between them. Even a museum such as Templo Mayor, does not present
most of the objects in their original place nor maintains the relationship between them. The Templo Mayor Museum is an iconic
place for the modern Mexican archaeology. With its exemplary trajectory, under the leadership of Eduardo Matos Moctezuma, the
Museum has its origin in the very need to preserve and maintain together the awesome richness and variety of the materials
recovered by the archaeological project that started in 1978. Recently, the Templo Mayor Museum has been developing specific
works to reproduce the original context on some of its temporary exhibits, also we are introducing more information and giving our
visitors tools to understand and discover the humans behind the objects. All these efforts come together under specific values in
coherence with the mission of the Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia (INAH), to pursue the preservation of the
archaeological objects, the contexts and their inherent values, in order to get closer to the understanding of cultural diversity.
Ledin, Lauren (University of Chicago) and Hongbin Yue (Institute of Archaeology, Chinese Academy of Socia)
[205]
New Perspectives on Age in Early China: A Bioarchaeological Life Course Approach to the Late Shang Capital of Yinxu (ca. 1200–
1050 BCE)
Mortuary theory of early China commonly describes differences among graves and grave goods as indicative of differences in
individuals’ wealth and lineage affiliation. While early Chinese graves are well-explored from the perspective of archaeology, history,
and art history, the skeletal remains found within them only became an important subject of study relatively recently in the history of
research at many early Chinese sites, such as the UNESCO World Heritage Site of Yinxu in Anyang, China (ca. 1200–1050 BCE).
Even with this new body of evidence, its benefit to researchers, including bioarchaeologists eager to implement aDNA and stable
isotope analyses, is limited by a mortuary theory that never sought to include skeletal data in the first place. In this paper, I discuss
bioarchaeological research on the skeletal remains of approximately 150 individuals excavated from a single lineage neighborhood
at Yinxu, ranging from rarely studied infant remains to elderly adults. In analyzing the resulting age estimates through the lens of life
course theory, I consider how a systematic understanding of age can either bolster or improve the extant mortuary theory for early
China, and address ongoing questions related to kinship, personhood, and ancestor veneration.
[205]
Chair
Lee, Hyunsoo (University of Oregon)
[199]
Early-Mid Holocene Subsistence through Archaeobotany: Case Studies in Korea and NE China including Gosanri,Gungokri,and
Houtaomuga
This study focuses on tracing subsistence trajectories amid Early-Mid Holocene environmental change through archaeobotanical
evidence. Archaeobotanical remains from coastal, island, and lacustrine sites across Korean Peninsula and northeastern China are
analyzed. Starch, phytolith, charred plant remains, and other archaeological data are used to produce more comprehensive
understanding of subsistence trajectories. One of the main questions in this research is how occupants in certain landscape have
interacted with surrounding resources. Early Holocene societies in Korea and NE China have been often defined as a hunter-
gatherer economy with no existence of plant managements, due to lack of accumulated archaeobotanical evidence. The main
objective of this research is to test usefulness of archaeobotanical analysis in prehistoric Korea and NE China studies. Concepts
such as niche construction, low-level food production, and hunter-farmer are applied to interpret the botanical findings linked with
other archaeological evidences. Case study sites include Gosanri in Jeju Island, Gungokri in Mokpo, Korea, and Houtaomuga in
Jilin, China. This study aims to contribute for mapping diverse economic niche constructions, human-environmental dynamics, and
sociocultural transitions amid environmental changes of the Early-Middle Holocene worldwide.
Lee, Lori (Flagler College)
[3]
Bottles and Beads: Glass Objects at Fort Mose
Classification systems that focus on primary function can obscure the cultural significance of objects for the people who used them.
Glass bottles store liquids and glass beads are used for adornment. Yet these same objects sometimes had unique cultural
meanings for African Americans and African Americans who used them. In large assemblages bottles often get analytically
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     321
separated from beads because of primary function. In a small assemblage, we have the opportunity to explore relationships among
objects made of the same material with different primary functions. This paper examines attributes of glass objects recovered at Fort
Mose in St. Augustine, Florida and their contexts to consider cultural insights beyond practical function.
[3]
Chair
Lee, Lori [3] see Slatowski, Jenna
LeFebvre, Michelle (Florida Museum of Natural History), Jessica Oswald (Florida Museum of Natural History), Julie Allen
(University of Nevada, Reno), David Steadman (Florida Museum of Natural History) and Robert Guralnick (Florida Museum
of Natural History)
[27]
Transdisciplinary Questions and Interdisciplinary Approaches to Caribbean Historical Ecology: The Anthropogenic History of
Endemic Hutias (Capromyinae)
Cultural heritage and biodiversity are inextricably linked through a long history of human-environment interactions. The human
colonization of the Caribbean Archipelago ca. 7,000 years ago marked the beginning of significant and lasting anthropogenic
impacts across this island landscape, including the extirpation and extinction of native and endemic animals. In this presentation, we
discuss the historical ecology of hutias, a group of rodents endemic to the Greater Antilles and The Bahamas. Hutias are significant
for their breadth of species and morphological diversification, and an over 50% extinction rate during the Holocene. This rate of
extinction is readily attributable to a long and variable history of human activities. With a focus on Bahamian hutias (Geocapromys
ingrahami) specifically, we present a suite of interdisciplinary data from our ongoing research focused on their historical ecology
prior to and after human colonization of the Bahama archipelago (The Bahamas and the Turks & Caicos Islands) ca. AD 700/800.
Drawing on zooarchaeological and paleontological hutia distribution records, morphometric specimen comparisons, isotopic
signatures, and ancient DNA, our data indicate previously unrecognized indigenous human influence over Bahamian hutia
distribution, diet, and genetic diversity. This study exemplifies the need for and critical role of interdisciplinary collaborations in
Caribbean historical ecology.
LeFebvre, Michelle [271] see Ardren, Traci
LeFebvre, Michelle [212] see Harvey, Virginia
LeFebvre, Michelle [59] see Jorissen, Philippa
LeFebvre, Michelle [146] see Miller, Sarah
Legrand, Victor [107] see Lueth, Friedrich
Lehner, Joseph [175] see Martin, Samuel
Leight, Megan (CUNY Graduate Center) and Brent Woodfill (Winthrop University)
[168]
Honoring the Legacy of Ron Bishop at Salinas de los Nueve Cerros
The study of ancient Mesoamerican economic exchange systems is intricately connected to the work and legacy of Ron Bishop,
who pioneered the use of INAA in archaeology for ceramic analysis, moving it far beyond visual identification to compositional
analysis. For the archaeological project of Salinas de los Nueve Cerros located in the Transversal region of Guatemala at the
intersection of the Maya Highlands and Lowlands, Bishop’s work has helped illuminate cultural interaction and exchange at this
economic hub. This presentation will focus on discussing trade at the riverine port recently excavated at the site, which boasted a
vibrant trading economy with an exceptionally long occupation history from the Middle Preclassic through the Late Classic periods.
While ports have been exceptionally hard to characterize and identify in the Maya world, a decade of work on the site’s ceramic
typology through INAA data testing has helped define the local ceramic sequence, highlight the non-local trading spheres, and
solidify the site’s connections with the greater Maya world.
Leja, Daniel [149] see Schleher, Kari
Lekson, Stephen (University of Colorado Museum of Natural History)
[156]
Discussant
Lemke, Ashley (University of Texas, Arlington)
[37]
Chair
Lemke, Ashley (University of Texas, Arlington)
[238]
Submerged Prehistoric Archaeology on the Atlantic Continental Shelf
Given the last two million years of global fluctuations in climate and ocean levels, submerged landscapes are arguably the most
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  322
important zone for addressing questions concerning human evolution and migration and are unique for their potential to preserve
extraordinary evidence of prehistoric peoples. A discovery off the coast of North Carolina on the Atlantic continental shelf offers an
exceptional new research locality, with a rock outcrop, mammoth bones, and a likely paleo-river channel preserved in 80 feet of
water, 25 miles offshore. This raw material source may provide connections to Paleoindian sites on the mainland; and a locus of raw
material, big game, and fresh water provides an ideal setting for prehistoric archaeological sites. Results from preliminary field work
are presented from the area around this discovery which offers an ideal laboratory for linking submerged landscapes to terrestrial
ones and for methods development for prehistoric underwater archaeological research.
Lemke, Ashley [170] see Wernecke, D. Clark
Lemly, Marina (University of New Mexico), Amy Thompson (University of New Mexico) and Keith Prufer (University of New
Mexico)
[7]
Modeling Ancient Maya Transportation and Trade Routes in Southern Belize with a Least Cost Path Analysis
Little is known of the trade routes and paths that the Maya used traveling from city to city. We model potential past transportation
and trade routes and how people moved across the landscape using a Least Cost Path Analysis (LCP). Our study focuses on the
transportation routes and interactions among Classic Period (AD 250–800) Maya centers in southern Belize. Using the slope of the
terrain, we created LCPs in ArcMap to show the potential paths between 18 ancient Maya cities. The LCP results indicate possible
corridors that form where several LCPs intersect and link up, suggesting that certain paths were likely more frequently used by
travelers throughout the region. Some sites are situated on the corridors of several LCPs, suggesting that the location of these sites
was advantageous for trade and interactions. Furthermore, the intersections among the LCPs are ideal locations for sites, where
travelers would have stopped to rest during their journey. This study using geospatial analyses to model how past people traveled
across the landscape and may reveal the locations of additional minor centers.
Lemminger, Jennifer (University of Wyoming)
[75]
Agate Basin Stratified Paleoindian Site: Faunal Analysis from Area I
Agate Basin is a significant stratified Paleoindian site with multiple kill/processing localities and campsites. The Area 1 bone bed
was excavated in 1942, 1961 and 1975 by the Smithsonian Institute and the University of Wyoming. Bone was not collected during
the earlier excavations and an insignificant assemblage was encountered in 1975. However, bone was collected in 2004 and 2008
when the back dirt from previous work was excavated. The results of 2004 zooarchaeological analysis were inconclusive with
regards to Paleoindian behavior due to small sample and attritional bias. The bones from the 2008 analyzed here increase the
sample size and provide a more precise composition of the faunal assemblage. Previous studies of Area 2 of the Agate Basin site
suggest that Area 1 was the primary kill area for the Agate Basin components of Area 2. Comparisons between the Area 1 bonebed
and the Area 2 bonebed and other bonebeds could support this hypothesis or provide evidence supporting different interpretation.
Lemonnier, Eva [102] see Arnauld, M. Charlotte
Lent, Kyle [18] see Delgado, James
Lentz, David (University of Cincinnati), Brian Lane (Univerisity of Oregon) and Kenneth Tankersley (University of
Cincinnati)
[258]
Plant Fibers and Associated Bioactive Compounds Used to Protect Hopewell Copper Artifacts
Two Hopewell copper artifacts, a breastplate and a celt, were recovered from the Twin Mound site (33Ha29) in southwestern Ohio.
An AMS radiocarbon age of 2030±40 BP was obtained on collagen extracted from an Ursus americanus canine located adjacent to
the artifacts. An environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) was used to determine the species of plant fibers used to
manufacture the textile covering the artifacts. The fabric employed to wrap the breastplate was manufactured from Asclepias
incarnata (milkweed) fiber and the fabric covering the celt was manufactured from Eryngium yuccifolium (rattlesnake master) fiber.
The textiles were preserved by a combination of copper carbonate hydroxide (Cu2(CO3)(OH)2) and copper carbonate
(Cu3(CO3)2(OH)2), which resulted from the chemical weathering of native copper. Alternatively, it seems likely that the textiles used
to wrap the artifacts were applied by the end user to protect the objects. This paper will explore the numerous bioactive compounds
produced by each of these plant species to evaluate their potential use as preservative agents.
Lentz, David [206] see Quiroz, Carlos
Leppard, Thomas (Florida State University) and Sarah Murray (University of Toronto)
[210]
Coercion, Violence, and Inequality in Archaeological Perspective
A central contradiction that has emerged in social science scholarship concerns how wealth inequalities are built and maintained.
Historians, including Charles Tilly and Ian Morris, have argued that coercive violence (or its threat) is central to how groups and
institutions construct unequal social and economic systems. This interpretation is now challenged by the work of Thomas Piketty
and colleagues, who have shown that in capitalist systems conditions of exaggerated inequality usually result from gradual,
generally peaceful processes of resource accumulation due to changes in the relative valuations accruing to labor and capital over
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     323
time. Conversely, large-scale social violence appears to erode and undermine wealth inequalities, an analysis supported by the
diachronic perspective offered by Walter Scheidel. In this paper, we introduce this and other problematics surrounding the study of
violence and inequality in the archaeological record. We discuss how the archaeological evidence from prehistoric societies might
add to our understanding of the variety of peaceful and violent dynamics that lead to inequality in human societies and emphasize
the value of bringing a comparative approach to the study of coercion as a prominent force in shaping, causing, and maintaining
archaeologically apparent disparities in well-being and access to resources.
[210]
Chair
Leque, Kirstyn [213] see Clark, Jessica
Lerner, Shereen (Mesa College)
[254]
Connecting the Past to the Present: The Social Relevance of Archaeology
How can we help students better understand how the past connects to the present? Our efforts in the classroom provide students
with an opportunity to learn about the common threads connecting ancient civilizations. The elements that we share with students
provide us with a story of humanity and its successes and failures. We focus our pedagogical strategy on a thematic approach,
connecting regions to themes such as trade, the significance of water, urbanization, political power, climate change, food,
overpopulation, and more. This integrated approach, using active learning techniques, helps students to understand the importance
and value of our past and its connection to our present. In the process, students gain a greater understanding of a world heritage
that is tied to issues they are confronting today.
Lerner, Shereen [98] see Green, Margerie
LeRoy, Sarah [186] see van Leeuwen, Willem
Leroy, Stéphanie [28] see Hendrickson, Mitch
Lesage, Louis [12] see Birch, Jennifer
Leslie, David (Archaeological and Historical Services Inc.) and Sarah Sportman (Archaeological and Historical Services
Inc.)
[13]
Preliminary Results from Site 4-10B (Brian D. Jones Site): Paleoindian Occupation of the Farmington River Valley, Avon,
Connecticut
In the winter of 2019, AHS, Inc., under contract to the Connecticut Department of Transportation, conducted Data Recovery
excavations at Site 4–10B along the Farmington River in Avon, Connecticut. Excavations revealed at least three stratified
occupation levels at the site; two are unquestionably Paleoindian and one a possible Early Archaic occupation. We recovered a rich
dataset of lithic and botanical artifacts, as well as 29 cultural features, which may be indicative of living areas. To date, 4–10B is the
oldest occupied site in Connecticut and the only site with stratified Paleoindian deposits in New England. Lithic raw materials include
local (chalcedony and siltstone) and exotic (Normanskill chert, New Hampshire rhyolite, and Hardyston jasper) sources. Analyses
are ongoing, but suggest highly specialized activity areas within the site in each occupational level, including the production of fluted
points and animal and plant processing using the typical Paleoindian tool kit (pièces esquillées, endscrapers, sidescrapers, bifaces,
utilized flakes, and gravers) and non-typical tools (grinding stones). In this paper we present preliminary results of the Data
Recovery and discuss the vital role Dr. Brian Jones played in the discovery of Site 4–10B and his support of the excavations as
Connecticut’s State Archaeologist.
Leventhal, Alan [233] see Fournier, Nichole
Levi, Laura (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[53]
From Temple to Polity: Wari Camp’s Classic Period Political Landscape
In the Maya lowlands, temples are one of the most visible clues to ritual activity available to archaeologists. They also are
understood to have been closely associated with the exercise of political authority—that is, unless they are found outside precincts
of monumental architecture in so-called “shrine groups.” In the latter instance, residential temples have been interpreted as
indicators of ancestor veneration or of ritual specialists. However, there is reason to question whether ritual practice ever proceeds
in the absence of an authorizing hand. This issue will be explored using data from the ancient Maya community of Wari Camp in
northwestern Belize. Here, a set of residential temples suggests a new way forward in the study of lowland Maya power politics.
Levi, Laura [230] see Sheumaker, Christian
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    324
Levi, Sara (Hunter College, CUNY), Valentina Cannavò (Univ. Modena e Reggio Emilia, IT), Peter Day (Univ. Sheffield, UK),
Domenica Gullì (Soprintendenza Agrigento, IT) and Alessandro Vanzetti (Univ. Roma 1 Sapienza, IT)
[196]
Sardinia Comes to Sicily? Nuragic Pottery at Cannatello
Cannatello lies in a key position for trade, on the southern coast of Sicily, only 1.5 km inland in a walled settlement. The site is
exceptional, hosting an assemblage whose ceramic and other material parallels lie with the major harbors of the Mediterranean Late
Bronze Age, participating in very early, long-distance maritime trade. These include transport jars familiar from the Levantine coast,
southern Cyprus, Kommos in Crete, Malta and the Bay of Cagliari in Sardinia. The site dates to Middle BA3–Final BA in Italian
terms, corresponding to the Aegean phases LH IIIA-LH IIIC, a crucial time which encompasses the Mycenaean palaces and their
collapse. Of special interest is the recent identification of a range of pottery of Sardinian Nuragic style, which has been subject to
ceramic compositional analysis (46 samples). These include imported large storage jars, but a range of Sardinian-style small bowls
(conca) have both imported examples and those that are clearly manufactured locally, using a grog-tempering tradition more
characteristic of Bronze Age Sicily. We consider the implications of this for understanding the movement of potters and the
interaction of pottery traditions in this, the first example of Nuragic pottery made outside of the island of Sardinia.
Levin, Maureece (Stanford University), Aimee Miles (Uppsala University) and Katherine Seikel (Australian National
University)
[100]
Eating Pingelap: Archaeobotanical and Zooarchaeological Perspectives from a Micronesian Atoll
Pingelap Atoll, located in central-eastern Micronesia, was colonized by 1550–1700 cal BP. Although these settlement dates are only
a few hundred years later than those of nearby high islands such as Pohnpei and Kosrae, the environment presents notably
different challenges and opportunities for subsistence. In this paper, we engage with archaeobotanical and zooarchaeological data
to examine human-mediated landscapes and seascapes of the Pingelapese past, and the culinary patterns that developed in the
local human community. Ethnoarchaeological interviews and observation focusing on both farming and fishing inform the
interpretation of this research, as horticulture and fishing continue to be an important part of subsistence for the modern
Pingelapese population. Subsistence datasets show evidence for usage of a variety of local fish and shellfish over a long period of
time, as well as sea birds, turtles, and introduced chickens. Coconut, pandanus, and several introduced plant taxa constitute
important crops, and phytolith data demonstrate, long-term anthropogenic fertilization of soils.
Levin, Samuel (Wyoming State Historic Preservation Office) and Shane McCreary (Wyoming State Historic Preservation
Office)
[190]
Advances in Wyoming Cultural Resource Data Access
In May 2019, the Wyoming State Historic Preservation Office migrated to a fully digital submission process using a web-application
called WyoTrack. WyoTrack couples modern database technology with integrated GIS resources to streamline the Section 106
consultation process. In doing so, cultural resource data are managed more effectively and with enhanced data quality. Cultural
Resource Management data are frequently viewed as an underutilized source for academic research. This underutilization is due to
a variety of factors including inaccessibility and poor data resolution. WyoTrack provides an online platform for researchers to
access and explore these data. Moreover, these data are encoded using a standard that vastly expands academic research
potential, far exceeding the minimum standards necessary for Section 106 compliance. With the heightened accessibility and data
quality offered by WyoTrack, the Wyoming SHPO anticipates that this system will become a foundation for future archaeological
research, fulfilling both academic and CRM purposes.
Levine, Marc (University of Oklahoma), Alex Badillo (Indiana State University), Amanda Regnier (University of Oklahoma)
and Scott Hammerstedt (University of Oklahoma)
[189]
Quantifying Monte Albán’s Main Plaza: Digital Mapping, Spatial Analysis, and Social Relations
In this paper, we take a quantitative approach to examine the history of Monte Alban’s Main Plaza and how physical changes in this
space may reflect changes in sociopolitical relations through time. This study draws on a recent digital mapping project of the Main
Plaza that utilized a robotic total station in conjunction with UAV(drone) technology. We present the results of a microtopographical
analysis of the Main Plaza surface that highlights previously underappreciated features, including two large enclosures that sub-
divide much of the plaza’s west side. We also present new estimates for the total area of the Main Plaza, as well as its smaller open
spaces, and compare these to analogous spaces from other sites in Mesoamerica. Additionally, we present the results of a view-
shed analysis to investigate the degree to which activities carried out in distinct areas of the plaza were visually accessible to others
in attendance. Finally, we carry out estimates of volume for all structures on the Main Plaza based on 3D renderings of the
architecture. This facilitates a study of labor investment for the Main Plaza, including attempts to track the pace of these efforts over
several centuries.
Levinson, Judith [258] see DeLeonardis, Lisa
Levy, Janet (UNC Charlotte)
[114]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      325
Levy, Thomas [147] see Liss, Brady
Lévy Contreras, Jessica
[268]
 Excavating the Field and Museums: Recovering Data on Textiles from Corral Redondo
Textiles recovered in Corral Redondo, located in the confluence of the Ocoña and San Juan de Chorunga Valleys in the Arequipa
region of southern Peru, were analyzed and preliminary conserved under the Corral Redondo Archaeological Project in 2019.
Although archaeological contexts and material have suffered advanced deterioration due to the extreme looting of the site, textiles
and artifacts assemblages, including basketry, lithic, shell and featherworks, still provide important data to complement research
done by Heidi King in 2013 and 2016. Comparing contextual and technical relationships between excavated textiles and other
objects ascribed to the site on display at the Museo IE Miguel Grau “Luis Guillermo Lumbreras” (Iquipi) and the Museo Municipal
Histórico “Guillermo Zegarra Meneses” (Arequipa), this paper presents new perspectives on production practices, mortuary
patterns, and worldview on textiles from the Ocoña Valley between the end of the Middle Horizon and the beginning of the Late
Horizon periods.
Lewandowski, David (Logan Simpson)
[122]
Persistent Places, Settlement Patterns, and Shifting Relations in the Mogollon Highlands: A Case Study along Eagle Creek, Eastern
Arizona
This poster examines settlement patterns and the concept of persistent places and its implications regarding population circulation,
community, and identity during the Pithouse and Pueblo period occupations (AD 700–1450) within the Eagle Creek area of the
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests (ASNF) in eastern Arizona. Eagle Creek is a perennial stream which flows south from the
Mogollon Rim to the Gila River along the border of the ASNF and San Carlos Apache Reservation, immediately east of the Point of
Pines cultural region. A recently completed 5,627-acre survey within the study area identified new sites and information pertinent to
addressing site occupation spans and external interaction. This study examines site occupation spans and site function to
reconstruct persistence, the reuse of sites, population movements, and changes in community location and structure in the Eagle
Creek area over time. Changes in the presence and proportions of non-local decorated ceramics are used to discuss the changing
external relationships during the Pithouse and Pueblo periods, particularly as it relates to the Mimbres and southern Cibola cultural
areas. Such changes may tell us about shifting identity formation within the area over time, with implications for the adjacent Point of
Pines area and greater Mogollon Highlands region.
Lewis, James [234] see Frieman, Catherine
Lewis, Lauren and Lisbeth Louderback
[177]
Using Starch Grains to Study a Shift in Food Processing Technology in Cowboy Cave, UT
Shifts in the food processing technology of North America’s arid southwest have been used to hypothesize about the origin of
dietary shifts in the past. The oldest coiled basket in the Americas, dated by Geib and Jolie to 7950 ± 50 RCYBP, was determined
not to have been used for food processing. This discovery has raised questions about the source of this technological innovation. It
is possible that if not motivated by a shift in food processing procedures, this change is a result of cultural diffusion. In an attempt to
better understand the transition from the simpler twined method of weaving to more complex coiled basketry, this project examines
starch grains extracted from ground stones and coiled parching or grinding baskets spanning from the 7519 ± 42 BP to the Terminal
Archaic. With the identification of similarities and differences in types of starch found on different tools, we are finding indications of
the methods of food processing being conducted by each respective technology. The results from this study lend to our
understanding of the source of the initial shift from twined to coiled basketry, which can lead to further hypotheses about the
environment and cultures present during this transition.
Lewis, Lauren [235] see Louderback, Lisbeth
Lewis, Cecil, Jr. [244] see Haffner, Jacob
Lewis, Quinn [175] see Friberg, Christina
Li, Kin Sum (Hong Kong Baptist University)
[42]
Attaining Accuracy and Precision of Measuring Containers in the Qin Dynasty
This presentation is a technical study to explore how Qin Dynasty bureaucrats attained accuracy and precision in producing and
utilizing measuring containers, through which they implanted the awareness of the Qin Empire among the populace. We hope to first
investigate what accuracy and precision meant to the Qin producers and users by focusing primarily on the measuring containers.
Establishing standards of accuracy and precision was essential in all engineering and technological projects; this was extremely
important in all grand infrastructure in the Qin Empire. We examine material features of the containers in details and attempt to ask
how the producers attained them. Whether this was achieved by calculation of the volume of each container or rapid replication of
models and/or molds of the containers constitutes our initial query. The measuring containers were also useful tools of indirectly
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   326
propagandizing the establishment of the empire. We further investigate how the Qin bureaucrats implanted the awareness of the
empire by widely distributing the standard containers and displaying the royal edicts inscribed on them. We supply the field of the
history of the Qin Dynasty with more solid evidence to see how the empire was built.
Li, Lavina [268] see Muros, Vanessa
Li, Xiuzhen (Emperor Qin Shihuang’s Mausoleum Site Museum), Andrew Bevan (UCL Institute of Archaeology, London,
UK), Yin Xia (Emperor Qin Shihuang’s Mausoleum Site Museum) and Marcos Martinón-Torres (University Cambridge)
[42]
New Insight into the Terracotta Army: Archaeological Discoveries and Post-excavation Research
Over recent decades, ongoing archaeological surveys and excavations have shed new light on the large quantity of fundamental
new data about the Qin Empire, particularly within the mausoleum complex of the Qin First Emperor. Furthermore, post-excavation
research has incorporated novel theoretical frameworks and methods. This paper is focused on the recent research on the Qin
Terracotta Army using combination of spatial statistics, material analysis, and paleographic evidence to get new insight about Qin
society, technology, individual behavior in mass production, and state level oragnization in early imperial China. The results
contribute to a renewed understanding of the Qin Empire as a crucial period of state formation and empire building in ancient China.
[42]
Chair
Li, Xiuzhen (Emperor Qin Shihuang’s Mausoleum Site Museum)
[94]
Discussant
Li, Xiuzhen [42] see Martinón-Torres, Marcos
Libbon, Jonathan [77] see Burnett, Paul
Liebmann, Matt (Harvard University)
[46]
We’ve Been Asking the Wrong Questions about Early America
For decades archaeologists, historians, and other researchers have focused their efforts on a group of particularly enigmatic
questions surrounding the European conquest of the Americas. What was the population of the Americas prior to European contact?
How many Native Americans died as a result of post-1492 colonization? What diseases caused the demographic decline of
Indigenous peoples in the fifteenth–seventeenth centuries? At the same time, these questions unwittingly served to rationalize
inequalities in contemporary Native American life. It’s time for archaeologists to turn our attention to a new set of questions that will
help to dismantle enduring myths about early encounters in the Americas. These new questions cast light on continuing injustices
perpetrated on Native Americans, the ways archaeology has contributed to those injustices, and the role archaeologists can play in
their rectification.
Liendo, Rodrigo
[102]
Ancient Population History in the Palenque Region: The Problem of the Selection of Population Proxies
The Proyecto Regional Palenque (PREP) has recorded a total of 653 sites within an area of 650 km2. Regional population ranges
from 28,000 to 32,000 inhabitants. Mapping efforts and household excavations undertaken as part of the Proyecto Especial
Palenque during the seasons of 1992–1994 identified 1480 structures at the site core with a probable population range of 6,000 to
8,000 residents. According to this estimate, population densities within city limits were quite high, 2,000 to 2,666 persons/km2, a
number only comparable to Mayapán or Copan´s estimates. What is really striking for Palenque is the difference in terms of the
sheer number and density of structures present within the site core compared to its immediate surroundings. Definitely, Palenque’s
urban core represents an environment qualitatively different from anything surrounding it. During the Balunte period (AD 750–820)
the immediate city hinterland (approximately 37 km2) was a region with an extremely low population density (25 persons/km2). The
space between main regional centers remained sparsely occupied. Using recently obtained lidar data, better chronological dating,
and new excavation information, this presentation will focus on several issues relevant to the building of more robust ancient maya
population estimates.
Lieske, Rosemary (Vanderbilt University)
[119]
Urbanism and the Conquest: Geophysical Survey at Ciudad Vieja, El Salvador
During the conquest of Mexico and Central America in the early 1500s, conquistadors exercised power on native inhabitants in
many ways, including the manufacture and control of space in urban city-centers. The grid-system implemented throughout New
Spain served as an ideological statement from which the Spanish Crown imposed new policies—political, economic, and religious—
on indigenous populations (Kagan 2000:26–28). Thus, town planning was a form of social control (Soja 1989) utilized by the
Spanish to exert and create social hierarchy within their towns. The first villa de San Salvador, El Salvador (AD 1528), known
archaeologically as Ciudad Vieja, serves as an ideal site for the study of Conquest-era spatial organization and control. The use of
geophysical survey at Ciudad Vieja has illuminated the ways in which indigenous residents were organized along the peripheries of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    327
the town. The arrangement of native space—particularly for members of the indigenous auxiliary—at Ciudad Vieja may illuminate
the degree in which these cultural groups were entangled in Spanish policy, or the ways these local allies negotiated power and
autonomy within their communities.
Lightfoot, Kent (University of California, Berkeley)
[117]
Discussant
Ligman, Michael [194] see Webb, Dallin
Lilley, Ian [188] see Lowe, Kelsey
Lillios, Katina [35] see Priola, Victoria
Linares-Palma, Adriana (University of Texas, Austin)
[151]
Contradictions and Challenges on Conducting a Critical Archaeological Program at San Juan Cotzal, Guatemala
This presentation focuses on my recent fieldwork experiences at San Juan Cotzal, Guatemala. I question how appropriate
“traditional methodologies” are in contexts of indigenous communities that have faced systemic historical violence. Given the
violence, genocide, and historical invasions that have displaced people and stolen land in San Juan Cotzal, I underscore the threads
that run through a participatory mapping of ancient settlements in Cotzal. My presence as “mu’s” (a person that does not speak Ixil,
the foreigner) created tensions and distrust among Ixil people, since I was the coordinator of the mapping project. I emphasize the
necessity of having a clear political positionality within our profession, since archaeologists still represent a threat for owners of
lands in which ancient settlements are located and also because locals associate archaeology to extractive industry in the region.
Within this scenario, I provide a reflection about methodologies and their close relationship to coloniality of power in a country in
which politics and discourses are predominantly racist.
[151]
Chair
Lincoln, Noa [252] see Peck, Katherine
Lind, Åsa [169] see Locker, Angelina
Linderholm, Anna (BiG Lab, Texas A&M), Frederik Seersholm (TrEnD Lab, Curtin University), Taryn Johnson (BiG Lab,
Texas A&M), Michael Bunce (TrEnD Lab, Curtin University) and Michael Waters (Texas A&M)
[19]
Tracking the Younger Dryas Mass Extinctions Using Ancient DNA from Cave Sediments
The Younger Dryas (YD) is one of the most well-known examples of abrupt climate change in recent history. Despite considerable
knowledge about the mass extinction that took place during this period, surprisingly little is known about the pace and scale of biotic
turnover in response to the YD cold period and subsequent warming. It has been problematic to evaluate the response to these
events due to the lack of available fossil and pollen records. To investigate the impact of the YD, a site situated south of the ice
sheet that extends back across the YD is needed. Hall’s Cave fits these requirements as it is unique Texan paleoenvironment
archeological site with a deep YD sediment layer. Due to its location on the central Edwards Plateau, where the bedrock consists
primarily of limestone, it is an excellent place for ancient DNA preservation. Based on ancient DNA extracted from a small number of
bulk bone samples plus around 100 sediment samples taken from across the stratigraphy, we can describe rapid biotic shifts across
the YD. Interestingly as plant diversity recovered after the YD, animal diversity did not. We can track the biotic shifts and correlate
them to the fluctuating temperatures.
Linderholm, Anna [244] see Johnson, Taryn
Linderholm, Anna [51] see Jones, Lauren
Lindsay, Audrey (Center for Environmental Management of Military Lands [CEMML])
[231]
3D Modeling of Rock Art Sites: Applications for Federal Management Agencies
Recent studies demonstrate how Structure from Motion (SfM) photogrammetry provides a non-destructive, affordable, and
accessible method to document and preserve rock art sites. This particular method is especially attractive for some Federal
agencies, because it requires a limited amount of financial resources to complete and produces high quality results with a variety of
uses. Vandenberg Air Force Base (AFB) in California recently initiated a 3D modeling rock art project, with the objective to build a
3D digital library for the fourteen Chumash rock art sites on base. This paper discusses how the Vandenberg AFB cultural resource
program actively employs 3D modeling for continued rock art documentation and site management, as well as explore how this
method and the resulting rock art 3D models may be used for further site monitoring, research, and public outreach.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     328
Lindsey, Zachary (Texas State University)
[164]
In My Grownup Headdress: The Iconography of Childhood and Investitures in Classic Maya Art
Proportionally-distinct children are rare in Classic Maya art, rarer still in monumental art. But images of children do exist, especially
at Piedras Negras, Palenque, and Yaxchilan. In his recent book, Steven Houston discusses a ruler of Uaxactun who may have used
his childhood as political propaganda. In this paper, I take his work further and suggest that all extant images of children in stone
represent unstable dynasties. Either their kings could not trace direct descent to lineage founders or the dynasty lacked a male heir
to serve as undisputed ruler. With this poster, I look at iconography and epigraphy of children in Classic Maya art. Rulers that used
images of children in their iconographic suite may have been performing a long-term Gramscian War of Position in an effort to
maintain their political dominance.
Linstädter, Jörg (Deutsches Archäologisches Institut)
[250]
Discussant
Linstädter, Jörg [250] see Stempfle, Sabrina
Lipo, Carl [24] see DiNapoli, Robert
Lippert, Dorothy (National Museum of Natural History), Desireé Martinez (Cogstone) and Michael Wilcox (Stanford
University)
[184]
Everything You Should Know about Indians but Were Afraid to Ask
The practice of American archaeology, and the knowledge it produces, have impacts on the social, economic, and political policies
and laws which affect Native American tribes. Recent SAA discussions on working effectively with tribes have largely focused on
educating repatriation practitioners. Non-Native cultural heritage and resource managers, academic researchers, and museum staff
who work with tribal heritage often lack basic knowledge about the nature of American Indian tribes. This poster will identify
minimum standards of knowledge including but not limited to an understanding of legal rights, tribal sovereignty, tribal lands, the
nature of THPOs, and traditional knowledge, among others.
Lira-Lopez, Yamile and Virginia Arieta Baizabal (Instituto de Antropología, Universidad Veracruzana)
[227]
La historia reciente en el estudio de las esculturas de la Costa del Golfo en el centro y sur de Veracruz: Dos casos de análisis
Las esculturas prehispánicas pueden ser analizadas bajo distintos métodos, los cuales incluyen el estudio sobre su estilo,
manufactura materia prima, la aplicación de técnicas científicas y la reconstrucción de su historia reciente. Este último, se vuelve
valioso cuando se aplica a esculturas halladas de manera fortuita y/o fuera de su contexto arqueológico, lo que en muchas
ocasiones ha provocado que sean injustamente juzgadas y tarden mucho tiempo en recuperar su lugar en los estudios
arqueológicos. Consideramos que la responsabilidad académica demanda estudios que tengan como objetivo el trazo histórico de
datos de procedencia, mediante el análisis de documentos, entrevistas y relatos a fin de resaltar y aportar información relevante
para la validación o el rechazo de su autenticidad como pieza arqueológica. En esta ponencia se expondrán dos casos de estudio
sobre la reconstrucción de la historia reciente de esculturas procedentes de la costa del Golfo: uno desarrollado en la región de las
Grandes Montañas en el centro-oeste de Veracruz y el otro enfocado en la región Olmeca al sur del mismo estado. Ambas
investigaciones tienen importantes repercusiones para el estudio prehispánico en la costa del Golfo, desde las perspectivas
arqueológica y la histórica.
Lisboa, Rafaella [195] see Burns, Samuel
Liss, Brady (University of California, San Diego), Matthew Howland (University of California, San Diego), Anthony
Tamberino (University of California, San Diego), Scott McAvoy (University of California, San Diego) and Thomas Levy
(University of California, San Diego)
[147]
Archival Photogrammetry: Repurposing Excavation Photographs to 3D Model Previous Excavations in Faynan, Jordan
Using photography to thoroughly document the excavation process is a common and long-standing practice on most archaeological
excavations. Moreover, since the advent of digital photography, the number of photos captured of an excavation has generally
increased. The Edom Lowlands Regional Archaeology Project (directed by Thomas E. Levy and Mohammad Najjar) has been using
digital photography to record their excavations since its inception in 1997. While these original excavation photos were not intended
for photogrammetry (using digital photos to produce 3D models), their rigorous photography strategy affords an opportunity to
potentially repurpose this archival data for 3D modeling. In addition, these photos captured the excavation in its original state, before
any damages of time. This poster explores this possibility based on archival photographs from the 2002 and 2006 excavations at
Khirbat en-Nahas, an Iron Age copper smelting center in Faynan, Jordan. Using an excavation into a slag mound that has since
collapsed as a case study, this poster presents the methods and results of this process along with one method for sharing this data
using virtual reality. In doing so, it provides a case study of using archived photography to produce 3D models for the preservation
and dissemination of archaeological sites/excavations.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         329
Little, Nicole (Smithsonian) and Brice Vincent (Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient)
[205]
Identification of Bronze Workshops in Angkor Thom, Cambodia
In 2012, archaeological teams associated with the Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient (EFEO) were able to uncover previously
unknown bronze workshops at the ceremonial center of Angkor Thom in Siem Reap, Cambodia. Radiocarbon dating has confirmed
the workshops were actively used during the eleventh to twelfth centuries at the height of Angkor civilization under King Jayavarman
VII. Excavations for this project are now aimed at identifying the degree of metalworking (for both bronze sculptures and leaded roof
tiles) at the ceremonial center during this important period. As a result, 251 soil samples were taken from 64 soil probes (and
several test pits) in 2016 from across the ceremonial complex for processing and analysis by ICP-MS at the Smithsonian Museum
Conservation Institute in Suitland, MD. The determination of heavy metal concentrations (including Cu, Sn, and Pb) in the soil will
help researchers locate the extent of bronze statue and lead tile production at the ceremonial center of Angkor Thom. Preliminary
results reveal concentrations of Cu and Pb in several areas in excess of 1000 ppm, far exceeding expected environmental levels.
Little, Terry [111] see McClintock, Thomas
Little, Walter
[157]
A Cultural Economy of Relief in the Aftermath of a Volcanic Eruption in Guatemala
When the Fuego Volcano erupted on June 3, 2018, it was not surprising that the greatest damage and greatest loss of life occurred on
the slopes that were well known to be the most hazardous. That two communities were completely obliterated with hundreds of dead
and injured, while an elite golf resort was completely evacuated with just one death—that of a worker—speaks to the uneven ways in
which information is shared and acted on according to class and ethnic lines. In this presentation, I use the concept of cultural economy
as a way to think about how the vulnerability of where some live can be linked to entrenched ethnic and class politics and to tourism
practices in general. In outlining how post-disaster relief plays out, I discuss the reasons why aid continues to fall short and, ultimately,
fails to address the conditions that put certain people in the riskiest places to live. What, then, is the alternative? How can risk be
reduced and more effective aid reach the afflicted in high-risk disaster zones? I conclude that the answers may be found by using
archaeological models to better understand how contemporary people can mitigate disaster into the future.
Littman, Robert [192] see Silverstein, Jay
Liu, Xinyi [61] see Diaz, Lucia
Liu, Xinyi [35] see Sun, Yufeng
Liu, Yaxiong (UCL Institute of Archaeology), Marcos Martinón-Torres (University of Cambridge) and Kunlong Chen
(University of Science and Technology Beijing)
[42]
Iron Production in State of Qin during Warring States Period: Exploration of the Technology and Its Social Impact
Iron production in State of Qin during the Warring States period has been more or less overlooked in past research. In this paper,
based on scientific examination of iron objects unearthed from the Guanzhong Plain, China, we were able to reconstruct the
technological system applied for iron production in the Qin state during the late Warring States period. The results show that the
overall production industry was well developed and standardized. Based on cast iron smelting as the primary technique to extract
iron, different techniques such as controlled mold-casting, annealing and Chaogang (fining) were developed to cost-effectively
produce an array of products for daily use, production activities as well as military purposes. The result suggests that during this
period, the Qin state was actively engaged in developing and innovating iron production techniques, which may have contributed to
the success of the unification war and the establishment of the Qin Empire.
Liu, Yu, Zhanwei Yue and Deming Kong
[94]
The Foundry Workshops and Craft Production of Bronzes in Late Shang Dynasty China (Thirteenth–Eleventh Centuries BC)
Several foundry sites were found in Anyang city, Henan province, China, which is the capital of the late Shang dynasty (thirteenth–
eleventh Centuries BC). From those excavations and many further research, we know the extent of the large manufacturing scale and
outstanding casting technology which has profound and lasting influence on the subsequent development of the metal technology. The
formation of piece-mold casting technology tradition, which is very different from mainly using the forging method and lost-wax process
in the west Asia, is closely related to the craftsman’s technological choice. Since bronzes production is a complex process, the
investigation of casting technology, manufacturing sequence, and the organization of production would contribute to a better
understanding of technology, economy, labor organization, social structure as well as cultural interaction in ancient societies of China.
Through analysis of the excavation of foundry sites and thousands of bronze vessels, the craft production of bronzes in late Shang was
studied, and the distribution and the management of the foundry workshops in Anyang were also discussed.
Livesay, Alison (Los Alamos National Laboratory)
[214]
Our Hearts Are Always from Here: Research and Collaboration at the Vigil y Montoya Homestead
Sometimes our work takes us to unexpected places. My current postdoctoral project at Los Alamos National Laboratory focuses on
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    330
the Vigil y Montoya homestead, a Hispanic-owned homestead occupied from 1912–1942, and an under-represented period of
history of the Pajarito Plateau in northern New Mexico. This research has been greatly enhanced through the chance meeting of a
direct descendant and subsequent collaboration with the local lineal descendants. This poster summarizes the recent work at the
homestead, including survey, excavation, artifact analysis, and drone work. I discuss the fascinating spatial patterns, issues with
multiple occupations, important facts learned through exchange with descendants, and even how certain artifacts can be attributed
to named individuals. Collaborations such as these are unparalleled as additional lines of evidence and have larger impacts on the
field of historical archaeology and archaeology in general; most importantly highlighting the need for and returns of collaborating
with descendant communities and constructing richer narratives of the past together.
Livesay, Alison [184] see Stewart, Carlyn
Livingood, Patrick (University of Oklahoma), Amanda Regnier (Oklahoma Archaeological Survey) and Scott Hammerstedt
(Oklahoma Archaeological Survey)
[222]
The Great Raft of the Red River: Testing Impacts on Regional Interaction Using Cost-Distance Modeling
The Great Raft was an obstruction of logs and trees that formed in northwestern Louisiana on the Red River. By the 1800s it was a
224 km long obstruction, and archaeological evidence suggests it started forming between AD 1000 and 1400. Using cost distance
modeling allowing for pedestrian and canoe travel, this paper will present the impact of the Great Raft on travel times between major
Caddo regions and sites to the east. These differences will be compared against patterns of long distance exchange to measure
whether the Great Raft had a measurable impact on regional histories and patterns of travel and contact.
Livingood, Patrick [107] see Hammerstedt, Scott
Liwosz, Chester (Mesa Prieta Petroglyph Project)
[25]
Selective Hearing: Toward a Puebloan Probability Model for Archaeoacoustic Landscape Properties Using Iconography and
Geophysical Variables
Since the first forays into the use of databases and computational analysis of rock art compositions by Leroi-Gourhan in the middle
of the twentieth century, digital archaeology applications have boomed, becoming a virtual necessity in twenty-first-century practice.
Contemporary computerized tools for managing “big data” facilitate scholars’ unprecedented capacities to archive, manage, and
swiftly analyze large volume datasets, shifting the biggest burden toward developing effective and informed attribute-based models
as opposed to compiling sufficient sample sizes. This paper proposes a set of weighted criteria for identifying culturally significant
landscape acoustics in the Puebloan Southwest based on experimental results at research loci selected from an existing database
of documented petroglyph panels along the Rio Grande in northern New Mexico. A targeted sampling strategy was employed to
sample locations suspected to have strong sonic significance, and a comparative sample of loci suspected to have little or
alternative motivating factors. All locations underwent impulse response tests using percussion and sinusoidal sweeps and were
virtually modeled in 3D to better understand the relationships of possible reflecting surfaces. Ultimately, this paper aims to improve
research and sonic heritage conservation strategies by suggesting means of sifting through the ever-increasing large datasets
available to twenty-first-century archaeoacoustics scholars.
Lizarraga Rojas, Beatriz [224] see Black, Valda
Lloyd, Lara (Mesa Community College)
[254]
From Site Tours to College Teaching: Applying Lessons from Working for the National Park Service into the Archaeology Classroom
Interpretive techniques assist with students’ abilities to forge intellectual and emotional connections to a given tangible or intangible.
Because interpretation relies on multiple methods, the variety of learning styles and backgrounds of students in the classroom
provides an ideal setting for applying interpretive techniques without placing the potential financial burden on students that may
result from field trips. Teaching about places from the classroom may also provide a sense of authenticity not available at
archaeological sites. Universal concepts such as survival and comfort provide students with a means for understanding an
unfamiliar place while allowing them to connect with past lifeways. Through interpretative techniques, students can begin to
reconstruct past lifeways with the goal of comprehending past cultures.
[254]
Chair
LoBiondo, Matthew (UC Santa Barbara)
[222]
Etowah Beginnings: New Research on the Multiethnic Origins of Etowah
Recent research has emphasized the role of culture contact as a process through which Mississippian culture originated. Indeed,
this research has indicated that Etowah’s Mississippian beginnings appear to have emerged out of interactions among multiple
different ethnic groups. Exactly who these groups were and how they interacted has remained obscure. A new project seeks
answers to these questions through the analysis of pottery assemblages recovered between 1954 and 1958, from dense middens
located in borrow pits excavated at the Etowah site. These middens have been interpreted as the remnants of large-scale-feasting
associated with the founding of the site and initial mound construction. Preliminary results reveal that the pottery from these contexts
can be linked to groups from northwestern Georgia and eastern Tennessee, with more than half of the study sample belonging to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    331
non-Georgian traditions. This analysis will advance archaeological interpretations on the emergence of Mississippian practices at
Etowah. Specifically, this research will address questions regarding the coalescence of disparate groups and how their interactions
were negotiation and enacted. Additionally, the information gained from this study will be placed in a broader regional framework
that will assist in macroscale discussions of the movement of people during the “Mississippianization” of Southeastern North
America.
Lobo, José [26] see Sandeford, David
Locker, Angelina (University of Texas, Austin), Åsa Lind (University of Texas, Austin), Fred Valdez Jr. (University of Texas,
Austin) and Deborah Bolnick (University of Connecticut)
[169]
Ancient DNA of Prehistoric Maya: Feasibility, Possibilities, and Implications for Research in the Neotropics
Genomics research has exploded in archaeological inquiry in recent years. Europe, the Arctic, and South America have provided
most of the archaeological samples included in genomic research to date due to their tendency to have well-preserved human
remains. Nevertheless, other regions have also identified questions that would be productively addressed with genomic data. The
Maya area, for example, is rich in archaeological understanding and provides a wealth of information regarding the rise of social
organization, complexity, and prehistoric lifeways; yet, preservation of human remains is notoriously poor. This has led to a severe
deficiency in ancient Maya genomics research—which might elucidate (a) the role that kinship, lineage, and descent played in the
social organization of households, communities, and regions, (b) the movement of and change within populations through time, and
(c) how the ancient Maya are related to their Archaic predecessors, other ancient groups who lived contemporaneously around
them, and extant populations. Here, we discuss preliminary mitogenome data from 49 prehistoric Maya individuals from northwest
Belize to showcase the feasibility and benefits of genomics research in the Maya region. Based on this study, we offer guidance on
methodological considerations, sampling strategies, and considerations for future research in the neotropics.
[169]
Chair
Lockhart, Jami (Arkansas Archeological Survey), George Sabo III (Arkansas Archeological Survey) and Jerry Hilliard
(Arkansas Archeological Survey)
[107]
Geophysics, Discovery, and Changing Perceptions in the Protohistoric Arkansas River Valley
Radiometrically dated to the period of European contact, the protohistoric Carden Bottoms site in the Central Arkansas River Valley
thrived for little more than a single generation. Thousands of museum-quality artifacts collected from the site over the past century
indicate stylistic similarities to several distinct, yet distant, contemporaneous native cultures. This research comprises a landscape-
scale, GIS-driven analysis informed by a site-wide, multisensor geophysical survey. These data were used to direct the complete
excavation of multiple, sturdily-built, nearly-identical houses and other archeological features that elucidate this enigmatic and
seemingly culturally-coalescent locale at the moment of impending colonization. Feature and artifact distributions are interpreted
against the backdrop of the geophysical remote sensing data that led to their targeted discovery.
Lockhart, Jami [107] see Hammerstedt, Scott
Loehman, Rachel (U.S. Geological Survey)
[117]
Discussant
Loendorf, Chris (Gila River Indian Community)
[69]
Technological Implications of Atlatl Dart Raw Material Preferences along the Middle Gila River in South Central Arizona
The middle Gila region within the Phoenix Basin of south central Arizona is an important case study for considering projectile point
raw material preferences because nearly all of the stone that was used to manufacture points had to be imported. Consequently,
examination of temporal patterning in raw material usage provides insight to changes in stone preference that are not related to
availability. These data show that higher impact strength materials were preferentially selected to produce atlatl dart tips, while finer-
grained low impact strength stones were substantially more commonly used to make arrow points. This patterning may have
occurred because the larger size of atlatl darts makes them difficult to transport, and this may have increased the importance of
having fewer but more durable weapons. Furthermore, because of their larger size, dart points could be employed for a wider range
of functions including cutting tasks, and this possibly also favored the use of more durable materials. Finally, impact energies differ
between darts and arrows, and this theoretically could also have affected material choices.
Loendorf, Chris [229] see Morgan, Linda
Loendorf, Chris [229] see Plumlee, R. Scott
Lofaro, Ellen (University of Tennessee)
[153]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      332
Lofaro, Ellen (University of Tennessee) and Anne Amati (University of Denver)
[184]
Let’s talk about a NAGPRA Community of Practice
As we approach the 30th anniversary of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990 (NAGPRA),
practitioners recognize the progress that has been made and acknowledge the vast amount of work left to be done. In order to meet
that challenge, we need to increase capacity for NAGPRA implementation, improve overall engagement with ongoing NAGPRA
work, and decrease misunderstanding and confusion still associated with NAGPRA. With the support of NAGPRA mentors and
colleagues, the University of Denver Museum of Anthropology created the NAGPRA Community of Practice to advance
implementation by bringing together people to connect and collaborate. Public discussions and a national survey have identified
issues impacting NAGPRA implementation. For example, when asked if their museum or agency was respecting the rights of tribes
under NAGPRA, 77% of museum survey respondents said yes but only 23% of tribal respondents agreed. These numbers highlight
the lack of collaboration and communication that many recognize as one of the core issues impacting NAGPRA implementation.
Learn more about the current state of NAGPRA implementation, survey results, and how you can get involved with the NAGPRA
Community of Practice.
Loffler, German
[267]
The Lurin Valleys’ Micro-politics: Ceramic Styles, Their Spatial Clustering, and Their Changing Distribution from the Middle Horizon
to the Early Colonial Period
In this paper I analyze more than 100 surface collections from the Lurin Valley in the central coast of Peru, paying particular
attention to their ceramic components. The sites span from the Middle Horizon to early Colonial Period based on temporal
association of key ceramic styles in each assemblage to known ceramics from those periods. Comparing ceramic style densities, in
time, per fixed intervalley partitions, suggests a dynamic and changing political landscape in the Lurin. It can be inferred form the
ceramics that the intervalley locations of importance seemingly shift from the low-valley—the area around Pachacamac during the
Middle Horizon and Late Intermediate Period—to the upper valley with the dominant role of Sisicaya during the Late Horizon and
early Colonial Period. The changing pattern speaks to the imperial machination influence of the Inca Empire on coastal communities
as they encroached lowland valleys.
Lofthouse, Susan [50] see Ryan, Karen
Loftus, Emma [240] see Pfeiffer, Susan
Logan, Amanda (Northwestern University)
[46]
Food Security in Africa’s Past Holds Lessons for African Futures
In this TED-style talk, I argue that archaeology is critically important to building long-term histories of African food security. Long-
term histories are important for several reasons. They challenge the notion that the African continent is a forever food-insecure
continent by recognizing the strategies people used in the past to maintain high levels of food security. They help decolonize history
by revealing the processes responsible for modern-day poverty and insecurity. And they provoke a different understanding of human
responses to climate change. Together, these insights challenge us to ask a series of “what ifs” that radically challenge what we
understand of African food security in the past and present, and urge us all to reframe very different kinds of futures.
Logan, Amanda (Northwestern University)
[114]
Discussant
Logan, Lilith [259] see Bridgman Sweeney, Kara
Lohse, Jon (Terracon Consultants Inc.), Don Wyckoff (University of Oklahoma) and Marjorie Duncan (University of
Oklahoma)
[23]
Calf Creek: An Exceptional Archaic Adaptation in the Southern Plains, North America
Starting just after 6000 cal years bp, the Calf Creek horizon appeared in Oklahoma and Texas and quickly spread to cover over a
half-million square miles in less than 250 years. Following an abrupt cold climate interval that may have been triggered by explosive
high latitude volcanism, bison herds (Bison occidentalis) expanded their rangelands from the grassland prairies of western
Oklahoma and Kansas as far south as northern Tamaulipas and along the Gulf Coast, and as far east as western Arkansas and
Louisiana. Hunter-gatherers responded to this new resource by developing a highly specialized, over-elaborated biface technology
centered around producing broad, triangular and deeply barbed spear tips (Calf Creek, Andice, and Bell types). Evidence for the
heat treatment of bifacial preforms shows repeated heating episodes between reduction stages as a way to help ensure successful
thinning and notching of these bifaces. The skill level required to fashion several of these bifaces suggests specialized production.
In many respects, the Calf Creek horizon is exceptional in terms of Archaic adaptations, from volatile climate change to rapid
cultural responses that may have included craft specialization.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     333
Lohse, Jon (Terracon Consultants Inc.)
[90]
Discussant
London, Marilyn (University of Maryland) and Adam Fracchia (University of Maryland)
[188]
University of Maryland Forensic Aviation Archaeology
The University of Maryland Department of Anthropology has partnered with DPAA since 2016 for the recovery of American MIA
military personnel. UMD faculty developed a summer field school through the Education Abroad program, with support from the
UMD Department of Anthropology and the University of Vienna’s Institute of Prehistory and Historical Archaeology. The course
includes one week of classroom and hands-on instruction and five weeks of excavation. We have taken 24 U.S. students to work on
two aircraft crash sites in Austria over the past three years. DPAA protocols are followed. Students learn archaeological techniques,
recognition of human remains and probative evidence, basic forensic science, documentation, inventory, photography, and
mapping. The faculty supervises and reviews all excavation and recovery, and provides DPAA with standardized reports, both daily
and at the end of the field season. This partnership provides students with specialized training, the experience of traveling and living
in a foreign country, and a chance to work with students from several institutions. The University of Maryland is honored to be a part
of this important recovery program, and hopes to continue the work with its annual field school.
Long, Ashley [97] see Cowie, Sarah
Longstaffe, Matthew, Virginia Chiac and Meaghan Peuramaki-Brown (Athabasca University)
[178]
Daily Life in the Periphery: Results of 2019 Excavations at a High-Status Household at the Ancient Maya Center of Alabama, Stann
Creek District, Belize
Situated in what was once a political and economic frontier zone in the eastern Maya lowlands, the ancient Maya center of Alabama,
Belize, experienced rapid settlement and growth during the Late Classic to Terminal Classic period (ca. AD 700–900). The variable
ecological and geological landscape of the region surrounding Alabama provided settlers access to a diverse array of unique and
valued natural resources, including pine, cacao, granites, minerals, and unique clays. An ongoing household archaeology study
aims to understand the role of exploitation of natural resources in structuring daily life at this community. As part of this study, results
from a test pitting program at a high-status residential group in the Alabama periphery, are presented. Over 250 shovel test pits
were excavated on a 5x5 meter grid, positioned to capture space between mounds as well as off-mound space beside and behind
structures. Excavations identified a formally prepared plaza surface, non-architectural features, and located household middens.
Preliminary analysis of recovered artifacts illuminates an array of economic, social, and political activities that took place at this
household. The presented data contributes to an ongoing assessment of how broader socio-environmental factors intersected to
guide community development at this “boomtown” settlement.
Loomis, Sarah (Harvard University)
[169]
Bloodshed and Bloodlines: Mortuary and Sacrifice at Los Guachimontones
This presentation examines the mortuary practices in excavated burials at Late Formative and Early Classic (300 BCE–400 CE) Los
Guachimontones in Jalisco, Mexico. This site, with features such as shaft tombs and circular public architecture, is exemplary of the
unusual regional cultural tradition of ancient West Mexico. An analysis of the mortuary remains found in both public and residential
contexts across Los Guachimontones reveals the lineage-based hierarchical social organization that structures symbolism and
ideology at this ceremonial center. Some burials are associated with wealth, status, and kinship, honoring and preserving the
lineages that inhabited the center. Others are consistent with sacrifice, with specific groups of individuals (e.g., warriors, the
deformed, and children) targeted for violent deaths, symbolic arrangements of remains, and possible human consumption. The
choice of sacrificial offerings and the cosmological structures seen in the burial arrangements connect Los Guachimontones to
ideologies found in the broader Mesoamerican sphere. The burials also demonstrate the emergence of a lineage-based hierarchy,
capable of directing the construction of monumental architecture, alongside sacrificial and ceremonial activities to emphasize and
maintain the power of the sacred center. These burials thus illustrate the emergence of cosmologically-supported lineal hierarchy at
ancient Los Guachimontones.
Lopez, Andrea
[228]
Where Are We Five Years Later? A Reexamination of Gender Disparities in Publication Trends in Archaeological Journals
This project builds on the work of Dana Bardolph’s 2014 gender research, where she analyzed gender publication trends across 11
major archaeological journals from 1995 to 2014, to assess any disparities between men and women in the number of publications
per gender. Her research put statistical value on what many researchers have found before and since: men had higher rates of
publication over women, often by wide margins. She argued this trend was a result of authorial behavior, not editor bias, as women
were less likely to submit or resubmit publications for submission over male peers. In the five years since it was published, the
difference in the number of women to men in archaeology has only grown, with women making up greater portions of graduate
students and professionals, and it only gets larger with every passing year. Due to recent events, both in archaeology and the world-
at-large, where light is being shed on gender inequalities and abuse, I reexamined the same 11 archaeological journals, evaluating
whether publication trends have changed in the five years since Bardolph’s survey, and where the future of archaeology is heading,
from my perspective as a female graduate student on the cusp of my professional career.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    334
Lopez, Andrea [147] see Porter, Keri
López, Francisco [163] see Hernández, Enrique
Lopez, Julieta [128] see Murakami, Tatsuya
López Bravo, Roberto (Universidad de Ciencias y Artes de Chiapas), Elizabeth Paris (University of Calgary) and Timothy
Sullivan (University of Pittsburgh)
[168]
Coming through the Borders: Fine Orange Pottery, Trade, and Politics in Central Chiapas
The Early Postclassic was a period of changes for the peoples of the western Maya frontier: Tzotzil Maya, Zoques and Chiapanecs.
Political entities located in the Jovel Valley of the Central Highlands and the Central Depression engaged in competing production
and trade spheres. Recent INAA analysis of fine orange ceramics from three archaeological projects in these regions suggests that
the Tzotzil Maya from Moxviquil produced and imported a highly diverse range of fine orange variations, using several different local
clay sources, with an emphasis on Balancan Fine Orange forms and styles; they also imported large quantities of Provincia Plano-
Relief produced in the Lower Grijalva Tabasco Lowlands. Conversely, their Zoque and Chiapanec neighbors from Chiapa de Corzo
and other surveyed sites in the Middle Grijalva produced their own Fine Orange pottery. Sherds from these sites are all
compositionally similar to each other, and do not show compositional overlap with Jovel Valley ceramics, suggesting the
independent production of wares inspired by Balancan/Provincia vessels.
López Bravo, Roberto [150] see George, Miranda
López Bravo, Roberto [196] see Meanwell, Jennifer
López Bravo, Roberto [150] see Pacheco, Ellen
López Bravo, Roberto [54] see Paris, Elizabeth
López Bravo, Roberto [203] see Williams, Megan
Lopez-Finn, Elliot (University of Texas at Austin) and Elliot Finn (University of Texas, Austin)
[84]
Subtleties in Translation: Mexica References to an Imagined Teotihuacan
By the Postclassic Period, Teotihuacan and its cultural material represented an idealized past that existed before Mexica arrival.
Archaeologists and art historians have traced the visual roots of deities like Tlaloc, Huehueteotl, and Quetzalcoatl to this earlier
period, suggesting that later artists continued to reference these iconographic programs to invoke the Classic Period and its mythos
in the Postclassic imagination. In addition to archaizing references, Postclassic works integrated imagery associated with this
ancient past in more subtle ways. The Xochipilli of Tlalmanalco offers one such case of subtle reverberations of Teotihuacan-style
imagery into the Postclassic period. The talud tablero base that supports this deity effigy is not only a clever incorporation of that
well-known architectural profile, but also a visual reference to sculpture bases found at Teotihuacan and sites influenced by its
artistic program. However, this Postclassic base also incorporates distinct geometric bands with inward-curling features, a
convention seen not at Teotihuacan but rather in material from the Preclassic and Classic Period coasts. In this presentation, I
examine the Xochipilli of Tlalmanalco through the lens of archaism and translation, wherein the artistic repurposing of Preclassic
and Classic Period visual motifs reveal contemporary understandings of an idealized ancient past.
López Mazz, José (Universidad de la República, Uruguay) and Federica Moreno (Universidad de la República, Uruguay)
[4]
Environmental management and emergency complexity in the lowlands of eastern Uruguay.
During the middle holocene (ca 5500 to 3000 years a.P) the lowlands of eastern Uruguay were subject to significant environmental
changes, caused by variations in the level of the Atlantic Ocean and climatic conditions. These changes were important and
involved high and low marine levels, as well as wet and dry climatic conditions. These changes impacted the economic organization
of prehistoric populations that had to adjust their strategies in the way of occupying the geographical space and in the exploitation of
plant and animal resources. After 30 years of research in the area, the available information allows us to explore different working
hypotheses, which allow us to understand and explain the emergence of societies with different levels of social complexity. The
study of settlement patterns and zoo archaeological information are particularly useful when studying human responses to changes
in environmental conditions and the strategic role that flood lands seem to have played.
López Pérez, Eos [211] see Johnson, Lisa
Lopez Varela, Sandra (UNAM)
[204]
Mexico’s Landscapes of Poverty Domination: Contesting Their Pertinence for Economic Growth through Impact Assessments
Memory is intimately linked with the landscape, as it creates a sense of place, by evoking people to remember social practices of
lived histories through time. In eradicating poverty through infrastructure building and welfare policies, the Mexican government is
suppressing the lifeways of indigenous communities that the government wants so much to preserve as emblematic of its identity.
The paradox between preserving their past and life ways as emblematic of Mexico’s national identity, and, at the same time,
incorporating them into a model of modernization is contested here, by revealing how the commodification of the landscape leads to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 335
the eradication of people’s social practices and identities in a small community in Morelos. The discussion states that in preserving
Mexico’s heritage, archaeologists need to incorporate social impact assessments, if the well being of indigenous communities is a
truthful interest.
Lorenz, Wayne, Kate Trusler and Jamie Akens
[85]
Mosaic Water Fountains in Pompeii
Water was a key element in the life of Roman citizens in Pompeii. Beautiful mosaic fountain structures were constructed in several
of the houses and gardens in Pompeii. So far, there have been mosaic fountains excavated at 11 locations. Some of these were
impressive in size, with the largest mosaic fountain located in the House of the Mosaic Columns measuring 12.5 feet wide by 14 feet
high. A goal of Roman urban architecture in antiquity was the use of in-house, plumbed water to foster a pleasing sensual setting.
The sights and sounds of water in the key living space areas conveyed by the mosaic fountains were used to create illusions of
pleasure, wealth, and leisure. These fountains were adorned with glass tiles of multiple colors and arranged to display images of
deities and other art. Seashells (both small conches and clams) and pumice stones were used in walls and aediculae, where bronze
and marble statuettes spouted water into cascades and basins. With water as the main attraction to mosaic structure, the design of
the alignment of piping and water pressure were evaluated in several mosaic locations, as will be shown in this paper.
Lorenz, Wayne [159] see Bernstetter, Jessica
Lorenz, Wayne [159] see Trusler, Kate
Lorenzen, Eline [64] see Szpak, Paul
Lothrop, Jonathan (New York State Museum)
[114]
Discussant
Lothrop, Jonathan (New York State Museum), Michael Beardsley (NY State Archaeological Association), Susan Winchell-
Sweeney (New York State Museum), Andrea Lain (New York State Museum) and Mark Clymer (NY State Archaeological
Association)
[190]
Powered by the Public: Investigating Paleoindian Archaeology in Central New York
Over his 30-year career as New Hampshire state archaeologist, Dick Boisvert had an enviable record of both promoting and
researching archaeology across the state. Through the SCRAP program, Dick educated legions in the practice of archaeology, while
investigating a series of important Paleoindian sites in the process. Modeled in part after Dick’s approach, the New York Paleoindian
Database Project has been actively researching the first peoples of the New York region, with a current regional focus on central
New York. Our recording of Paleoindian artifact collections held in repositories and by private individuals has permitted development
of geospatial datasets for modeling Paleoindian land-use in the region. In turn, this has led us to target specific sites for
archaeological field investigation, with fieldwork supported almost entirely by the volunteer labor of avocational archaeologists and
members of the general public. Here, we discuss our approaches to outreach and recent insights from this ongoing research on the
Paleoindian peoples of central New York.
Loubser, Johannes (Stratum Unlimited, LLC)
[60]
Hidden in Plain Sight: Hexoganol and Avian-Shaped Petroforms in the Piedmont of Georgia
When viewed directly from above with a drone, a site complex with 56 piled stone features, located on a ridge toe east of the North
Oconee River, Jackson County, Georgia, contains 16 features with hexagonal shapes and seven features that have outlines
resembling raptors. Two thin-lined incised carinated bowls that are associated with piled stone features at the site date to the Late
Mississippian Lamar Wolfskin phase (AD 1550–1670). Assessed in terms of the ethnohistorical record, the recovery of human
remains from the main petroform at the River Glen complex suggests that it was a place honoring the physically departed. The
presence of human remains and the unique shapes of the piled stone features prompted the Jackson County government to turn the
wooded plot into a green space for public visitation and interpretation.
Loubser, Johannes [60] see Simek, Jan
Loubser, Johannes [8] see Whitley, Tamara
Louderback, Lisbeth (Natural History Museum of Utah, University of Utah), Kaley Joyce (University of Utah), Stefania Wilks
(University of Utah), Lauren Lewis (University of Utah) and Nicole Herzog (University of Denver)
[235]
Identification of Ethnobotanical Genera and Families Based on Starch Granule Morphometrics
Food resources exploited by people in the past are often sorted into ecological guilds that reflect ecosystem composition (e.g., large
mammals, small mammals, small seeds, acorns, tubers, etc.). These resource categories are further ranked by energetic returns in
a diet breadth model that ultimately explains human dietary behavior. With the advent of residue analyses, many plant resources
that were invisible in the archaeological record can now be revealed in the cracks and crevices of artifacts. Adding starch granules
to a diet breath model can dramatically alter conclusions regarding what resources were available and how people behaved in a
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      336
given ecosystem. But taxonomic identification of starch granules is still a challenge as there are no comprehensive surveys across
important plant groups that have uncovered consistent diagnostic characteristics. This study aims to define characteristics for
identifying starch granules of major plant genera and families (Poaceae, Apiaceae, Amaranthaceae, Liliaceae) based on systematic
studies of granule morphometrics from modern reference materials. Although we have focused on western North America, these
plant genera and families occur across the globe and have had dietary significance throughout prehistory.
Louderback, Lisbeth [177] see Lewis, Lauren
Louderback, Lisbeth [245] see Wilks, Stefania
Loughlin, Michael [102] see Pool, Christopher
Loughran, Kailey (The University of Vermont) and John Welch (Archaeology Southwest)
[122]
Ancient (In)Security in the Upper Salt River Canyon, Arizona
Regional tension can inspire the construction of tactical sites in defensive locations, indicating community interest in monitoring
landscapes and controlling access. Geographical, site location, and architectural data provide bases for considering decisions about
why, where, and how people assert interests in security in response to inter-community or inter-regional relationship dynamics.
Terrain analysis in ArcGIS enables assessments of geographical distributions of tactical sites, spatial scales of social insecurity, and
possible relationships based on inter-visibility among sites. The spatial analysis described here uses site location data to calculate
individual tactical site’s visibility to evaluate how communities were organized around what and how much they can see. The
relationships among inter-visibility, interaudibility, and viewshed provide insights into sociopolitical dynamics. Defensibility and line-
of-sight criteria are used to understand relationships among fortified sites in the context of regional and interregional settlement
dynamics from 1200 to 1400.
Lovata, Troy (University of New Mexico)
[214]
Manito Trail Archaeology: The Role of Archaeology in an Interdisciplinary Chicanx Studies Project
The Manito Trail Project encompasses ongoing research by Chicanx Studies, English, Documentary Film, and Archaeology scholars
from the University of New Mexico, Arizona State University, and the University of Wyoming. The project records the lives of the
Chicanx diaspora who left New Mexico from the mid nineteenth through mid twentieth centuries to work, live, and sometimes
permanently settle in Wyoming, Colorado, and Arizona. The project began as a study of oral and written histories focusing on the
descendants of Manitos, but began considering material culture and attracted the attention of Archaeologists as it grew. This poster
outlines how Archaeology—when based in community engagement and recovering life stories— can play a role in interdisciplinary
research about Chicanx and Hispanics, groups not often associated with people’s view of the discipline. It considers: how
Archaeology can empower Chicanx when they have been ignored by or written out of other forms of history-making; how
interdisciplinary research can be structured; the role of educating University students in larger research projects; and the ways that a
Chicanx focus might move beyond the application of Archaeology and change the discipline’s conception of itself.
Love, Michael (Calif State Univ-Northridge)
[237]
Late Classic Occupation at La Blanca, San Marcos, Guatemala
La Blanca is best known as a Middle Preclassic center, but it also had a substantial Late Classic occupation. In 1972, Edwin Shook
identified a kiln in the southern portion of the site, which he linked to Plumbate pottery production. Hector Neff explored the southern
extreme of the site in 2005, using remote sensing and auger cores to collect more evidence of the Late Classic occupation. In 2017,
excavations further explored the southern sector, finding evidence of residential and ceremonial activities.
Lovejoy, Owen [232] see Mraz, Veronica
Loven, Jeremy [193] see Miller, Kye
Lowe, Benedict [104] see Tanasi, Davide
Lowe, Kelsey (University of Queensland), Richard Martin (University of Queensland), Ian Lilley (University of Queensland)
and Nick Bainton (University of Queensland)
[188]
Preliminary Investigations of American Service-Members in Papua New Guinea
The University of Queensland (UQ) has partnered with DPAA through the UQ Culture and Heritage Unit (UQCHU) to bring renewed
focus to search operations for aircraft crash sites in East New Britain, Papua New Guinea, that have continued intermittently since
WWII. The operation is challenging because often only a general idea of where aircraft were lost is known and East New Britain
contains some of the most extreme terrain on earth. There are also both Allied and Japanese incidents reported, so sites are not
always associated with U.S. aircraft. A small team of experienced PNG researchers recently visited East New Britain and
established relationships with local villagers to facilitate access to their lands and ask about crash sites. A larger team followed up,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   337
with results to be highlighted in this poster. This work builds on UQ’s archaeological and PNG expertise to expand UQCHU’s
repertoire beyond Australia. We envision this search will create research opportunities between UQ, DPAA, and others such as the
University of Papua New Guinea and the PNG National Museum. Such research addresses broader questions regarding
archaeological technicalities of DPAA projects and the social and political dynamics of searching for missing American service-
members in non-Western societies.
Loyless, Alyssa [26] see Klassen, Sarah
Loyola, Rodrigo [237] see Glascock, Michael D.
Lozada, Josuhé [204] see Sanchez, Fabiola
Lozada, Maria (University of Chicago), Danny Zborover (Institute for Field Research), Sylvia Cheever (Center for American
Archaeology) and Erika Simborth (Independent Researcher)
[268]
The Excavations at Corral Redondo
This presentation will focus on the results of two field seasons of excavations at the site of Corral Redondo. The aim of the
excavation was to answer the following research questions: 1) How and why did the site remain relevant through so many different
iterations of human occupation? 2) How has the presence of the site affected the daily lives of local individuals and communities
from its inception through to the modern day? 3) How were death and mortuary ritual conceptualized and incorporated within the
site? And 4) How did the rise and fall of varying political powers in the valley become reflected in the ceremonial use of the site?
Although limited in scope, our excavations revealed not only more spectacular Wari period (ca. 600‒1000 CE) and Inka Period (ca.
1450‒1550 CE) artifacts similar to those reported from the 1943 looting events, but also unexpected uses of the site in the Early
Horizon period, the Colonial period, and even up to the present. These results will then be compared to other sacred ceremonial
huacas and ritual practices in the Andes, past and present.
[268]
Chair
Lozada, Maria [268] see Silva Sifuentes, Jorge
Lozano, Beatrice [37] see Ramos Berrios, Alanis
Lozano, Sergi [48] see Fulminante, Francesca
Lozano, Stephanie (University of California, Riverside)
[84]
New Perspectives on the Teotihuacan Storm God
Teotihuacan was one of the largest precolumbian cities of Mesoamerica with extensive archaeological research. As a metropolitan
city with multicultural barrios, it has often been compared to the present-day city of Los Angeles. This paper will highlight one of the
most important gods found at Teotihuacan, the Storm God, which has been generally understood as an early form of Tlaloc. This
paper will present new insights of the Teotihuacan Tlaloc and its association to power and political authority from the Preclassic to
Late Classic Period analyzed from both the archaeological record and museum collections. Secondly, this paper will note the
Teotihuacan Tlaloc’s presence abroad in different Mesoamerican regions such as Oaxaca and the Maya area, offering new insights
into the sociopolitical relationships that occurred between the multi-cultural city of Teotihuacan and other areas within Mesoamerica.
Lu, Jou-chun (National Taiwan University)
[267]
The Different Consuming Strategies between Political Center and Port City: A Case Study of the Distribution of Yue Celadon Types
in Eighth–Elevenh-Century Japan
 In ancient Japan, the trade of Chinese ceramics started from the eighth century. The most popular ceramics among the Japanese
consumers was Yue celadon. Since Yue celadon is found with small number and limited spatial distribution of fine and coarse
wares, this type of ceramics is usually considered by researchers as a luxury good which only reflected the political structures.
Although the ancient Japanese government had priority to access trade ceramics, it could not monopolize the market. A free market
for Yue celadon still existed. Thus, besides the influence of the political realm, it is also important to analyze the consumer
preferences and how they reflect cultural and social structure. In this paper, I argue that we can understand ancient Japanese
consumption of celadon ceramics more thoroughly by analyzing their function and art style, which previous scholarship fails to
consider. This paper then uses a typology based on ceramics shapes linked with function and art style to illuminate both consumer
preferences and various consumption strategies of the political center (Heian-kyō) and a port city (Dazaifu) in ancient Japan. It also
explains the effectiveness of this research method in revealing the consumption patterns of ancient Japan.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 338
Lubkemann, Stephen, Jaco Boshoff (IZIKO Museums of South Africa), Ricardo Duarte (Eduardo Mondlane University-
CAIRIM), David Conlin (U.S. National Park Service Submerged Cultural res) and Paul Gardullo (Smithsonian National
Museum of African American History)
[273]
Toward a Transformative Maritime Archaeology of the Slave Trade: Reflections from the Slave Wrecks Project Research Programs
in Mozambique and South Africa
Drawing on work in Mozambique and South Africa undertaken over the last five years this paper examines how the Slave Wrecks
Project’s field research program, and its stakeholder engagement initiatives have come to inform each other in profoundly
transformative ways. Our investigations of specific slaver shipwrecks have compelled a re-conceptualization of notions of “the site”
itself and of research strategies for addressing the “Black Atlantic”, while also underwriting complex reconsiderations of concepts of
“heritage,” “stake” and “stakeholder,” “community”, “engagement,” and “memory.” SWP’s emerging approach has drawn from
sources as diverse as South African critiques of apartheid’s “heritage legacy” and Mozambican cultural scripts for contending with
historical violence. We reflect on the signature approach emerging from this struggle to be “ethical social navigators” in contexts
where stakeholders may disagree with researchers and each other about the past’s meanings; about the merits of, or methods for,
its recovery; and about the disposition of tangible vestiges of the lived past in the living present. In conclusion we call for a
transformative maritime archaeology of the slave trade that will challenge maritime archaeology—both analytically and as a socially-
embedded practice, critically contending with colonial and nationalist legacies that have implicitly shaped it.
Lubkemann, Stephen [273] see Boshoff, Jaco
Lucas, Virginia (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[76]
Faunal Exploitation Practices during the Pueblo II Period in the Moapa Valley: An Examination of Three Lowland Virgin Branch
Puebloan Sites in Southern Nevada
Subsistence practices of the Lowland Virgin Branch Puebloans of the Moapa Valley, located in southern Nevada, are not yet well
understood. This project examines faunal remains as well as marine shell from the Pueblo II component of the Steve Perkins site
and the Pueblo II period sites of Elwood and Adam-2 (AD 1000–1150). Previous excavations at these three sites resulted in the
recovery of several artifacts, including lithics, ceramics, turquoise, shell beads, and faunal remains that enhance our understanding
of prehistoric occupations of the Moapa Valley. Faunal analyses should reflect procurement strategies indicative of a more
sedentary lifestyle. This project aims to provide insight into the subsistence practices, exchange economies, and seasonality of the
Lowland Virgin Branch Puebloans.
Lucas, Virginia [76] see Benedict, Laura
Lucero, Lisa (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign)
[70]
Discussant
Lucero, Lisa (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign)
[127]
Discussant
Lueth, Friedrich, Sebastian Messal, Anja Behrens, Guillaume Bruniaux and Victor Legrand
[107]
Large-Scale and High-Resolution Magnetometry of a Neolithic Landscape with Megalithic Monuments in Western France:
Preliminary Results
Megalithic Monuments in Western France are embedded into a rich landscape. The size of undisturbed monuments does not allow
minmal invasive excavations. These monuments are built with large quantities of local limestone of which it is assumed that they are
quarried somewhere in the direct vicinity. At the same time it is desirable to detect contemporary settlements of which only a few are
known to date. Within the research programme MONUMEN we have carried out a high resolution (12.5 cm distance) large-scale
(800 ha) survey around two groups of Megaliths. Presentation will highlight the main results.
[107]
Chair
Luin, Camilo [130] see Vepretskii, Sergei
Luisi, Pierre [173] see Nores, Rodrigo
Lujan Sanders, Mariana [149] see Schleher, Kari
Lukens, William [8] see Ferraro, Joseph
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  339
Lulewicz, Isabelle (University of Georgia), Victor Thompson (University of Georgia), Karen Walker (Florida Museum of
Natural History) and William Marquardt (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[59]
Local Manifestations of the Little Ice Age in Southwestern Florida, USA: A Zooarchaeological and Stable Isotope Perspective for
Socio-Ecological Communities
Current research at the Pineland Site Complex (8LL33, etc.) and Mound Key (8LL2), two large midden-mound sites in southwestern
Florida, provides new insights into the anthropological and environmental similarities and differences between two different bay
systems at the onset of the Little Ice Age, ca. AD 1250. In this paper, we combine Bayesian statistical analyses of radiocarbon
dates, zooarchaeological analyses of invertebrate and vertebrate remains, and stable oxygen isotope analysis of marine
invertebrates. This provides a decadal view of the local changes occurring within these socio-ecological communities, how people
navigated these changes in the face of the global climatic shift of the Little Ice Age, and how these signals compare to the global
climatic characteristics of the Little Ice Age. Our research illustrates the need for developing localized paleoenvironmental datasets
to examine the socio-ecological relationship at a scale relative to the human experience.
[59]
Chair
Lulewicz, Jake [264] see Doubles, Catherine
Lulewicz, Jake [77] see Duguid, Danielle
Lum, Koji [100] see Vilar, Miguel
Lundelius, Ernest [19] see Stafford Jr., Thomas
Luo, Shengqiang [94] see Lam, WengCheong
Lupo, Karen (Southern Methodist University), David Schmitt (RPA), Gwen Bakke (Southern Methodist University) and
Nicolette Edwards (Southern Methodist University)
[22]
Faunal Remains from Farmer and Forager Sites in the Congo Basin in the Ethnoarchaeological Record
Archeologists have long sought methods for identifying different kinds of population interaction in the prehistoric record, especially
among groups with vastly different power structures and economic strategies such as foragers (or hunter-gatherers) and food
producers. Although zooarchaeological remains are a principle line of evidence used to identify forager-food producer economic
interactions, archeologists lack an ethnoarchaeological framework where hunted wild faunal are the main source of meat consumed,
exchanged and sold. In this paper we present comparative analyses of animal bones assemblages created by interacting forest
foragers and farmers. Analyses show significant differences between these assemblages in NISP, taxonomic diversity and body part
representation of marketable species. These results can provide an important line of interpretive evidence for the prehistoric record
where wild prey are the main source of meat for foragers and farmers.
Lüth, Friedrich [107] see Ebert, Julia
Lüth, Friedrich [107] see Ruby, Bret
Luthman, Sarah [97] see Newton, Kathryn
Lutterbach, Austin (Purdue University)
[17]
GUImorph: A User-Friendly R Package to Digitize and Perform 2D and 3D GM
Morphometric analyses of anatomical remains and artifacts are common practice in archaeology. Landmark-based Geometric
Morphometrics (GM) is a prominent approach used to quantify shape variation and its covariation with other variables. Current
theoretical and methodological approaches allow GM analyses of traditional 2D and 3D landmarks, and of important 3D curves and
surfaces representing anatomical and material structures of interest to archaeologists. Modern 3D scanning and photogrammetry
easily render high-quality 3D point, curve, and surface data. Despite these advances, many studies using 3D GM methods only
evaluate hypotheses about landmark configurations, excluding crucial shape information encapsulated in surfaces and curves. This
occurs because most user-friendly morphometric software does not conduct GM analyses of 3D surface and curve semilandmarks.
Here, we present GUImorph, the first user-friendly R package featuring a Graphical User Interface (GUI) to: 1) digitize 2D landmarks
and sliding semilandmarks, as well as 3D landmarks and sliding curve and surface semilandmarks; and 2) conduct 2D and 3D GM
analyses on landmarks, curves, and surface semilandmarks. GUImorph is easy to use and provides needed tools for archaeologists
interested in quantifying complete artifact and anatomical shape variation, and in evaluating hypotheses regarding shape co-
variation with other variables of interest.
Luzzadder-Beach, Sheryl (University of Texas, Austin)
[93]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 340
Luzzadder-Beach, Sheryl (University of Texas, Austin), Timothy Beach, Nicholas Dunning (University of Cincinnati),
Samantha Krause and Jedidiah Dale
[206]
Using Lidar and Multiproxy Evidence to Assess the Role of Western Hemisphere Wetland Farming in the Early Anthropocene
Early human land use and landcover changes influence many related earth systems including the carbon cycle, methane
contributions to the atmosphere, changes in runoff, and sediment cycles. Human-induced disruption of the global hydro-climatic
cycle in turn can influence global carbon sequestration, glacial mass balances, and sea level, all potential markers of the Early
Anthropocene. This paper builds on our three decades of research in the Neotropics on ancient wetland agriculture to focus on
synthesizing and modeling the potential influences and impacts of early wetland agriculture in the western hemisphere, based on
our airborne lidar and ground level multiproxy evidence. We will compare the current records for the Mesoamerican neotropics with
a synthesized and assessed western hemispheric record to better quantify the impact of ancient American agroecosystems on
global atmospheric inputs of CO2 and CH4.
[206]
Discussant
Luzzadder-Beach, Sheryl [59] see Beach, Timothy
Luzzadder-Beach, Sheryl [206] see Dale, Jedidiah
Luzzadder-Beach, Sheryl [230] see Doyle, Colin
Luzzadder-Beach, Sheryl [14] see Krause, Samantha
Lyall, Victoria
[109]
The Role of Precolumbian Collections in Contemporary Discussions of Identity, Heritage, and Home
Spanning thousands of miles and nearly four millenia, precolumbian collections represent a constellation of voices and communities
across time and space. As curators and keepers of these collections our responsibility lies in understanding their origins, their
journeys, and ultimately their relationship to the present. How and why do these collections relate to contemporary communities?
For many Latinx artists working on both sides of the border, precolumbian imagery remains a touchstone for a sense of place,
heritage and identity. Unlike many of their predecessors who engaged with the material formally, many artists today investigate,
interrogate, and amend the practices and vocabularies of ancient material to speak to their own journeys. Visitors connect the
collections to current events, specifically the immigration crisis and the underrepresentation of Latinx artists and materials in
museums across the country. In other words, as we consider the fate of these collections and their problematic origins, we must
keep in mind the role these works play in contemporary discussions of identity, heritage, and home.
Lynch, Elizabeth (Florida State University)
[177]
Analysis of Catchy or Punny things: Analysis of Terrestrial Components at the Page-Ladson Site (8JE591), Northwest Florida, USA
The Page- Ladson site on the Aucilla River is most well-known for its early Paleoindian and pre-Clovis components, but there are
extensive Archaic and Woodland artifact assemblages that have also been discovered at the site. Little is known about these
younger assemblages, but, recent terrestrial archaeological excavations during the 2019 Florida State University Field School
season has yielded potentially significant evidence to further our understanding of post-Paleoindian use of Page-Ladson. Shovel
test pits and other excavations have turned up artifacts such as fire cracked rock, chert flakes, projectile points, and pottery of
Archaic and Woodland age, demonstrating that Page-Ladson was an important location on the landscape for at least 14,500 years.
These materials, along with faunal materials from soil samples, are being analyzed in order to further our understanding of this
locality’s importance to pre-Colonial peoples of northwestern Florida.
Lynch, Joshua (Center for the Study of the First Americans)
[228]
Teaching Archaeology in situ: Culturally Responsive Education and Outreach on Saint Paul Island, Alaska
Archaeology has been slow to embrace on-going developments in outreach and education paradigms, shifting toward student
centered learning and culturally responsive pedagogy, particularly when working with underserved, remote, or rural native Alaskan
communities. This paper presents the results of a multiyear education and outreach partnership between the Aleut Community of St.
Paul Tribal Government and Ecosystem Conservation Office, the St. Paul school district, and professional archaeologists that
culminated in the development of two college-level intensive Arctic archaeology courses delivered to students and community
members on island in 2017 and 2018. Using hands-on experimental archaeology, object-based teaching, and hyper-local datasets, I
developed a series of scaffolded and scalable student centered learning activities tailored to incorporate cultural knowledge of native
Alaskan students and community members. The success of these education and outreach efforts is a direct result of presenting
archaeological theory, methods, and data in the context of the unique and vibrant culture of St. Paul Island.
Lynch, Paige [233] see Ray, Erin
Lyons, Natasha [1] see Hodgetts, Lisa
Lyons, Natasha [64] see Hodgetts, Lisa
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      341
Lyons, Patrick (Arizona State Museum)
[172]
Discussant
Lyons, Patrick [129] see Crown, Patricia
Lyons, Patrick [172] see MacFarland, Kathryn
Lyons, Scott (University of California, Berkeley)
[234]
Reconstructing Ironworking on the Fifth- and Sixth-Century Osaka Plain
Excavated sporadically for over thirty years, Ogata in Kashiwara City and Mori in Katano City are the largest-scale Kofun Period
ironworking sites in Osaka Prefecture, Japan. Large numbers of forging slags have been unearthed from both sites, which alongside
partially preserved hearth features, provide the bulk of evidence for ironworking. Following methods developed by French
archaeometallurgists, novel analyses of these forge slags correlate different slag materials with different forging activities. This has
allowed for more precise reconstructions of the kinds and range of ironworking activities at these two sites. This presentation
combines these new analyses with new radiocarbon dates, charcoal analysis, and legacy data from prior slag analyses to illustrate
the contrast in ironworking technologies at the two sites as well as differences in fuel preferences. Further, comparison with legacy
paleoenvironmental data illuminates the relationship between the ironworkers at each site and their local forest landscapes.
Lytle, Whitney (University of Texas at San Antonio)
[158]
The Ancestors You Choose: The Role of Predecessors from the Late Preclassic to Late Classic at Xunantunich, Group D Belize
Ancestor veneration was a cornerstone for Maya social organization and vital to the maintenance of hierarchy. As the Maya became
more politically and socially complex, ritual practices involving ancestors also rose in complexity. Critical to the concept of ancestors
is the recognition of the bond between ancestors and spaces. This paper explores the perceptions of “ancestors” through a case
study of the Xunantunich, Group D eastern shrine and adjoining courtyard. Group D is an enduring example of power reflected in
the creation and manipulation of space. The Late Classic period creators of Group D utilized the communal perception of an
important ancestral space, a Late Preclassic hilltop shrine, to legitimize a new ritual location. All too often ancestors are
characterized through kinship alone when reality indicates a multitude of definitions, manifestations, socio-political roles, and variety
of ways in which they are incorporated in ritual spaces. Using evidence from Group D, I suggest ancestors should be understood as
more complex characters which can be revered as ancestors of an entire community due to their significant contributions and not
solely based on kinship ties.
[158]
Chair
Macaulay, Carol (Baylor University)
[235]
Interpreting Food Preparation Activities within a Central Texas Rockshelter during the Early Archaic Period
The evidence of two food preparation areas, dating to the Early Archaic period, was encountered during the 2018 Baylor University
Archaeological Field School at Barnhill Rockshelter #6, a large rockshelter located in Coryell County of central Texas. One of these
areas consisted of two tethered features, a hearth and pit, as well as micro- and macro-botanical remains, stone tools, faunal bone,
and hundreds of Rabdotus species snail shell. Charcoal recovered from these features produced a mean date of 7380 BP. The
second work space was encountered below this surface and consisted of an earth oven, macro-botanical remains, stone tools, and
discarded domestic debris. Wood charcoal used in this oven produced a mean date of 7445 BP. This paper will discuss what these
domestic assemblages have revealed about the preparation of food within each of the areas.
MacDonald, Brandi (University of Missouri Nuclear Research Reactor), Izumi Shimada (Southern Illinois University), Marco
Fernandez (Bruning Archaeological Museum, Lambayeque, Peru), Michael Glascock (University of Missouri Research
Reactor) and Ursula Wagner (Munich Technical University, Germany)
[5]
Sicán Sociopolitical Organization in Lambayeque, Peru: Ceramic Compositional and Distributional Perspective
We report major results of a recent chemical compositional analysis (INAA) of ceramic samples from multiple Middle Sicán (ca.
1000 CE) sites in the Lambayeque region on the north coast of Peru that offer important insights on the sociopolitical and territorial
organization of the Middle Sicán polity. The analysis is an integral part of our cross-disciplinary testing of the multi-lineage collective
governance model of the Middle Sicán leadership. The model postulates that the polity was composed of six elite lineages that
shared the basic religious beliefs but each had its own distinct territory as well as workshops and other production setup to supply its
valued craft goods including fine ceramic and precious metal items. Analyzed samples were derived from two distant, excavated
ceramic workshops of Huaca La Pava and Sialupe as well as two contemporaneous loci within the Sicán capital, Huaca Loro and
Huaca Lercanlech temple mound complexes. INAA results point to two different ceramic supply setups (Huaca La Pava and
Sialupe) for these two temple complexes. We also compare the results with those of previously reported studies from the broad
Lambayeque region.
MacDonald, Brandi [5] see McGrath, James
MacDonald, Brandi [105] see Shimada, Izumi
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    342
Macdonald, Danielle (University of Tulsa) and Lisa Maher (University of California, Berkeley)
[171]
Leaving Home: The Abandonment of Kharaneh IV
For over 1,000 years, the Epipalaeolithic site of Kharaneh IV was a focal point on the landscape for hunter-gatherer groups, acting
as an aggregation site for Early and Middle Epipalaeolithic peoples. Located in the eastern desert of Jordan, at the time of
occupation the site was a lush wetland surrounded by a rich grassland environment, providing abundant of food and resources for
the site’s occupants. However, over time the wetland began to dry up and by 18,600 cal BP Kharaneh IV was abandoned. In this
presentation we discuss the final occupation of Kharaneh IV, linking the site’s abandonment to increasing aridification of eastern
Jordan. Environmental change is linked to social transformations and the eventual collapse of the Kharaneh IV as an aggregation
locale.
Macdonald, Danielle [17] see Buchanan, Briggs
MacDonald, Douglas (The University of Montana)
[253]
Discussant
[253]
Chair
MacFarland, Kathryn (Arizona State Museum, University of Arizona), Arthur Vokes (Arizona State Museum, University of
Arizona), Suzanne Eckert (Arizona State Museum, University of Arizona) and Patrick Lyons (Arizona State Museum,
University of Arizona)
[172]
A New Fee Structure to Ensure Repository and Archive Sustainability
For many decades, the Arizona State Museum (ASM) used a flat-rate curation model that proved unsustainable. It did not cover the
costs of reviewing incoming materials for compliance with the Arizona Antiquities Act (AAA), preparing submissions for curation, or
care in perpetuity. Furthermore, inadequate funding resulted in a storage space crisis and an intimidatingly large processing
backlog, undercutting ASM’s ability to meet its legal responsibilities and comply with ethical standards. An amendment to Arizona
Revised Statutes § 15–1631 in 2016 required ASM to develop a new fee structure that would recover all costs and ensure ASM’s
ability to curate collections that, by state law, are in its care. The new fee structure, an effort-based model, coupled with an interest-
bearing account designed to cover in-perpetuity curation costs, has been in effect for more than a year. In this paper, we discuss
two ASM offices, the Archaeological Records Office and the Archaeological Repository, as case studies, describing for each: (1) the
new fee structure in place; (2) the way the fee structure has been implemented; (3) the reverberating effects of this new, effort-
based approach to curation at ASM, and; (4) the efficacy of the new model for in-perpetuity curation and AAA compliance.
Macías, José Luis [157] see Mendelsohn, Rebecca
Macias Quintero, Juan Ignacio [267] see Martínez de Luna, Lucha
MacIntosh, Sarah (University of Nevada, Las Vegas), Levent Atici (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Sachihiro Omura
(Japanese Institute of Anatolian Archaeology)
[27]
Controlling Inherited Biases and Analytical Procedures for the Zooarchaeologist: A Case Study from the Central Anatolian Site of
Kaman-Kalehӧyük
Zooarchaeologists have tackled numerous questions to reveal human-animal interactions in time and space. In addition to
depending on animals for their primary products, that is meat, and secondary products such as milk, muscle-power, and wool,
humans have used animals to establish and legitimize status and power, and to represent ideologies, identities, and ethnicity. In
order to address such abstract concepts, however, potential sources of bias need to be first identified. In a previous paper, we
identified a serious methodological dilemma, and bias, zooarchaeologists often face when sorting artifacts/ecofacts in the field. In
our case study, bone artifacts from the Bronze Age (ca. 3000–1200 BCE) site of Kaman Kalehӧyük were separated from the rest of
the faunal assemblage; thus, taxa representation and body part percentages and ratios were greatly misrepresented in the faunal
record. This paper expands upon that research agenda by analyzing new archaeological contexts and incorporating other
researchers’ datasets. By examining more material, we aim to determine how significant the changes are with the inclusion of new
data when analyzing the distribution of principle taxa and the ratio of body parts. Finally, we probe how these new results affect
subsequent interpretations of past human behaviors at the site.
Mack, Jennifer [172] see Noldner, Lara
Mack, Karen
[190]
It’s in the Pits: New Insights into the Eddington Bend Site, Penobscot River, Maine
Eddington Bend is one of the largest Precontact period archaeological sites in Maine where people returned for over 5,000 years. It
sits 15 m above the Penobscot River on an early post-glacial terrace composed primarily of sand that offers sweeping views of the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     343
river and easy access to a large set of falls or rapids created by a bedrock outcrop to the north. Hundreds of cultural features have
been excavated at the site. A sample of 20 of them studied in 2018 shows that the features fall into five groups including shallow
trenches, shallow fire pits, deep trenches, deep fire pits and pit features. These groups do not appear to be morphologically distinct
by cultural time period. Functionally they appear to be related to fish and vegetable processing. Analysis of the faunal and floral
content of these features revealed that river herring and sturgeon were important resources. Native people were not only harvesting
river herring and sturgeon, but they may have been cultivating gourds as well. A fragment of Cucurbita pepo identified in one floral
sample was AMS dated to 3,790±30 BP and provides evidence of this cultivation. This is the earliest reported gourd cultivation on
the Penobscot River.
Mackay, Alex [11] see Phillips, Natasha
Mackertich, Samantha [35] see Barrett, Sophia
Mackie, Madeline (University of Wyoming) and Todd Surovell (University of Wyoming)
[180]
Early Paleoindian Hearth-Centered Activity Areas: Identifying Invisible Hearths and Their Spatial Structure at the La Prele Mammoth
Site
In the archaeological record, relatively few Early Paleoindian hearth-centered activity areas have been identified. This is likely due to
these sites’ significant age, poor preservation, and often short occupation spans which can easily obscure characteristics generally
used to identify hearths (e.g., charcoal staining, oxidation). However, even in the absence of these characteristics, hearths can still
be identified during post-excavation analysis of burned artifact and bone distributions. Here we apply this technique to the La Prele
Mammoth site, a Clovis mammoth kill/scavenge with associated activity areas, located in Converse County, Wyoming. The
associated activity areas appear to be domestic spaces based on their artifact assemblages which include chipped stone tools,
faunal remains, ocher, bone needles, and a bone bead. We first identify likely hearth locations using burned artifact distributions.
Then, we examine the spatial structure of the immediate hearth area using a modified ring analysis. This study offers the rare
opportunity to understand how Clovis peoples used hearth-centered spaces.
Mackie, Madeline [270] see Herron, Molly
Mackie, Madeline [244] see Ricketts, Macy
MacLellan, Jessica (University of Arizona)
[128]
Domestic Rituals in Unstable Times: The Protoclassic and Early Classic at the Karinel Group, Ceibal
The Karinel Group is a residential area near the center of Ceibal, Guatemala. During the Protoclassic period (c. 75 BC–AD 300),
similar caching rituals were carried out at the Karinel Group and in the Central Plaza, showing the group’s residents were closely
involved in public rituals. Similar domestic and public caches, often involving many ceramic vessels and limestone spheres, are
characteristic of the Protoclassic period across the lowlands. Like many lowland Maya centers, Ceibal experienced a major
population decline and political collapse at the end of the Protoclassic. The Karinel Group is one of few areas of the site occupied
throughout the Early Classic (c. AD 300–600). In the absence of a strong political-ceremonial center, the residents stopped caching
pottery and experimented with new rituals. A deposit of two decapitated domestic dogs was created. A human skull was buried with
other objects. Structure 47, a household shrine or temple with origins in the Preclassic, was buried. The residents transformed their
ritual practices and spaces along with their relationship to the public center. Interestingly, Ceibal’s royal dynasty appears to have
been founded during this time of instability.
MacMillan, Vincent [60] see Palonka, Radoslaw
MacMillan, Vincent [147] see Varien, Mark
Macrae, Scott (Trent University), Gyles Iannone (Trent University), Kong Cheong (American University), Nyein Chan Soe
(Mandalay University) and Naing Soe (Yangon University)
[28]
Surveying Dispersed Urbanism in Bagan’s Peri-Urban Zone
Throughout Southeast Asia, settlement pattern studies employed around Classical Era cities are increasingly classifying residential
surveys as dispersed urbanism. Dispersed urbanism, alternatively known as agrarian low-density urbanism, has been broadly
defined as the intermixing of both urban and rural settlement patterns and land-use. Ancient cites prescribing to these settlement
patterns exhibit larger monumental centers immediately surrounded by a peri-urban zone consisting of continuous homogeneous
mixture of settlement and agriculturally modified lands. The practice of identifying this style of settlement pattern offers an interesting
opportunity to develop new and tailored survey methodologies. In this paper, the methodological approach implemented by the
IRAW@Bagan research team to explore the per-urban zone surrounding the Classical Burmese capital of Bagan (eleventh to
fourteenth centuries CE) will be presented. Defining the linkage between the survey methods employed and the hypothesis of
dispersed urbanism provides an opportunity to not only address methods but also the concept. Methodological approaches will be
highlighted during the presentation through the preliminary results of reconnaissance, transect survey, and intensive surface
collection carried out during the 2019 field season.
[28]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   344
Macrae, Scott [28] see Iannone, Gyles
MacWilliams, Arthur [156] see Zaragosa, Gabriella
Mader, Christian (University of Bonn)
[259]
The Archaeology of Dependency: A Theoretical and Methodological Framework with an Application in Precolonial Peru
In archaeology and related disciplines, systems of asymmetrical interpersonal dependency have been mostly investigated in the
form of slavery in the “Old World” and in the transatlantic slave trade (sixteenth–nineteenth century). This paper introduces the new
concept of resource dependency, which allows to analyze types of dependency in spheres such as the precolonial Americas.
Resource dependency is defined by two significant sorts of strong structural dependency within a larger ecological and sociopolitical
setting. The first sort concerns the dependency of people on resources, which is a crucial basis for the second sort, the dependency
between humans. The methodological key for the examination of resource dependencies is a holistic approach combining several
lines of archaeological and, if available, textual evidence. Three important lines of archaeological evidence are (1) the analysis of
landscapes, architecture, and households, (2) the analysis of artifacts and ecofacts, and (3) the analysis of funerary contexts. The
exploration of resource dependencies along several lines of evidence has pronounced interdisciplinary components, for instance by
applying natural scientific analytical techniques and aspects of economic theory. As a case study serve the Palpa valleys in
southern Peru. First results are exemplified by the Formative Paracas culture (800–200 BCE).
Madrid i Fernández, Marisol [196] see Buxeda i Garrigós, Jaume
Madsen, David [170] see Des Lauriers, Matthew
Magargal, Kate (University of Utah)
[15]
Limb for Limb: Risk and Firewood Acquisition in the Southwestern United States
There are numerous dynamics of risk associated with acquiring any resource. The risk of investing time unsuccessfully, of incurring
too great an opportunity cost, and of dangers to life or limb when venturing forth all come into play. How do these different types of
risk trade-off and how does a human in need of said resource navigate these dynamics? Firewood is one such resource where
scarcity and intensity of need can combine to create a landscape of risk for those engaged in its harvest. This ethnographic study
examines firewood harvest among Diné in southern Utah. In this case, woodlands are located a large distance from home sites,
causing wood haulers to face several different elements of cost and risk in the pursuit of firewood. Using a combination of
quantitative and qualitative ethnographic data, an analysis of the risk landscape for wood haulers is presented. Given the
importance of firewood throughout human history, understanding the risk landscape of firewood will have many implications for
archaeological interpretation.
[15]
Chair
Magargal, Kate [236] see James, L. Brock
Magargal, Kate [195] see Vernon, Kenneth
Maggs, Tim [240] see Pfeiffer, Susan
Magoon, Dane (University of Leicester)
[251]
Powhatan’s Pearls: Power, Prestige, Profit, and Identity in Coastal Virginia during the Late Woodland and Contact Periods
While copper and shell beads have been focal topics within the region, as items of Native adornment and power during later
prehistory, a review of early historic accounts indicates that freshwater pearls may have been the most valued of all such
commodities, during both life and death. Obtained locally, from the expansive waters of the inner coastal plain region, freshwater
pearls may also have served as a symbol of regional identity. These pearls were subsequently targeted by English settlers as a
potential means of making the Virginia Company profitable during the initial years of colonial settlement, underscoring their
persistent presence in the historic record. In retrospect, the quest for freshwater pearls may have been a driving force behind Native
American settlement within the inner coastal portion of the James River drainage during the Middle and Late Woodland periods,
based upon a potential knowledge of former Hopewell economies, extra-regional trade networks, and the ideal habitat required by
freshwater mussels, a resource often viewed as a mere survival food. While ephemeral in the archaeological record, this
presentation investigates the presence and varied roles of freshwater pearls as contested objects within the historic record and at
archaeological sites in coastal Virginia.
Mahan, Chase (University of Wyoming), Sarah Allaun (University of Wyoming), Todd Surovell (University of Wyoming) and
Marcel Kornfeld (University of Wyoming)
[180]
Redating the Sheaman Clovis Site, Wyoming
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  345
The Sheaman site, located in eastern Wyoming near the Agate Basin site, has been represented as one of only a few Clovis
campsites in North America. However, problematic dating of the site has resulted in questionable Clovis affiliation. A total of sixteen
radiocarbon dates have been used by various researchers to argue for or against that affiliation, with some research suggesting a
younger Paleoindian Goshen or Agate Basin affiliation. This paper presents the results of radiocarbon ages obtained from calcined
bone, a relatively newly accepted method producing consistently reliable radiocarbon dates. In contexts where charcoal or bone
produce inconsistent radiocarbon dates, calcined bone can serve as a viable alternative dating method.
Maher, Lisa (University of California, Berkeley), AJ White (University of California, Berkeley), Jordan Brown (University of
California, Berkeley), Matthew Jones (University of Nottingham) and Christopher Ames (Wollongong University)
[140]
From Wetlands to Deserts: The Role of Water in the Prehistoric Occupation of Eastern Jordan
In the Azraq Basin of eastern Jordan, dramatic landscape changes from wetlands to desert resulted in major shifts in settlement and
landscape use over time. Within the last decades, several springs in the central oasis have ceased to flow, with devastating effects
for the local communities of this once rich marshland. In a similar balance between climate change and human demands on the
landscape, palaeoenvironmental research here suggests conditions have changed throughout the Pleistocene and into the
Holocene, with significant impacts on human population movements and landscape use. For example, recent work at the
Epipalaeolithic site of Kharaneh IV (and others nearby) indicates abandonment of this intensively used aggregation site with
desertification at the end of the LGM. In contrast to neighboring areas, where increased temperatures brought about climatic
amelioration, here it brought increased rates of evaporation, shrinking wetlands and leading to the disappearance of associated
resources. The occupants of Kharaneh IV reconsidered their use of this locale for large-scale settlement and, in fact, such
aggregation sites disappear entirely from the region. Here, we examine how occupants of the basin throughout prehistory
experienced similar situations to modern-day inhabitants of the region, where water is an increasingly dwindling and precious
resource.
Maher, Lisa (University of California Berkeley)
[219]
Discussant
Maher, Lisa [171] see Macdonald, Danielle
Mahoney, Maureen (Seminole Tribe of Florida THPO) and Domonique deBeaubien (Seminole Tribe of Florida THPO)
[192]
Hearing the Native Voice through the Colonial Narrative: A Retelling of Seminole History and Ancestry
North American archaeology has been plagued since its inception with colonial narratives that ignore histories that run counter to
conventional academic viewpoints. While the archaeology of South Florida originally followed this pattern, in recent years it has
become more focused on a historical narrative that is inclusive of Native voices. The Seminole Tribe of Florida Tribal Historic
Preservation Office has been working to rewrite this narrative through the intensive examination of select sites located on
reservation lands. New archaeological evidence from tree island hammocks clearly reinforces Tribal belief that the Seminoles and
their ancestors have occupied the ancestral lands of Florida for thousands of years. This paper will present the concept of a
continuous Seminole occupation of Florida, and how this is reflected in the archaeological record.
Mahumane, Cezar (Eduardo Mondlane University)
[250]
New Approaches to Protect Endangered Shipwrecks around Mozambique Island
The end of commercially oriented activity aimed at Underwater Cultural Heritage at Mozambique Island presented the opportunity to
fully assess what can still be researched and plan strategies to effectively protect this heritage following the UNESCO best practices
proposed on the 2001 UNESCO Convention on the Protection of Underwater Cultural Heritage and its Annex. In the last two years
some steps have been taken regarding research, protection strategies and the establishment of basic conditions for stabilization of
endangered wreck sites. This paper highlights some of the major activities developed at Mozambique Island in the last two years in
terms of strategies to effectively protect Underwater Cultural Heritage. These activities have been undertaken by the Department of
Archaeology and Anthropology at Eduardo Mondlane University in collaboration with international partners and the Mozambique
Island community.
Mailler, Mary and Spencer Mitchell (UC Santa Barbara)
[239]
Geospatial Analysis of Historic Maps Further Confirms Etzanoa Was Located at the Mouth of the Walnut River in Arkansas City,
Kansas
ABSTRACT: This spatial analysis applies ArcMap’s various geo-referencing and viewshed analysis tools in confirming that the site
of a historic encounter occurring in 1601 between Juan Oñate (the Oñate expedition) and native Etzanoans occurred at the mouth of
the Walnut River, in Arkansas City, Kansas. The analysis relies on a study of expeditioner’s notes discussing the encounter and two
period maps produced for Spanish officials in Mexico City—the Miguel Map, drawn by a native captive of Oñate’s and a transcription
of the pilot’s map, referred to as the Martinez Map (both dated to 1602). Bringing the two maps into ESRI’s ArcMap 10.6.1 GIS
spatial environment allows for the controlled scaling of both maps and an aligning of their geophysical features, including salt plains
and river systems, to geophysical features observable in satellite imagery taken over Kansas and neighboring states. Following this
study with a viewshed analysis of the river systems, their banks and ravines in Kansas affirms that the expeditioners first sighted the
Etzanoa settlement at the mouth of the Walnut River, in Arkansas City, in 1601.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   346
Maisel, Mary (Cardno)
[213]
At Fort Brooke Tampa, Florida, Trash Pits Are People Too
Fort Brooke, a historic fort site occupied between 1824–1882, is the most significant historic component in Tampa, Florida. Pit
features are the most commonplace remains of the fort, found in almost all Fort Brooke contexts across town, but they tend to lose
precedence to privies, cemeteries, other structural remains, or even post holes. Focusing on these pit features, we find these
commonplace remnants of Fort Brooke to be just as valuable to site interpretation, because they are often compact, discreet, and
equally as important for the materials we prize for their diagnostic quality. They can expose details about the lives of individuals
contributing to these trash pits. Wine seals, pipe stems, teapot spouts, faunal remains, shells, among others detail the material
consumption of individuals residing in Fort Brooke era Tampa.
Majere, Evelynn [82] see Gillispie, Thomas
Majewski, Teresita (Statistical Research Inc.)
[132]
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act Nationwide Section 110 Work
Work funded by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 through the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, St. Louis District
consisted of 40 individual delivery orders for “shovel-ready” projects within 18 months. The work provided the government’s three
prime contractors with opportunities to gain new experience and build relationships with every Corps District in the continental
United States, and projects were conducted in more than 30 of the lower 48 states. In addition to nearly 60,000 acres of
archaeological survey, contractors and their small business team members completed site evaluations, geoarchaeological and
condition assessments, National Register nominations, GIS analysis and modeling, curation, and other tasks, such as supporting
the Veterans Curation Project. Accelerated timelines for projects spurred development of innovative fieldwork and management
strategies to meet the government’s requirements for high-quality archaeological work and contractual accountability. The projects
also made valuable contributions to our understanding of our collective heritage, particularly in some Corps Districts where
knowledge of regional prehistory and history was incomplete. This work was a lifeline for many cultural resource management
companies during the recession, and is a testimony to the creative thinking of Dr. Michael K. “Sonny” Trimble and his staff.
Majewski, Teresita (Statistical Research Inc.)
[247]
Discussant
Makarov, Nikolai [173] see Kim, Alexander
Maki, David (Archaeo-Physics, LLC), Dianne Desrosiers (Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate THPO) and Sigrid Arnott (Sigrid Arnott
Consulting)
[127]
Thunder Beings and Human Interactions: Lightning-Induced Magnetic Remanence in the Ancient Landscape
Cultural representations and stories show lightning beings are significant forces in the indigenous worldview. In the Mni Sota
Makoce (Minnesota River region) the Dakota continue to welcome the wakinyan (thunder beings) in ceremonies recognizing them
as earth renewal forces. Magnetic field gradient survey of selected sites within this region has provided a means of mapping lighting
strikes in cultural landscapes, and the resulting data have graphically demonstrated the power that thunder beings focus at specific
landforms. Magnetic data from burial mound groups have documented lightning induced anomalies closely associated with the
mortuary landscape—both before and after construction. Within this context, this paper summarizes the physics of lightning-induced
magnetization and presents examples of thunderbird representations and burial sites associated with lightning strikes to explore
how indigenous peoples in the Upper Midwest interacted with supernatural thunder beings in their cultural landscape. Literature
shows interest in lightning and thunder was spatially widespread over a deep time span in the Americas. In some areas,
observations of lightning beings inspired people to explore magnetism, and perhaps even develop the ability to locate and map
lightning strikes. Understanding this practice can assist preservation of places where past communities interacted with, attracted, or
observed thunder beings.
Makin, Mike (Stantec)
[251]
The Problem with Prehistory: A Case for Precolonial Archaeology
Traditionally archaeologists working in the United States divide the continent’s chronology into two major periods: Prehistoric and
Historic. I argue that these periods would more accurately be called precolonial and colonial. The current dichotomy implies that
prior to colonization, there was no collective cultural memory in the region. It creates a world where Indigenous societies never
changed and people simply existed with no interest in their pasts or futures. The archaeology of persistently used places in the
Chesapeake region suggests otherwise. Archaeology sites like the Hatch Site (44PG0051) suggest history existed in the region long
before colonization. Native people came to Hatch for hundreds (possibly thousands) of years and carried out elaborate feasting
rituals. The way ritual artifacts were deposed at the site suggests a method of creating social memory that is markedly different from
the Western historical tradition. It implies precolonial people understood time as cyclical rather than linear. A different method of
understanding the passage of time, but a means of creating a record all the same. The term ‘prehistory’ is inaccurate and should not
be used when discussing America’s precolonial past.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  347
Maldonado, Antonio [74] see Gayo, Eugenia
Maldonado, Blanca (El Colegio de Michoacán)
[204]
Ethnoarchaeological Research of Traditional Charcoal Production in Central Michoacán, Mexico
Charcoal production along the region known as Bishopric of Michoacán, which included the modern states of Michoacán and
Guanajuato, as well as parts of Jalisco, Colima, Guerrero, and San Luis Potosí, in Mexico, has changed very little since the arrival of
the Europeans. The expansion of this traditional craft is linked to the development of the colonial mining industry from the early
sixteenth century to the turn of the nineteenth century. The exploitation of mineral resources, including copper, gold, and silver,
involved the use of charcoal to produce heat at numerous points along the extractive process. Charcoal makers represented a
socially and ethnically diverse group whose composition captures the complex and diverse nature of the incipient colonial society.
Today, charcoal represents an important source of energy in Central Michoacán and its surrounding regions; it is used primarily by
the residential and food vending sectors. An ethnoarcheological approach has been developed combining systematic research of
written and oral data, as well as archaeological evidence, to investigate charcoal production in the region, and generate a historical
and current assessment. The purpose of this paper is to present the preliminary results of this ongoing research.
Malhi, Ripan [82] see Lanoë, François
Malin-Boyce, Susan [132] see Smith, Mark
Mallick, Soumen [50] see Bielenberg, Aliosha
Malo, Erika (Project Archaeology), Courtney Agenten (Minnesota Project Archaeology), Jennifer Knutson (University of
Western Florida) and Erin Pritchard (Tennessee Valley Authority)
[193]
School of Rock Art! Getting CRM into the Classroom
Project Archaeology is a nationwide K-12 archaeology education program. A major part of the program is the creation of inquiry-
based curricula and its delivery through professional development. These aspects of Project Archaeology are supported through
multiple avenues, including mitigation. Curricular materials provide an opportunity to produce mitigation and outreach products that
give back to communities on a long-term basis. These materials can encourage archaeological stewardship and cultural
understanding while building relationships between agencies and communities and fulfilling classroom needs. Descendant
community members, archaeologists, and educators are essential participants in making powerful curricular materials. In 2016,
Project Archaeology and the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) embarked on a public outreach project—Project Archaeology:
Investigating Rock Art and its regional investigation, Investigating Painted Bluff. This was a completely new third through fifth grade
curriculum series. The project continues with workshops being offered annually and the curriculum message of preserving our
shared archaeological heritage is being taught in classrooms in Alabama and throughout the nation.
Mandel, Rolfe (Kansas Geological Survey), Mark Mitchell (PaleoCulture Research Group) and Michele Koons (Denver
Museum of Nature & Science)
[198]
Geoarchaeology of Magic Mountain (5JF223): A Stratified Site on the Front Range of the Southern Rocky Mountains, North-Central
Colorado
The Magic Mountain site (5JF223) in Golden, Colorado has long been recognized as one the most important stratified
archaeological sites on the Front Range of the Southern Rocky Mountains. For decades, the site’s well-preserved middle and late
Holocene record served as a comparative touchstone for systematizing the archaeological record of the South Platte River Basin.
Early, Middle, and Late Archaic artifacts have been recorded at Magic Mountain, but the site’s richest and most extensive cultural
deposits represent multiple Early Ceramic period occupations dating to ca. 1800–800 BP. Although archaeological investigations
have focused on the Early Ceramic record, recent geoarchaeological investigations at Magic Mountain revealed potential for
stratified Early Archaic and Paleoindian cultural deposits at the site. A buried landscape marked by a prominent paleosol developed
in alluvium occurs beneath a 1.8 m thick mantle of colluvium. Radiocarbon ages determined on soil organic matter (SOM) indicate
that the paleosol was buried soon after ca. 9000 BP, and temporally undiagnostic artifacts occur on and within the paleosol. This
paper describes the stratigraphy, geochronology, depositional environments, and paleopedology of the site, and the results of δ13C
analysis of SOM are used to infer bioclimatic change for the period of record.
Mandel, Rolfe (Kansas Geological Survey)
[219]
Discussant
Mandel, Rolfe [8] see Niquette, Richard
Mangado, Xavier [30] see Sánchez de la Torre, Marta
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      348
Mann, Abby
[160]
Humanizing the Past through Human-Canine Interactions in the Maine/Maritime Region: An Archaeological Case Study from the
Holmes Point West Site in Machiasport, Maine
Archaeologists are challenged with humanizing their research, a task complicated by the sometimes-arcane nature of our work.
Indigenous communities and local stakeholders are often excluded, a result of long-standing exclusionary practices in academic
research and colonization of archaeology by western institutions. Examining the past through the lens of communities offers a
bridge between empirical and community-oriented archaeologies. Burial contexts are rich in evidence about the past and provide
insight into cultural practices, dietary trends, individual and community choices, and interspecies interactions. This study explores
human-canine interactions in the Maine/Maritime region through analyses of δ13C and δ15N isotopic ratios for past dietary
information. Evidence from two individually interred dogs at Holmes Point West in Machiasport, Maine, are used as an analogy for
human diet, following the Canine Surrogacy Approach (CSA). Stable isotope analysis complements traditional lines of evidence,
including faunal, ethnographic, and spatial. Excavation and analyses of materials was completed in partnership with the
Passamaquoddy Tribe, Maine Coast Heritage Trust, and the landowner. Ultimately, this project seeks to develop educational
products for explicit use by community stakeholders invested in cultural heritage of the site, accomplished by combining empirical
and community-oriented archaeologies to provide more holistic interpretations of the past.
Manning, Sturt [12] see Birch, Jennifer
Manunza, Maria Rosaria [196] see Day, Peter
Manzanilla, Linda (U Nacional Autónoma de Mexico)
[10]
The Palace of Xalla at Teotihuacan: An Overview of a Multifunctional Palace
The palace of Xalla is located between the pyramids of the Sun and the Moon. It is a 55,000 m2 palatial complex with plazas, structures,
rooms, porticoes, and patios surrounded by a double wall for patrol walk. It has been excavated extensively by Linda R. Manzanilla and
her team from 2000 to 2019–2020, particularly in the central portion of the palace. Different functional sectors have been identified: (1)
An important ritual sector in the center of the palace, with four equivalent structures surrounding a temple. Each of these structures is
dedicated to a different deity: the Thunder God, the Fire God, the Mountain God, and the Goddess of Flowing Waters; (2) To the south,
there is a huge plaza devoted to craft-production, and in the northeast, to the military guard of the palace; (3) An important domestic
sector was identified from 2012 to 2019 between the ritual sector and the craft-production sector; (4) To the northwest, there is an
important ritual tumulus that displays a wide variety of faunal remains, as well as many sumptuary goods. It also displays the treasuring
of mica plaques. I will emphasize the possibility that this palace housed two of the co-rulers of Teotihuacan.
[10]
Chair
Manzanilla, Linda [10] see Beramendi-Orosco, Laura
Manzano, Bruce, David Pollack and A. Gwynn Henderson
[129]
Fort Ancient Village Wild Turkey (Meleagris gallopavo) Management
Birds, and in particular turkeys (Meleagris gallopavo), were an important component of the Fort Ancient diet, often accounting for
about 4% of the meat consumed by village residents. Our research focuses primarily on the humerus, as it is an element that is
easily identified, sexual dimorphic by size, and rarely modified like other wild turkey leg and wing elements. Our analysis of turkey
humeri recovered from two large Fort Ancient villages in the middle Ohio Valley documented two different turkey exploitation
patterns. One, which we refer to as the Buffalo Pattern (46Pu31; n = 277 humeri) involved taking relatively equal numbers of males
and females. The other, which we refer to as the Fox Farm Pattern (15Ms1; n = 264 humeri), involved taking more than twice as
many males as females. Previously, we have argued that taking more males (Fox Farm Pattern) reflects the management of the
turkey flock in the vicinity of villages with long and continuous occupational histories. In this paper, we report on our analysis of
turkey bones, and in particular the humeri, from several other Fort Ancient villages, characterizing their turkey exploitation patterns,
and interpreting Fort Ancient bird subsistence strategies.
Manzano, Bruce [254] see Bonzani, Renee
Marceaux, Paul (University of Texas-San Antonio)
[113]
Discussant
Marchant, Robert [74] see Joly, Delphine
Marciniak, Arkadiusz (Institute of Prehistory, University of Poznan)
[199]
The Origin of Cattle and the Changing Forms of Cattle-Based Agriculture in the Neolithic of the Polish Lowlands
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    349
Cattle was the most important domesticated animal in the Neolithic of the Polish lowlands. Different proxies of unspecified heuristic
potential such as settlement location, ethnographic analogies, species composition have been used until very recently to reconstruct
the character of cattle husbandry in the Neolithic. The nature of this evidence, in addition to a lack of any in-depths reflection on the
complexion of husbandry practices, made these reconstructions largely inadequate, simplistic and superficial. The paper aims at
presenting the objectives and preliminary results of the ongoing project aimed at reconstruction of major facets of cattle husbandry
practices as well as forms of exploitation and use of this animal by the Neolithic farmers from the Polish lowlands. The objectives of
the paper are twofold. Firstly, it intends to scrutinize the place of origin of domestic cattle and the introduction of cattle-based
agriculture in the Polish lowlands. Secondly, it aims at presenting the changing character of cattle husbandry, as an outcome of
husbandry traits of different cattle breeds, throughout the studied period. The paper will also outline the adopted multi-proxy faunal
and archeogenomic approach to achieve the advocated goals.
Marciniak, Arkadiusz [199] see Kuijt, Ian
Marcone, Giancarlo (University of Engineering and Technology [UTEC])
[32]
Discussant
Marcone, Giancarlo (University of Engineering and Technology [UTEC]), Camila Capriata and Nina Castillo (Proyecto
Qhapaq -Ñan)
[224]
The Tale of Two Valleys: The Inka Restructuration of Territories in the Peruvian Central Coast as Viewed from the Lurin and Cañete
Valleys
How do territories form and transform? The study of the occupation of the Peruvian central coast and the formation of social groups
along with the understanding of Inka impacts could help us to answer this question. The present paper seeks to unveil local and
regional strategies that can give us a hint about how identities, polities and social organizations transform intentionally or
unintentionally in these contact years. This paper seeks to present a comparative reconstruction of the late period occupations and
their transformation after the Inka arrival in the Lurin and Cañete valleys based in several recent projects in the area. The available
data shows that the Inca presence brought a reformulation of territorial organizations at the regional and local (valley) level. Main
regional “Ischma” elites saw, at the same time, in one side challenges from local populations in their hinterland (Lurin Valley), on the
other fortify their ties and authority over local elites like the Guarcos (in the Cañete Valley). Sociopolitical interactions are
multidimensional in a region, even inside a valley. We think it is only possible to understand the effects of Inca society on local
populations by examining the phenomenon at larger scales than just a valley.
Marcone, Giancarlo [105] see Castillo, Nina
Marean, Curtis [55] see Coon, Sarah
Marean, Curtis [38] see Fahey, Brian
Marean, Curtis [38] see Martin, Miles
Marean, Curtis [5] see McGrath, James
Marek-Martinez, Ora [184] see Ekdahl, Amanda
Marengère, Véronique (Université Laval; Centre d’études nordiques), Kevin Smith (Haffenreffer Museum, Brown University)
and James Woollett (Université Laval, Centre d’études nordiques)
[50]
What Does a Fire Giant Eat? A Zooarchaeological Analysis of Surtshellir’s Burnt Faunal Remains
In the ninth and tenth centuries CE, a very distinctive and unique site was established inside the cave of Surtshellir. This lava tube
was reputed to be the home of the mythological fire giant, Surtur and has been studied over the course of several years by a team
led by the Haffenreffer Museum (Brown University), Þjóðminjasafn Íslands and Minjastofnun Íslands. Within this cave, various and
unique artifacts have been found alongside massive piles of faunal remains and burnt bone fragments associated with a boat-
shaped structure made of stone. This paper will report on ongoing analyses of burnt bone remains found inside Surtshellir during the
2013 campaign. Through experimental archaeology and analysis of taphonomic traces, the study seeks to determine how faunal
remains were treated. Through correspondences between their spatial distribution and the artifacts found on site, we will also
attempt to evaluate current hypotheses regarding the use of burnt animal bones. Are they remnants of ritual offerings and sacrifices
made to Surtur, leftover meals or were they simply used as fuel?
Marengo, Nelda (University of California, Riverside) and Mónica Rodríguez (Bioarchaeology Lab, UADY)
[225]
Mortuary Bundles, Decapitations, and Head Cosmograms: A Postclassic Period Funerary Assemblage from Vista Alegre, Quintana
Roo, Mexico
During the 2016 field season, the Costa Escondida Project (directed by Jeffrey Glover, Georgia State University; Dominique Rissolo,
University of California, San Diego) participants and UADY personnel jointly excavated a Postclassic period primary burial from the
site of Vista Alegre. All anatomic segments were registered on-site, following the methods of archaeothanatology, which are geared
toward understanding integrally the complex mortuary sequence that produced this assemblage, including the form of its funerary
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    350
space and type of wrap, the taphonomic timing of a subsequent entry event, when two severed heads and two mandibles were
deposited with the primary burial. Subsequently, the context was radiocarbon-dated and a 3D model developed using Structure from
Motion software. Bioarchaeological scrutiny determined a primary burial of a wrapped and seated female. Both skulls, one belonging
to a male individual, the other to a female, held their first vertebras still articulated with the lowest one displaying chop marks.
Delineating an embodied cosmogram, the male head had been placed facing up and the female one facing down. By comparing this
case study from Vista Alegre with others from the Yucatán Peninsula and beyond, we argue that head placements of this kind were
part of broader late Maya mortuary traditions.
Marengo, Nelda [189] see Romero, Ashuni
Margotta, James (Wheaton College Massachusetts) and Maxwell Forton (Binghamton University)
[122]
This Was Never Wilderness: An Archaeological Survey in Gila National Forest
For the past two field seasons the Upper Gila Preservation Archaeology (UGPA) field school, run jointly by Archaeology Southwest
and the University of Arizona, has conducted archaeological surveys of Lincoln Canyon in Gila National Forest. These surveys have
established the rich cultural history of this canyon, ranging from the Archaic to Historic time periods. While the collected data is
typical of southwest New Mexico sites, such surveys have greater implications beyond the tangible record. Archaeological survey of
Lincoln Canyon reveals that site data is useful for heritage management by the Forest Service and deconstructs false narratives of
untouched virgin nature. This poster presents the results of the UGPA Lincoln Canyon survey and examines the canyon’s place in
heritage discourse, especially in the lens of archaeological ethics, institutions of cultural heritage, and discussions on the greater
Southwest/Northwest.
Marin, Liliana [8] see Tew-Todd, Victoria
Marino, Marc (University of Arkansas) and Wesley Stoner (University of Arkansas)
[168]
Things We Know Because of Ron: Bishop’s Impact on the Field of Archaeological Materials Science
Ron Bishop is nothing short of a pioneer in archaeological science. Today, hundreds of archaeologists working around the world
owe much of what they do to Ron’s methodological and empirical contributions in the realm of materials science. He has personally
co-authored research with over 100 other researchers. Through this presentation we revisit some of Ron’s greatest contributions,
and demonstrate how our own research and teaching (and that of others) has benefited from the advances he continues to make
every year. We divide this talk into three parts: the history of Ron’s emergence into archaeological materials science, his
methodological contributions to the archaeological study of ceramics, and his impact on Mesoamerican archaeology.
Marion, Sandra [97] see Higgins, Howard
Mark, Robert (Ruperstrian CyberServices)
[95]
Discussant
Marken, Damien (Bloomsburg University), Matthew Ricker (North Carolina State University) and Robert Austin (North
Carolina State University)
[130]
Filled to the Brim: Estimating Lowland Maya Reservoir Capacities by Combining Survey, Soil Cores, and GIS
One of the limiting factors to settlement aggregation in the Maya lowlands is the availability of potable water. With few perennial
surface rivers and lakes, the ancient Maya collected water from rainfall for consumption. In areas with high population densities,
such as Classic period cities, this required engineering the built landscape to funnel water for collection and storage to various types
of basins and formal reservoirs. This paper presents the results of a multi-year project collecting and analyzing surface and
subsurface topographic data to improve methods for estimating the capacities of these water catchment features at the Classic
Maya city of El Perú-Waka’, Petén, Guatemala. Typically, reservoir capacity estimates in the Maya area rely upon mapped surface
topography to estimate storage volumes and occasionally employ subsurface excavations to increase depth measurements. The
present study integrates data from terrestrial and lidar mapping with soil core transects to model the subsurface topography of a
sample of reservoirs with GIS tools to more accurately estimate holding capacities at or near their time of use.
Marken, Damien (Bloomsburg University)
[155]
Discussant
Markin, Julie [184] see Chisholm, Amelia
Marks, Theodore [18] see Hollingshead, Analise
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 351
Marks, Theodore [222] see Ostahowski, Brian
Marquardt, William (University of New Mexico, United States Forest Service)
[192]
Ephemeral Archaeologies: Reconstructing a Single Occupation CCC Camp in Garfield County, Washington
Archaeological interpretations of temporary workers’ camps from the late-nineteenth to mid-twentieth centuries are greatly aided by
historical documents, oral accounts, and photographic evidence. This paper combines surface archaeological data with
documentary evidence to reconstruct a large Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) work camp that was occupied for a single summer
in 1933 on Mt. Misery, Garfield County, Washington. While the CCC indelibly changed how public lands are used in the United
States through the construction of thousands of administrative buildings, campgrounds, roads, and trails in National Parks and
National Forests across the country, their camps were intended to be temporary and were frequently demolished after
abandonment, impacting future archaeologists’ ability to conduct research on these sites. Despite the brief occupation history of the
Mt. Misery Camp and the demolition of most of the surface structures on the site, fieldwork conducted by the Umatilla National
Forest and the Youth Conservation Corps in the summer of 2019 uncovered a wealth of archaeological data that provides valuable
insight into how CCC camps were organized and the lives of the people who built the modern National Forest system.
Marquardt, William [59] see Lulewicz, Isabelle
Marques, Aguinaldo [161] see Kipnis, Renato
Márquez Ramírez, Danitza (University of Bonn)
[259]
Land Ownership in Colonial Peru: Interrelated Dependencies as Seen through the Archival Records
In pre-colonial Peru, the management of resources was exercised by local chiefs to ensure their redistribution and facilitate wellness
for their communities. Therefore, concepts such as “ownership” or “property” related to land tenure introduced by the European
colonizers in the sixteenth century caused major upheaval for the Andean societies, since their “land rights” were only valid after
Spanish legal acknowledgment that allowed individuals to exercise “ownership” and the access to agricultural and livestock regional
markets and thus, economic wellness, which consequently made them dependent on the lands they could usufruct. Nevertheless,
this dependency became “strongly asymmetrical” when the Spanish authorities favored the interests of indigenous elites while
undermining those of the Indian commoners, whose condition within the Colonial system was defined in terms of tributary labor
coercion, similar to the slavery system. Through the hermeneutic analysis of archival records (e.g., wills, lawsuits, land
compositions, visitations) this paper aims to analyze long-lasting conflicts regarding land tenure and proposes a comprehensive
approach from the perspective of asymmetrical and interrelated dependencies on natural resources, the spatiality of lands, and
Spanish legal recognition. The case study is developed after written documents related to the province of Cajamarca in northern
Peru (sixteenth–eighteenth centuries).
Marreiros, João [162] see Chu, Wei
Marsh, Erik [243] see Carline, Kristin
Marshall, Lydia Wilson (DePauw University)
[97]
Toward a More Collaborative Archaeology in Eastern Africa
Archaeology developed in Eastern Africa under a colonialist framework. Geopolitical power imbalances continue to affect
archaeological practice there today. For example, because of their easier access to funding, European and American archaeologists
have disproportionate power in setting the research agenda in the region. This paper considers two alternate strategies for seeking
a more collaborative approach to archaeology in Eastern Africa. The first, which I practiced in the study of nineteenth-century
fugitive slave communities in Kenya, focuses on the collection of oral histories and community input in site interpretation. The
second, taken up more recently in the study of slaving in southern Tanzania, locates collaboration earlier in the research process. In
this model, collaboration begins at project design and includes Tanzanian archaeologists as full research partners. This paper
argues that a truly collaborative approach is only possible when Eastern African archaeologists’ expertise and research interests
undergird project design.
Martal, Clementine and William Pratt (University of Texas, Austin)
[201]
Live in the Layers: Complex Earthen Architecture at Cochasquí
Investigations began at Cochasquí in 2017 to examine the construction techniques used to build Pyramid G, the largest pyramid at
the site. Previous excavations along with the more recent work on Pyramid G suggest that the pyramids were constructed over
several phases representing sequential occupations. Though commonly thought of as simply piles of dirt taken from the surrounding
landscape, the pyramids at Cochasquí demonstrate a remarkable level of internal organization with very particular sediments
chosen and used in particular ways. Alternate layering of sediments is seen in large portions of fill with loamy or more clay-rich
sediments interspersed by gravelly pumice. The tendency for these layers to correspond well to other architectural features such as
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     352
cangahua walls suggests that they are intentional architectural features rather than accidental artifacts of construction. Earthen
floors composed of a combination of sediment types, interspersed between zones of organized fill, appear to have been mixed and
potentially processed in a variety of ways. The careful analysis of sediments indicates that large portions of the pyramid were
meticulously constructed with individual basket loads of different sediments intentionally placed in their proper place suggesting that
these massive structures may be much more complex than previously realized.
Martí Gil, Irene
[186]
Fighting the Antiquities Black Market: Analysis of the Twenty-First-Century Illegal Trade in Antiquities and the Legal Framework to
Deter It
This poster presents an approximation to the PhD dissertation currently being developed and the results obtained by April 2020. The
research project examines the suitability of the international legal framework for the protection of cultural heritage against antiquities
trafficking. The illegal trade in antiquities, as any criminal activity, is subjected to a constant process of transformation to escape
detection and punishment. In recent decades, it has adapted to the increasing shift toward e-commerce and online networking to
expand, democratize, and sophisticate their strategies and niche market, for which the enforcement of the available cultural heritage
laws are proven to have fallen short. Hence, the goal is to define the transformations that the traffic of antiquities has experienced
with the rise of Internet by conducting literature research and web-based fieldwork to generate first-hand data on the twenty-first
century antiquities market, and evaluate whether the legal shield is appropriate to accomplish its goals. For the latter purpose,
discourse analysis, critical discourse analysis, comparative analysis, and conceptual analysis will be undertaken on domestic and
international legal corpora, official documents and a variety of significant legal case-studies, to both identify the existent legal
shortcomings and reformulate the heritage policies accordingly.
Martin, Debra (University of Nevada/Las Vegas)
[131]
Discussant
Martin, Debra (University of Nevada/Las Vegas) and Ryan Harrod (University of Alaska, Anchorage)
[210]
Inequality at Chaco Canyon (AD 900–1150): Creating Subordinates through Coercion and Fear
There has been debate about the degree of complexity and hierarchy present in the pre-contact Southwest cultural region. Recent
analyses have revealed evidence that Ancestral Pueblo communities in the San Juan Basin established and maintained a politically
complex society with at least some inequality, especially at major sites in Chaco Canyon located in north-central New Mexico. Site
layout, mortuary context, isotopic analysis, reconstructions of biological identity, health, trauma data, and genetic relationships all
support the idea that some members of the Ancestral Pueblo groups were higher in status than others. We argue that the
development of inequality was achieved through social control and coercion, and that various forms of indirect and direct violence
were entwined with political strategies used to regulate and extract labor from large numbers of people. Additionally, ethnohistoric
and archival data from Pueblo informants and their Athabascan neighbors suggest that the development of high status leaders was
not a gradual process but something that both began and ended rapidly. This is in line with the archaeological and biological data
analyzed at Chaco sites. By manipulating ideological beliefs and controlling key rituals, some gained authority and power over
subordinate subjects who were denied access to resources.
Martin, Debra [131] see Ralston, Claira
Martin, Erik (Far Western) and Chelsea Karthauser (Far Western)
[5]
Variation in Occupational Intensity and Mobility at Upland Springs in Arid Northwestern Nevada.
Far Western recently completed test excavations and data recovery at several upland springs in northwestern Nevada, documenting
hearth features, flaked and ground stone tools, faunal remains, and thousands of pieces of debitage. Here we examine both from
where and when the spring sites were occupied. XRF toolstone sourcing analysis data is compared to other regional datasets to
examine trends in toolstone acquisition and implied regional mobility. Next, series of historical satellite imagery measuring
vegetation abundance is analyzed as a proxy for spring drought resilience. Using obsidian hydration frequencies at sites to
reconstruct occupational intensity, we compare trends in site occupation, spring drought resiliency, and regional population
dynamics.
Martin, Fabiana (CEHA-UMAG)
[270]
The Cueva del Milodon Collections Stored at the Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom
Among the many Late Pleistocene faunal collections from Southern Patagonia, those obtained at Cueva del Milodon, southern Chile
are particularly important. The main reason is the excellent preservation of Late Pleistocene faunal remains, including soft tissues,
but also their significance in terms of several processes like the extinction of Late Pleistocene faunas, the subsistence of the first
inhabitants of Southern Patagonia and the paleocological conditions under which those processes were taking place. Some of those
collections were obtained at the turn of the twentieth century, and sold in Europe. In spite of the absence of information about the
recovery process, those faunal collections are extremely useful. We present a study of the collections stored at the Natural History
Museum, London, and indicate in which ways those remains impact current excavations and studies going on at Cueva del Milodon.
Martin, Fabiana [119] see Morello Repetto, Flavia
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     353
Martin, Jennifer
[175]
Artifact Illustration Using Camera Lucida Technology: A Guide for Researchers
Artifact illustration is an expensive and time-consuming process. As a result, only a select few artifacts will be illustrated from a large
collection. While Photography and 3D Modeling have made great advances in disseminating information, they do not always convey
the information a researcher wishes the audience to see. For this paper, I examine the use of a seventeenth-century technology
which has been brought into the twenty-first century by means of a smartphone application. I provide a simplified guideline for using
this technology. The use of the camera lucida has proven to increase speed and accuracy in producing artifact illustrations with the
goal of lowering cost so researchers may share more information with the scientific community.
Martín, Juan Guillermo [196] see Iñañez, Javier
Martin, Lois (Fordham University)
[2]
Symmetries of Corn and Cloth in the Ancient Americas: Pattern Generation, Botany, and the Maize Matrix
Several precolumbian royal garments with simple, repeating geometric designs have explicit associations to maize, and hint at a
deep significance to the cloth pattern—corn plant connection. In the Andes, Inca Coyas (noble women) wore special woven belts
during the annual Corn-planting ceremony. Sophie Desrosiers deciphered Murúa’s colonial-era code for the belt pattern in the
1970s, replicated the design, and located a few museum specimens. In 2002, Lynn Meisch encountered weavers in highland
Ecuador still producing almost identical “Sara” belts, named after the “Mama Sara,” an oversized corncob. In Mesoamerica, likewise,
the Aztec tlatoani (king) wore a blue-green mantle with a dotted diamond grid design (xiuhtlapilli tilmatli); it belonged to a maize-
inspired panoply of regalia worn and wielded by Mesoamerican sovereigns for millennia, including sprout-shaped crowns, leaf-like
quetzal plumes, dewdrop-like jade beads, and cob-like greenstone celts. Aztec maize goddesses and their impersonators wore
similarly decorated fabrics, but in white or reddish tones. Maize was fundamental to precolumbian societies, so regents sought to
associate themselves with its promise through dress. This investigation addresses the multiple visual, dynamic, and metaphorical
correspondences that link these textile patterns to maize, especially to the mutated and twinned cobs symbolic of extraordinary
potency.
[2]
Chair
Martin, Miles, John Murray (Arizona State University), Jacob Harris (Arizona State University) and Curtis Marean (Arizona
State University)
[38]
Heat Treatment of Silcrete during MIS 5 to 4 Transition at Pinnacle Point, South Africa
The heat treatment of stone tools marks a key technological advancement in early human cognition. Some of the earliest evidence
for this is in the archaeological record at the Middle Stone Age (MSA) site Pinnacle Point 13B in South Africa around 164,000 years
ago (ka). By approximately 70 ka, heat-treated silcrete is found throughout South Africa. This increase in silcrete use corresponds to
the MIS 5 to MIS 4 transition and the eruption of the Toba super-volcano. In this research, we investigate the role of heat treatment
in the production of stone tool technologies across the MIS 5–4 transition. We accomplish this using a new method to identify heat
treatment that combines surface roughness, 3D microscopy, and Bayesian modeling. Our analysis consists of 143 silcrete artifacts
from sub-aggregates that correspond to this transition at the MSA site of Pinnacle Point 5–6. Our results have implications for MSA
hunter-gatherer technological strategies during a glacial transition.
Martin, Miles [38] see Carroll, Peyton
Martin, Richard [188] see Lowe, Kelsey
Martin, Samuel, Dominique Langis-Barsetti (University of Toronto), Joseph Lehner (University of Sydney), Emre
Kuruçayirli (Bogaziçi University) and Nicolle Hirschfeld (Trinity University)
[175]
Investigating Copper Ingot Production in the Bronze Age Mediterranean Using 3D Derived Measurements
Over one ton of completed and fragmentary copper ingots comprised the primary cargo of a ship that sank at Cape Gelidonya in
southwestern Turkey, ca. 1200 BCE. Pb-isotope and metallographic analyses indicated that the metal originated in Cyprus and was
made through diverse methods of production. A new analysis began in 2016 using photogrammetry and structured light scanning to
model 268 complete copper ingots and fragments in 3D. The weight of oxhide and bun ingots combined with surface area and
volume measurements obtained from accurate, sub-millimeter 3D scans are being used to test the degree of standardization of
ingot production methods. Using weight and 3D metrics we may be able to extrapolate the porosity of ingots, which may have had
an impact on breakage patterns. The ability to predict breakage would have been useful to ancient metal-workers and distributors.
Additionally, morphometric data was used to identify technological and material similarities among complete ingots in order to
establish typologies. Using 3D models to extract the dimensions, they can serve as a basis for classifying fragmentary pieces. When
combined with the isotopic and elemental data we hope this refined typology will help us better understand the significant variation
among ingot types.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  354
Martin, Simon (University of Pennsylvania Museum)
[128]
Order from Chaos: Maya Kingship Reimagined in the Classic Era
Mayanists have, with good reason, dealt at length with the ninth-century collapse of Classic society but have increasingly
recognized that a previous calamity, marking the end of Preclassic society around the second century, almost as traumatic. Great
settlements were abandoned and the population suffered a serious decline, all associated with the disappearance of forms of
political authority that had developed over the previous millennium or more. While vestiges of the old system were retained, a
radically new set of ideas took precedence, with a new emphasis on central power and a dynastic bloodline. This paper explores the
commonalties and differences between new and old in search of the factors and mechanisms that brought political order from
chaos.
Martin, Simon (University of Pennsylvania Museum)
[223]
Discussant
Martin, Simon [223] see Beliaev, Dmitri
Martin, Terrance [233] see Painter, Autumn
Martin, Worthy [98] see Heitman, Carrie
Martin-Apostolatos, G. [159] see Trusler, Kate
Martindale Johnson, Lucas (Far Western Anthropological Research Group Inc.)
[203]
X-ray Florescence (ED-XRF) Analysis of Obsidian Artifacts from Caracol, Belize
This paper will discuss the results of handheld XRF analysis carried out at the Classic Period Maya city of Caracol, Belize. XRF
analysis of technologically, spatially, and temporally controlled samples can inform the nature of regional exchange within a
politically active region. Additionally, geochemical and spatial relationships of artifacts within cities can provide crucial data
surrounding the nature of intra-city economies (e.g., markets, non-markets). Caracol’s geographical location, straddling the border of
the Petén region to the west, and the areas of northern Belize and the Belize valley to the east was, we argue, an important
economic center in the region, and has only recently been considered in regional obsidian studies. We present XRF analysis of
2,038 obsidian artifacts from Caracol, Belize and discuss the results in terms of regional exchange and the intrasite distribution
through time. We also discuss data considerations of analyzing thinner blade artifacts with XRF and the processes of making source
assignments to small and/or thin artifacts in an effort to contribute to the refinement of the XRF methodology.
Martindale Johnson, Lucas [5] see Davis, Mary
Martinez, Desireé [184] see Lippert, Dorothy
Martinez, Kailey (New Mexico State University)
[270]
Balance on South Diamond: Using Faunal Analysis to Understand Biodiversity and Resource Use Trends in the Northern Mimbres
Region
The Gila National Forest/Wilderness consists of rich mountainous land spanning between western New Mexico and eastern
Arizona. This land was once home to the people of the Mimbres culture. The environments within these natural areas vary due to
different altitudes and precipitation, which also affect the variety and amount of ecological resources. Two sites that have been
excavated in the Northern Mimbres region by New Mexico State University students, professors, and volunteers include South
Diamond Creek Pueblo (SDCP) and Twin Pines Village (TPV). Both settlement size and resource availability would have worked to
dictate what resources were being exploited on each site. Beyond just these two sites, the differences of resource availability within
the Northern Mimbres region and other Mimbres occupied areas outside of it may also be apparent within the archaeological record.
The goal of the study is to determine if diversity trends and species abundances from the faunal assemblages of SDCP and TPV are
similar to or different from other Mimbres sites of the same time range and to determine if it is possible to accurately estimate what
transitional phase of the adaptive cycle these sites were in during the Classic Mimbres Phase.
Martinez, Marcos (Arizona State University), Alexandra Greenwald (University of Utah), Deborah Blom (University of
Vermont) and Kelly Knudson (Arizona State University)
[61]
Isotopic Biographies of the Andes: δ15N and δ13C Measures in Sequential Samples of Permanent First and Third Molars in
Moquegua Valley and the Lake Titicaca Basin
Human behavioral ecology predicts that individuals will modify subsistence strategies to maximize agro-pastoralist production rates
and mitigate agricultural losses in response to environmental uncertainty and socio-cultural circumstances. We utilize stable isotope
measures (δ15N and δ13C) of early childhood diet into adulthood from over 185 dentinal collagen sequential samples by combining
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    355
permanent first and third molar datasets from 10 individuals as proxies for the interplay of mixed agricultural-pastoralist subsistence
strategies utilized by the interred individuals at the site of Chen Chen, in the Moquegua Valley, Peru, and the Akapana and
Markapata sectors of the site of Tiwanaku in the Lake Titicaca Basin of western Bolivia. During the Middle Horizon (ca. AD 500–
1000), the environmentally vulnerable practice of irrigated floodplain agriculture is linked to the Tiwanaku Chen Chen phase colonies
of the Moquegua Valley region, while Tiwanaku’s groundwater-fed, raised-field systems were more drought resistant. The fine-
scaled (12–24 month intervals) datasets generated by sequential sampling of dentinal collagen allow us to examine the relative
inclusion of isotopically distinct cultigens and elucidate dietary differences brought about by differing agro-pastoralist practices
between the residents of the Tiwanaku heartland and its western lowland colony at Chen Chen.
Martinez, Valentina and Andres Garzon-Oechsle (Department of GeoSciences, Florida Atlantic Univer)
[257]
Landscapes, Architecture, and Settlement Patterns: Reflections on the Territorial Expansion of the Manteños and the Establishing of
a Distinct Social Identity
Considering Smith’s (2007) comparative approach to ancient urban planning, this paper suggests that starting circa 1200 CE the
Manteño engaged in a process of increased growth and expansion that led to a shared, standardized settlement strategy across an
environmentally diverse area. This shared settlement strategy reflects a complex process of continuous coherence of Manteño
communities into a larger social unit. This is evident in the large-scale terrain modifications and thousands of stone foundations
found across the diverse landscapes of Manabí. Our work in the cloud forests of El Pital shows that the Manteño extensively
modified marginal settlement areas such as the rugged slopes and deep cut valleys of the Paján Mountains to accommodate a
growing population. We explore this shared settlement strategy by analyzing commonalities and differences in viewshed, access,
and architecture between El Pital and other key Manteño settlements in different environments and elevations. The political and
social implications of this study are addressed as well, contributing to the expanding literature of complex societies and settlement
patterns in the New World’s neo-tropical regions.
[257]
Chair
Martinez, Valentina [257] see Ayers-Rigsby, Sara
Martínez Carrillo, Miguel [101] see de la Rosa, Yuri
Martínez de Luna, Lucha (Independent Scholar) and Juan Ignacio Macias Quintero
[267]
O’na Tök: A Preclassic Zoque Center in Chiapas, Mexico
Preliminary explorations at the previously unknown Zoque site of O’na Tök reveals within a mid-montane wet forest, a multifaceted
archaeological landscape containing an early ceremonial center, an expansive area of long architectural platforms, and nearby
caves used for ritual purposes. Analysis of obsidian and pottery recovered on the surface of the site show the Zoque of O’na Tök
occupied the center during the Early Preclassic until the Postclassic period. The architectural layout of the site does not correspond
with similar patterns often associated with other contemporary sites, suggesting the center may have played a distinct role in the
region. Test pits in the ceremonial center have revealed two distinct stratigraphic layers of occupation dating from the Early
Preclassic and Middle Preclassic. The excavations also uncovered a Preclassic midden containing high-quality cooking and serving
vessels, food refuse, lithics, figurines, obsidian from several sources, and luxury trade goods. Cultural material from the ceremonial
center suggest interactions between the Gulf Coast and centers in the Central Depression of Chiapas. These data indicate that the
occupants participated in active interregional interaction, with the site of O’na Tok functioning as a primary center along a previously
unknown exchange corridor in Chiapas.
Martínez López, Cira [39] see Minc, Leah
Martinez Milantchi, Maria Mercedes (British Museum), Alice Samson (Leicester University), Jago Cooper (British Museum),
Michael Charlton (University College London) and Carlos Perez (Instituto de Cultura Puertorriqueña)
[239]
A Materials Science Consideration of New World Encounters: Multi-method Approaches to the Archaeology of the Caribbean
Following a recent review of excavated materials from the island of Mona (Puerto Rico), this paper examines the transformation of
cultural and technological practices brought about by New World encounters. We focus on the affective material conditions that
emerge in the sixteenth-century Caribbean by applying a materials science approach to the newly integrated materials in
archaeological contexts. This sheds light on the interaction between the newly arrived European and local Taíno populations. From
the re-cycling of iron ship nails in local structures to the refashioning of glazed ceramics into indigenous spindle whorls, this study
reconsiders the agency that local Indigenous populations exercised by integrating aspects of European material cultures into
traditional and transforming lifeways. Importantly, this paper raises questions about the brokering between experience and
resistance in these complex spaces of interaction and exchange.
Martínez Mora, Estela and Guillermo Córdova Tello (DEA-INAH)
[144]
Apuntes para interpretación del Grupo 7 de Tamtoc, San Luis Potosí
Como su nombre lo indica, el eje de investigación en el proyecto “Origen y desarrollo del paisaje urbano de Tamtoc, SLP” es el
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    356
estudio de la evolución del fenómeno urbano. A partir del estudio estratigráfico y de la aplicación de modelos para el estudio de la
disposición espacial de conjuntos arquitectónicos, hemos realizado excavaciones en tres estructuras del Grupo F, cuyos resultados
aplicaremos en una propuesta de secuencia temporal y entorno espacial preliminar del Grupo F y particularmente de la Estructura
F7. En la documentación de estos contextos, presentaremos los fechamientos por 14C.
Martínez Mora, Estela [144] see Córdova Tello, Guillermo
Martínez Mora, Estela [144] see Valentín Maldonado, Norma
Martínez Vázquez, Dante Bernardo (INAH-Michoacán), José Luis Punzo Díaz (INAH), Alfonso Ramírez Galicia (ENAH),
Roberto Díaz Sibaja (UMSNH) and Juan Julio Morales (UNAM)
[198]
Cueva de los Hacheros: A Late Pleistocene Site (12,000 yrs BP) in Western Mexico
The Cueva de los Hacheros is an archaeological site located in the state of Michoacán, in western Mexico. The site is a rockshelter
that was investigated during the years 2016 and 2017, where excavations and surface prospection were completed. During the
excavation, the deeper levels of the shelter could be identified, in which abundant lithic material and bone remain (especially animal
bones) were found. The radiocarbon dates run on carbon from the deepest levels of the shelter yielded a result 12,000 yrs BP
showing the oldest evidence of human activity in the state of Michoacán. Among the recovered materials associated with this date,
there are lithic artifacts, including spear points, knives, scrapers, cores, and flakes, most of which are made of basalt, rhyolite, and
chalcedony. It also highlights the presence of several fossils of animal and human origin. Fossils of extinct Pleistocene fauna could
be recognized. The Cueva de los Hacheros site has become an important place of investigation to understand human activity during
the late Pleistocene period in western Mexico and pacific coast.
Martínez-Tagüeña, Natalia [15] see Pailes, Matthew
Martini, Sarah (Yale University) and Stefan Dreibrodt (Kiel University, Institute for Ecosystem Research)
[85]
On-site Geoarchaeology as a Method of Archaeological Hypothesis Testing on Multilayered Settlement Mounds: Examples from a
Transect of Sites from Anatolia to Central Europe
In almost all cases, the majority of an archaeological site is composed of sediment. For many decades, this “matrix” from which
material was recovered and in which structures were uncovered was ignored and displaced before being used to backfill trenches. If
this matrix is not simply disregarded, the preservation of layers of sediment formed during the accumulation of architecture and
debris resulting from continuous, overlapping inhabitations in tells and multilayered settlement mounds provides an invaluable
record of interactions between cultural and natural processes. Furthermore, the wide spread of this “type” of site across Eurasia and
their often extended duration of occupation offer the chance to compare and contrast these records both spatially and diachronically.
The analysis of the geochemical and geophysical properties of these sediments can thus be used to complement archaeological
investigations and test hypotheses made on the basis of other archaeological data. In this paper sediment records from eight tell or
multilayered sites occupied for varying intervals from the Neolithic through the Roman Iron Age and stretching from Anatolia to
central Germany are examined in order to establish the possibilities afforded by and weakness inherent in the application of
qualitative and quantitative geoarchaeological analyses for this hypothesis-testing purpose.
Martino, Shannon (Morton College)
[205]
Evidence of Local Resource Procurement for Early Ceramics in the Ilgin Region of Turkey
This paper will present the preliminary results of Neolithic to Early Bronze Age ceramic analysis from the Yalburt Yaylası
Archaeological Landscape Research Project. While the Neolithic evidence is minimal, the evidence for an expansive Middle
Chalcolithic presence in the area is growing. The material analysis will be discussed in the context of regional hydrology and
geological sources as well as relative chronology in order to illuminate settlement patterns and resource use outside of nearby and
well-recognized prehistoric centers, such as Çatalhöyük. Preliminary analyses indicate that local resource use can be identified in
the ceramic fabric, particularly during periods when mineral tempers were used, and one need not focus only on a narrative of
interregional networks when doing survey. Identifying the use of local clays and inclusions also highlights the importance of further
scientific analysis for identifying local resource procurement and landscape interaction.
Martinón-Torres, Marcos (University of Cambridge), Xiuzhen Li (UCL Institute of Archaeology), Yin Xia (Emperor Qin
Shihuang’s Mausoleum Site Museum, Xi’a), Agnese Benzonelli (UCL Institute of Archaeology) and Andrew Bevan (UCL
Institute of Archaeology)
[42]
“Anti-rust” Surface Chromium on the Qin Terracotta Army Bronze Weapons: New Research and Implications
For forty years, there has been a widely held belief that over 2,000 years ago the Chinese Qin developed an advanced technology
using chromium to prevent bronze corrosion. This belief was based on the detection of chromium traces on the surface of bronze
weapons buried with the Terracotta Army, and the same weapons’ very good preservation. The purported ‘anti-rust’ treatment
seemed coherent with the Qin concern with the afterlife. In order to revisit this suggestive hypothesis, we analysed weapons,
lacquer and soils from the site, conducted chromium-treatment replications and accelerated ageing experiments. Our results
demonstrate that the chromium on the bronzes is not the result of a deliberate treatment but simply postdepositional contamination
from nearby chromium-rich lacquer. Further, we argue that the explanation for the bronze preservation is partly related to the
composition of the surrounding soil. Our work solves a long-standing controversy but opens new questions for research on
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    357
archaeological bronzes and lacquer in the Qin state and beyond.
Martinón-Torres, Marcos [42] see Li, Xiuzhen
Martinón-Torres, Marcos [42] see Liu, Yaxiong
Marwick, Ben (University of Washington) and Pham Thanh Son (University of Ferrara)
[17]
An Update on the Sonvian-Hoabinhian Controversy: Shape Analysis of Flakes and Cores from Mau A, Northern Vietnam
Understanding stone artifact variation in northern Vietnam can be challenging because of the underspecified cultural taxonomies
that have dominated analytical frameworks. For example, the Hoabinhian is often thought to be a descendant taxa to the Sonvian.
Our recent excavations at Mau A challenge this sequence. We apply statistical shape analysis methods to overcome previous
limitations relating to subjective and irreproducible stone artifact classification methods. We clarify the definitions of Sonvian and
Hoabinhian technologies, present new radiocarbon ages, and provide a new framework for explaining the variability of these
technologies.
Marwick, Ben (University of Washington)
[87]
Discussant
Marwick, Ben (University of Washington)
[139]
Moderator
Marwick, Ben [55] see Park, Gayoung
Marx, Deborah [18] see Delgado, James
Mas-Florit, Catalina [35] see Smith, Alexander
Massey, David [175] see Friberg, Christina
Massey, Sarah
[21]
Tajahuana: New Perspectives on a Paracas Site in the Middle Ica Valley
This paper presents the results of the 2019 season of excavations at the site of Tajahuana in the middle Ica Valley. Widely
considered to be an important Ocucaje Phase 9 center, this assessment is based primarily on surface observations of the site’s
summit. To understand better the nature of summit occupation, excavations were conducted on examples of public architecture,
specifically a group of low mound-like structures and a series of earthen walls bordering the summit’s edges. Excavations define the
form, materials and construction techniques of these structures as well as associated artifacts. Analysis of pottery collected during
excavations and from surface collections as well as radiocarbon dating establish the chronological parameters of the summit
occupation. The measurement, location and construction of Tajahuana’s walls not only provide insight into their function but also
into the spatial organization of the site and the dynamic relationship between the summit and occupation areas situated along the
lower slopes. The mobilization of resources and labor required to build the walls and other summit structures have implications for a
larger regional context.
Masson, Marilyn (University at Albany SUNY), Carlos Peraza Lope (Centro INAH, Yucatán), Bradley Russell (University at
Albany SUNY) and Timothy Hare (Morehead State University)
[138]
Constructing Biographies of Place through Mortuary Practice and House Style in the Early Colonial Maya Period at Yacman and
Hunacti, Yucatán
Placemaking represented an important activity for Maya residents of the early Colonial visita sites of Yacman and Hunacti, Yucatán.
As rural settlements distant from centers of Franciscan power and Colonial Maya authorities, these localities provided particular
opportunities to reconstitute social life in a rapidly changing regional setting. Each settlement was associated with evidence for
continued practice of traditional Maya religion. At the same time, both embraced a reverential construction and use of built
environmental features of European derivation in the context of reconstitution of social identity. Yacman’s residents adopted the
chapel’s interior space for traditional mortuary practices, specifically, a family mausoleum for placement of non-Christian style
graves, and purposeful disturbance and arrangements of the bones of previously interred persons. Hunacti’s Maya nobles accessed
a considerable labor force, and despite the town’s relatively marginal importance, they constructed elaborate, European style
dwellings for their families, as well as an impressive chapel and atrium. The founding and construction of Hunacti reflect ambitious
designs, probably facilitated by close familial ties of its leaders to the resourceful regional Maya lord at Maní.
Masson, Marilyn [20] see Glumac, Bosiljka
Masson, Marilyn [269] see Hare, Timothy
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                358
Masucci, Maria (Drew University)
[257]
Discussant
Masur, Lindi (University of Toronto)
[235]
Maize Agriculture, Landscape Construction, and Identity in Southwestern Ontario, AD 1300
This paper examines the practice of maize agriculture in southern Ontario ca. AD 1300, particularly among Western Basin Tradition
(WBT) communities. Archaeological narratives have illustrated the enigmatic WBT as culturally distinct from neighbouring
Iroquoians in terms of settlement and subsistence, characterized as mobile hunter-gatherers engaging minimally, if at all with
agricultural endeavours. Paleoethnobotanical analyses of sites along the borderlands of Iroquoian influence have revealed the
ubiquitous cultivation of maize, as well as a unique suite of plant species suggesting these communities were engaging in significant
landscape management practices and perhaps even had a distinct gastronomic tradition. This paper will examine our current
understanding of the adoption of maize agriculture among WBT groups, and elucidate the construction and reification of social
identities through human-plant interactions and subsistence practices among localized communities.
[235]
Chair
Mathé, Vivien [107] see Ard, Vincent
Mathews, Jennifer (Trinity University)
[109]
Chair
Mathews, Jennifer [109] see Abramovich, Lucía
Mathien, F. Joan [197] see Munro, Andrew
Mathwich, Nicole (San Diego State University)
[71]
Embodied Colonialism: Studying the Political Ecology of Colonial Landscape Use from Legacy Collections
As conservation archaeology increasingly includes extant and legacy collections, researchers are beginning to ask new questions of
old materials. Political ecology examines the relationship between politics and the environment and how that relationship affects
ecosystems. A political ecology approach toward archaeological collections fits well with collections-based research. While
bioarchaeologists have shown the extensive physical and biochemical differences resulting from political and economic inequalities,
less attention has been given to the way animals embody power differences. Livestock alter their behavior based on human activity
and reflect human labor and resource use. In North America, the abundance of livestock make them particularly attractive as sample
sources to study political ecology. In this case study in the Pimería Alta, today southern Arizona and northern Sonora, I examine the
political ecology of Spanish colonialism through the embodiment of economic strategies using the stable isotopes of livestock. I
show how museum collections extended my study sample to multiple colonial settlements, and enabled me to produce a regional
examination of Spanish colonial ranching in the Sonoran Desert. My findings identify proxy evidence for the redirection of resources
toward the production of livestock for the Spanish colonial economy, and illustrate how political changes impacted the environment.
Matos, Daniela (University of Tübingen), Manuel Neto (University Mandume Ya Ndemufayo), Christopher Miller (University
of Tübingen), Luiz Oosterbeek (Instituto Terra e Memória, Centre of Geosciences) and Nicholas Conard (University of
Tübingen)
[11]
The PaleoLeba Project: Linking Human Adaptations and Paleolandscape in the Leba Formation (Huíla, Angola)
Southwest Angola, located at the western corner of southern Africa, encompasses a mosaic of ecotones from desert, steppe,
savanna, deciduous woodlands and tropical vegetation. The edge of the Escarpment draws a natural border between the Namib
Desert and the Central Plateau and holds important geological features which are key for characterizing environmental change and
human societies of the past. In the Humpata Plateau, between 1800 and 2200 m of altitude, the Leba Dolomites present a vast and
complex karstic system forming lagoons, springs and caves, that were used as habitat by animal and human species across the last
1 million years. Here we present the first results of the PaleoLeba Project and the fieldwork developed between 2018 and 2019 to
collect evidence on the geomorphology, prehistory and paleoclimate of the region. We present the first mapping of the karstic
system (and its fossil infillings) of Southwest Angola and discuss the archaeological data from excavations targeting Late
Pleistocene and Holocene deposits of Leba Cave for the understanding of human evolution in Africa.
Matsumoto, Go (Yamagata University), Gabriela de los Ríos (Ministerio de Cultura) and Gabriel Villegas (Proyecto de
Investigación Arqueológica Complejo La)
[106]
The Lambayeque Sociopolitical System Viewed from a Multivalley Perspective
The Proyecto de Investigación Arqueológica Complejo Lambayeque (PIACL) has conducted research at Huacas de Sicán, the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     359
inferred center of the Lambayeque phenomenon during the Late Intermediate Period in the Middle La Leche Valley on the Peruvian
North Coast. The site consists of several mortuary mounds, each of which is believed to have belonged to an elite lineage and
entombed and enshrined its ancestors. We have argued that the Lambayeque elites attempted to integrate subordinate groups of
different cultural identities and to consolidate the multiethnic society through their ancestor veneration cult and associated rituals at
the ceremonial core of the site. Our recent survey in the Lower Zaña Valley, however, now provides us with a series of new finds
and challenges our conventional view of the Lambayeque sociopolitical system as being highly centralized with its paramount
political and religious center in the Middle La Leche Valley. In this presentation, we will argue that the Lambayeque sociopolitical
system might have been much more fragmented and present an alternative view that conforms better to our new finds.
Matsumoto, Mallory (Brown University)
[164]
Hieroglyphs and Hegemony in the Classic Maya kingdoms of Piedras Negras and Yaxchilan
The area stretching from the Usumacinta River basin in western Guatemala into the highlands of Chiapas, Mexico, hosted key
centers of Classic Maya political and cultural life (ca. 250–925 CE). Scribes and sculptors active across the region produced
hundreds of stone monuments inscribed with texts in a common hieroglyphic script. Yet little is known about how these artisans,
working in different times and places, acquired and shared knowledge of what and how to write, or how this exchange was inflected
by other aspects of inter-polity interactions. This paper presents preliminary results from paleographic analysis of hieroglyphic
inscriptions to identify patterns of written variation that reflect scribal change and exchange. It takes as its case study Piedras
Negras and Yaxchilan, two antagonistic neighbors in the Usumacinta River valley whose spheres of influence extended to a series
of smaller, subordinate settlements. Focusing on visual form, rather than content, of the inscriptions produced in both kingdoms
provides insight into the cultural construction of intra- and inter-polity relations. In doing so, this research makes a broader case for
studying hieroglyphic texts as material outcomes of cultural production and transmission that can shed light on the contexts of their
creation.
Mattioli, Tommaso (University of Barcelona), Angelo Farina (University of Parma), Adriano Farina (University of Barcelona),
Elena Miklashevisch (Palaeoart centre, Institute of Archaeology, Moscow) and Margarita Díaz-Andreu (ICREA and
University of Barcelona)
[25]
Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) Impulse Response: An Advanced Acoustic Measurement Technique for Analyzing Rock Art
Landscapes
Characterizing the acoustical properties of soundscapes is an important objective in archaeoacoustic research. In recent years, rock
art soundscapes emerged as a significant arena for the development of new methods to identify the potential use of sites for ritual
activities involving sound and music. Standard parameters are computed from Impulse Response by means of omnidirectional
sources and microphones. Although widely accepted, this approach suffers from some limitations due to lack of information about
the spatiality of sound. In this paper, we present a new method aimed at characterizing the spatiality of sound propagation in rock
art landscapes by taking into account the directionality of both source and receiver (MIMO [multiple-input multiple-output]). This
method makes use of a portable spherical array of transducers, individually driven, combined with a HOA microphone and spherical
cameras. Data gathered allow us to infer monaural and binaural acoustic parameters, the graphical mapping of sound reflections
charted over the panoramic image, a “ray tracing” inverse processing for identifying the path of discrete echoes, and auralization via
binaural headphones and VR display. Fieldwork for this paper was undertaken in the Altai mountains (Siberia) in the framework of
the ERC Artsoundscapes project (www.ub.edu/artsoundscapes).
[25]
Chair
Mattioli, Tommaso [25] see Coltofean-Arizancu, Laura
Mattioli, Tommaso [25] see Jiménez Pasalodos, Raquel
Mattson, Hannah [244] see Haffner, Jacob
Mattson, Hannah [148] see Norris, Austin
Matu, Marie [171] see Brandt, Steven
Matute, Varinia (University of Calgary)
[209]
Discussant
Matute, Varinia [269] see Acuña, Mary Jane
Mauck, Jessica
[116]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     360
Mauldin, Raymond (UT San Antonio), Robert Hard (UT San Antonio), Jacob Freeman (Utah State University), Michelle
Carpenter (UT San Antonio) and Cynthia Munoz (UT San Antonio)
[179]
Patterning in Stable Carbon (δ13Ccollagen, δ13Ccarbonate) and Nitrogen (δ15N) Isotopes of Texas Hunter-Gatherers (7500–850 BP)
Analyses of hunter-gatherer adaptations across the Texas Coastal Plain and into Central Texas allows comparisons of stable
isotopic data from two mortuary sites, Morhiss (41VT1), located in the riverine zone 65 km from the coast, and Bering Sinkhole
(41KR241), 350 km inland. Morhiss contained over 200 interments (Campbell 1976) while Bering (Bement 1994) contained over 75
individuals. Eighty-nine directly dated individuals from Morhiss and over 70 from Bering demonstrate that both sites were used
between 7500 and 850 cal BP. Isotopic data from Bering Sinkhole show dependence on C4 animals early, with a gradual increase in
dependence on C3 plants and animals through time. Morhiss data show C3 plant along with freshwater aquatic and terrestrial animal
exploitation throughout the sequence, with an increase in C3 values late. Beyond these dietary trends, there are significant
differences in variability between the two sequences. The isotopic data from Bering shows low variability, suggesting that individual
diets were similar. The Morhiss data exhibit higher overall variability and a significant increase in the range of dietary isotopic values
between 4500 and 2500 BP. That increased variability may indicate reduced mobility and more limited access to other resource
zones for some individuals buried at Morhiss.
Mauldin, Raymond [240] see Carpenter, Michelle
Mauldin, Raymond [179] see Munoz, Cynthia
Mauricio, Ana (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú)
[59]
Preceramic Human-Ecodynamics and the Development of Monumentality in Lower Chao Valley of Northern Peru
The Pampa de las Salinas archaeological complex of the lower Chao Valley on the northern Peruvian coast was the scenery of the
development of preceramic monumental buildings around 5500 cal yrs BP. Here, ceremonial adobe-structures were built during a
time of transformation of the local environment associated with a change in the occurrence of El Niño events. Over 3,000 years,
Pampa de las Salinas became the center of communal ceremonial activities of this valley, creating a sacred landscape composed
by ceremonial buildings, geoglyphs, and productive landscapes. Around 3000 cal yrs BP, Pampa de las Salinas became an
abandoned area. The progressive end of this ceremonial center seems to be related with another change in the activity of El Niño
phenomenon and the rise of new centers in the interior of the Chao Valley and neighbor valleys.
Maxwell, Judith (Tulane)
[138]
Home Is Where the Fajawala’ Are: Making Habitable Space among the Kaqchikel and Other Maya
Mayan communities are located within sacred space. Each town has four principal guardians roughly aligned with cardinal directions
and, in pre-contact times, a central altar. Each of the guardians is associated with a landmark (an escarpment, a cave/overhang, a
spring or stream, a mountain) and embodies the energy of one of the 260-days of the ritual calendar, cholq’ij. Ceremonies
performed at these guardian altars ensure the well-being of the community and offer protection during times of conflict. When
refugees from the 35-year genocidal war were repatriated to the Ixcan region of Guatemala, the first task of the ajq’ija’ “ritual
specialists” accompanying these displaced returnees was to identify the locations of the potential guardian energies and establish
altars, thus defining the new townsites as Mayan living spaces. On a smaller scale, each new dwelling is imbued with energy during
its construction. This energy must be identified and named in a series of ceremonies. It then becomes the household lar or guardian
spirit. Energy is immanent within the natural and built world, but it takes Mayan ritual action to define the space as a living place, a
place that is alive and one that is suitable for living within.
May, Alejandra (Purdue University), John Rapes (Purdue University), Ben Schiery (Purdue University) and Erik Otárola-
Castillo (Purdue University)
[55]
The Effects of Human Predation and Climate Change on the Niche Space of North American Proboscideans
Approximately 13,000 years ago, 37 genera of North American megafauna went extinct. Proboscideans, such as mammoths and
mastodons, were among the megafauna affected. Today, researchers continue to debate between three hypotheses to explain
these North American Pleistocene mass extinctions: (1) human over-hunting, (2) climate change leading to a reduced niche, or (3) a
combination of both. Our previous research suggests that the effects of the warming, drying, and more seasonal climate at the end
of the Pleistocene likely caused a competitive environment between mammoth and mastodon seen in a drastic shift in the niche
spaces of both species. While ecological theory predicts that competition can drive species to extinction, our original sample was not
complete. Here, we expand on our previous work by increasing our sample, including archaeological and paleontological location
data and radiocarbon dates, and completing paleoenvironmental reconstructions of key environmental variables. Our objective is to
model the effects of climate change and human hunting on the niche space of North American proboscideans within Bayesian
hierarchical and Structural Equation causal inference frameworks. This study will enhance our understanding of the changing
environments in which these megafauna lived, which may have implications for the study of modern extinction rates.
May, Alejandra [38] see Radican, Kelsey
May, Keith (Historic England)
[24]
Ontological Spatio-Temporal Modeling and the Uses of Allen Operators for Stratigraphic Analysis
Records of archaeological stratigraphic data and the relationships between separately identified stratigraphic units are fundamental
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         361
to understanding the overall cohesiveness of an archaeological excavation during fieldwork, analysis, publication and in any
resulting archive. Having divided the archaeology into various units for recording purposes, we use stratigraphy, and associated
temporal logical relationships recorded between the physical materials as the “reasoning glue” to connect all these different spatial
and temporal phenomena, in the form of Stratigraphic Units, Phases, and Periods, back together again, with various narratives to
explain our conclusions. For “single context recording” methods widely used in the UK and beyond, most archaeological temporal
reasoning is based on the principles of stratigraphic superposition, the “Above and Below relationship” (Harris 1979). But further
principles of temporal reasoning are also available (Allen 1983). The CIDOC CRM uses the Allen operators to describe not just
superposition but a set of more complex temporal logical relationships that can pertain between archaeological data. This paper will
give an insight into how conceptual reference modeling can be used to explore these issues and how associated semantic
technologies can enable semantically enriched deductions about the spatio-temporal and purely temporal relationships which
fundamentally link such archaeological data together.
[24]
Chair
May, Keith [24] see Moody, Bryony
May Ciau, Rossana [230] see Ringle, William
Mayfield, Tracie (University of Southern California) and Danielle Phelps (University of Arizona)
[252]
Pirates and Puritans in the Western Caribbean: Historical Archaeology and Ethnography on Old Providence & Santa Catalina
Islands (Colombia)
English settlers colonized Old Providence and Santa Catalina islands in 1629 –arriving on the Seaflower, sister ship to the
Mayflower– one year after the founding of the Massachusetts Bay Colony in what was to become the United States, but the two
colonies had very different historical trajectories. From 1629–1630, colonists, under the direction of the Providence Island Company,
constructed a town, New Westminster, and several forts. Around 1836, it became clear that the Islands would not have enough
agricultural productivity to sustain the population. Before the Spanish captured the colony in 1641, the Islands were home to nobles,
indentured servants, and tenant farmers from Europe, African and Afro-Caribbean slaves, Miskito Indians, Pequot Indians from
Massachusetts, and English and Dutch pirates, including William Henry Morgan. Many of the original inhabitants and early settlers
stayed on after the colony changed hands and their descendants continue to live on the Islands to this day. In this presentation, we
review preliminary data, research outcomes, and lessons learned from the inaugural 2019 field season, which centered on
archaeological and ethnographic data collection with the goal of investigating material, temporal, historiographical, cultural, and
spatial dialectics on these small, yet highly multicultural, western Caribbean islands.
Mayhack, Connor [8] see Tew-Todd, Victoria
McAllister, Christine (Mesa Verde National Park) and Sheldon Baker (Mesa Verde National Park)
[149]
Ruins Road Site Survey: Then and Now (Results in 1951–52 vs. 2017–18), Mesa Verde National Park
Archeologists from the Mesa Verde National Park Section 106 Compliance crew conducted a survey along a 100’ right-of-way
corridor on both sides of the park’s Mesa Top Loop Road on Chapin Mesa during the 2017 field season and the Cliff Palace Loop
Road during the 2018 field season. Together these two loops are known as Ruins Road. 47 archeological sites were recorded in
2017 and 24 archeological sites were recorded in 2018. The area had been originally surveyed in 1951–52 by James Lancaster and
others as part of the Chapin Mesa Ruins Survey, and re-evaluated in 1958–59 by Arthur Rohn. This poster compares the results of
the original survey with the modern one 66 years later. The results and records differ in level of recordation, detail, and accuracy,
while much of the basic interpretation remains the same. One major difference is in the definition of sites and site boundaries. Over
the course of both surveys, 23 sites were integrated into larger “parent” sites. Because the earlier crews recorded individual
structures as separate sites rather than part of larger habitations, this resulted in incorrect tallies of various site types, particularly
single-unit habitation vs. multi-unit habitation (hamlet or village) sites.
McAnany, Patricia (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill)
[20]
Discussant
McAnany, Patricia (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill)
[57]
Discussant
McAnany, Patricia (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill)
[209]
Discussant
McAuliffe, Richard [16] see Roberts, Victoria
McAuliffe, Richard [16] see Roberts, Jerod
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     362
McAvoy, Scott [147] see Liss, Brady
McBride, Kevin (University of Connecticut)
[13]
Discussant
[13]
Chair
McBrinn, Maxine (Museum of Indian Arts and Culture, Santa Fe), Julia Clifton (Museum of Indian Arts and Culture, Santa
Fe), Amy Montoya (Museum of Indian Arts and Culture, Santa Fe) and Diana Sherman (Museum of Indian Arts and Culture,
Santa Fe)
[172]
Donations and Transfers: Recent Challenges at One State Repository
The care and preservation of cultural materials is often viewed by the public to be a vital role of the museum. Consciously or not,
museums are seen as “society’s attic,” a high-quality sophisticated attic that contains valuable and irreplaceable objects, while
remaining infinitely expandable. In reality, space is always tight while funds to properly care for the collections are frequently lacking.
The mission of the Museum of Indian Arts and Culture is, in part, to safeguard the archaeological heritage of the state of New
Mexico through caring for collections made over the past 100 years. This repository, like all archaeological curation facilities, also
owes allegiance to the wider field of archaeology and its ethics. Our collections provide snapshots of stages in the evolution of the
science during the twentieth century. Donations from private individuals and transfers from other institutions are surprisingly frequent
occurrences. The staff at MIAC uses a set of criteria to determine which collections to accept and which to decline. These criteria
derive from museum-specific considerations as well as from the broader field. This paper presents our criteria and how they were
applied to the decisions on whether to accept a variety of recent donations and transfers.
McCafferty, Geoffrey [133] see Butler, Michelle
McCall, Laura-Isobel [244] see Haffner, Jacob
McCarthy, John (Flinders University), Chelsea Wiseman (Flinders University), Jonathan Benjamin (Flinders University), Jo
McDonald (UWA Oceans Institute) and Sean Ulm (James Cook University)
[238]
Evidence for Occupation of Submerged Landscapes of the Australian Continent
The Deep History of Sea Country is a major Australian Research Council-funded investigation of the potential for submerged
archaeology in Australia. Nearly one-third of Australia’s landmass was drowned after the last ice age and generations of people
were displaced by sea-level change. This pioneering, multi-disciplinary study of submerged landscape archaeology in Australia is
designed to investigate the records of the now-submerged Murujuga (Dampier Archipelago) coast, spanning 50,000 years ago to
present. The project integrates cultural and environmental studies and contributes a unique southern hemisphere insight into world
submerged cultural landscapes. A suite of cutting edge marine and aerial survey techniques, including diver survey, has been
applied to investigate physical and cultural submerged landscapes, leading to significant discoveries that will change our
understanding of Australia’s deep history. The outcomes of this project will have significant implications for management of and
research into the physical and cultural submerged landscapes of the Australian continent. This presentation will focus on the results
of diver survey in the Dampier Archipelago.
McCarthy, Katherine
[84]
The Multiplicity of Murals: Translating Landscapes at Teotihuacan
The murals at Teotihuacan have become a common source of fascination in the archaeology and scholarly considerations of the
site. Although the site itself may need no introduction, the murals that decorate its walls have been studied with a level of
uncertainty. Often depicting complex and abstract representations of landscapes and deities, these polychrome works created a
style that spread from Teotihuacan and was later collected by major museums around the world. The murals become particularly
interesting when seen not purely from a decorative or didactic point of view, but rather as activating devices and 3D spaces
functioning in two-dimensional depictions. The mural schemes at Teotihuacan serve a cartographic function as well, created as a
way for the Teotihuacanos to visually map, understand, and metaphorically access the spaces they inhabited and the realms
beyond their reach. In this paper, I will explore the messages mediated by the decorated surfaces of Teotihuacan, and present an
alternative view of their function and capacity for transformation in the Classic Period site.
[84]
Chair
McCarthy, Melinda
[44]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       363
McCarty, Rita (Mississippi National Guard)
[52]
Using Nonintrusive Technology to Identify Buried Subsurface Cultural Resources at Camp Shelby, MS
Camp Shelby is a 136,000 acre National Guard training site in south Mississippi. Since its construction in 1917, Camp Shelby has
trained our Nations troops for conflicts abroad, as well as domestic disputes and emergencies. Because of Camp Shelby’s rich
history, all types of cultural resources are found during Section 106 surveys. Within the past five years, the Mississippi Army
National Guard (MSARNG) cultural resources section has begun intensive surveys within the Cantonment Area. These surveys
include recording above ground features as well as sub-surface resources. Shovel testing is limited in what it can reveal and find, so
a new approach using Ground Penetrating Radar has been initiated. This approach has been successful in finding buried WWI
infrastructure, as well as identifying the locations of underground tunnels used for training purposes during WWI. This paper
highlights some interesting findings related to this on-going Cantonment Area Survey.
[52]
Discussant
McClain, Brittany S. [194] see Lassen, Robert
McClain, Brittany [194] see Parker, Adam
McClean, Xavier (Xavier McClean), Traci Ardren (University of Miami) and Harri Kettunen (University of Helenski)
[164]
Establishing Provenance and Analysis of King Wak Chan K’awiil’s Bowl
Over a 60-year period, the Frost Museum of Science, Miami, Florida constructed a substantial collection of Pre-Columbian artifacts,
of which one third relate to ancient Maya culture. These artifacts have an established date range from around 200 BCE-1300 CE.
An assessment of the collection conducted in March 2014 documented around 400 separate objects with six ceramic vessels
identified as strong sources of information due to their displayed iconography. One of these six vessels is the focus of this follow-up
analysis and is tagged as the bowl of King Wak Chan K’awiil, a prominent Maya ruler of Tikal dated to the early sixth century CE.
Tikal then was under a series of extensive warfare against rival city-states. The bowl is decorated with a statement of ownership
associated with elite vessels known as the Primary Standard Sequence. This paper presents a study of this artifact that includes
discussion of the artifact’s entry into the Frost Museum collection, its epigraphic text, and its likely place of manufacture or use. It is
essential to establish context within management of archaeological resources and this study provides an example of how to analyze
objects that appear within miscellaneous and unprovenanced museum collections.
McClintock, Thomas (Getty Conservation Institute), Terry Little (Trust for African Rock Art), Janette Deacon (Private
Heritage Consultant) and Neville Agnew (Getty Conservation Institute)
[111]
The Rock Art Network: Fostering Support for Rock Art Preservation
Despite being a valuable cultural asset, rock art is often not understood, respected or valued by the general public. Decision makers and
governments offer little support for its protection and valorization compared to other types of threatened natural and cultural heritage.
Potential partners are not motivated to provide technical, moral or financial support. Attempts to reach a wider public through museums,
exhibitions, books, tourism products, radio and websites have not significantly raised public awareness. To address this, the Getty
Conservation Institute brought together specialists from around the world and with a variety of backgrounds to a series of workshops in
South Africa, Australia, and Namibia. In 2018, a colloquium in the USA continued this work: ‘Art on the Rocks—Developing action plans
for public and professional networking’ where participants agreed to create an informal body, the Rock Art Network whose purpose is to
foster principles of research and conservation, create a network of collaboration with the Bradshaw Foundation website and promote
public and political awareness of this irreplaceable heritage. The paper assesses results, challenges with this type of collaboration, and
how this network—or any kind of professional network—can thrive and be sustained.
McCloskey, Galen [148] see Portman, Katherine
McConaughy, Mark (PA Historical and Museum Commission)
[99]
Bird Effigies at Sugar Run Mound, Pennsylvania, and North Benton Mound, Ohio
Bird effigies were constructed from cobble stones at Sugar Run Mound, Pennsylvania, and North Benton Mound, Ohio. Burials were
found in direct association with the bird effigies. Birds and bird-like deities were important air symbols to historic Native Americans
that were also often associated with the afterlife. Bird symbols associated with burials may represent a belief that the souls of the
dead change into birds so they can fly off to the afterlife. Alternatively, they may represent spirit guides that take the souls to the
afterlife. Interpretations of the bird effigies at Sugar Run and North Benton Mounds will be explored in this paper.
McConnel, Sean [78] see Richards, John
McConnell, Joseph
[236]
Evaluating “Folsom” Points in the Blackwater Draw Museum’s Calvin Smith Collection
Folsom projectile points are housed and displayed by museums around the country, but many are donated by collectors without
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  364
information documenting their original archaeological context. As a result, questions surrounding their authenticity hamper their
ability to contribute to collections-based archaeological research of the Folsom time period. A variety of fluted points housed at the
Blackwater Draw Museum in Portales, NM, as part of the Calvin Smith Collection bear concave bases, lanceolate shapes, and
fluting and may represent Folsom points. Without documentation of their original context their authenticity remains a mystery. This
paper presents results of a technological and morphological analysis of Folsom points recovered from a variety of secure
archaeological contexts. These data were used to generate a range of variation for authentic Folsom projectile points from the
Southwest. Statistical analyses were used to evaluate whether the technological and morphological characteristics of each point
from the Calvin Smith Collection fell within or outside of the range of actual Folsom. Results of the analysis indicate that certain
points could be classified as Folsom points typical of the Southern Plains region, while others are either from outside of the region or
not Folsom at all.
McConnell, Joseph [136] see Stokes, Robert
McCool, Weston (University of California, Santa Barbara), Amy Anderson (University of California, Santa Barbara), Joan
Brenner Coltrain (University of Utah) and Douglas Kennett (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[15]
Explaining Trade-offs between Food Acquisition and Violence Avoidance Using a Risk-Sensitive Patch-Choice Model
Resource procurement and the avoidance of interpersonal violence are critical features of human survival strategies. Yet these
features are often competing, requiring individuals to make trade-offs in order to maximize fitness. This trade-off will influence
population mortality and yield insights into the evolution of violence avoidance behaviors. Recent decades of violence research have
shown violence to be a pervasive, albeit variable, feature of the human career. Frequently high levels of violence raise the inevitable
question as to what behavioral adaptations have evolved to reduce violence risk (VR), and at what cost? In the following
presentation we outline a risk-sensitive patch-choice model that formulates expectations for the optimal patch choice. We predict
(P1) that a patch will be avoided when the risk-effect reduces energetic returns below that of than an alternative patch, and (P2) a
patch will be utilized at a lower efficiency when the risk-effect does not reduce energetic returns below alternative patches. Further,
risk-averse individuals accept reduced energetic efficiency in order to minimize VR, while risk-prone individuals continue to
maximize energetics by accepting a higher VR. We test these predictions using human skeletal and stable isotope data and from a
prehispanic population of agropastoralists in highland Peru.
[15]
Chair
McCormack, Steve [147] see Varien, Mark
McCorriston, Joy (Ohio State University)
[125]
Discussant
McCorriston, Joy (Ohio State University), Julie Field (Ohio State University) and Henry Griffy (Ohio State University)
[226]
Teaching World Prehistory and the Anthropocene: Some Notes from Our Class [S]pace
What should be our goals as educators and archaeologists in the face of a looming climate crisis? Even as the SAA offers an
unparalleled opportunity to discover new research, it also offers an under-subscribed opportunity to talk about teaching archaeology
as our curricula and classrooms change. We used backward course design to identify paramount goals in our undergraduate
curricular introduction to archaeology. We embarked on a new course design for three reasons: (1) Relevance of archaeology to all
our students’ lives, (2) Teaching Skills critical to the Anthropocene challenges our students face, and (3) Cultivating Stewardship of
our archaeological heritage among our broadly diverse student body. Like most colleagues, we teach and need to keep courses
credited in the general education curriculum. Increasing numbers of our students are distance learners, shaping the tools and the
processes by which we teach. In this environment, we argue that an Anthropocene approach to teaching archaeology embraces
online technologies, promotes sustainability, broadens our outreach as archaeologists, and flips our approach from content delivery
to dialogue about the past and its value for the future.
McCorriston, Joy [226] see Field, Julie
McCorvie, Mary [269] see Wagner, Mark
McCoy, Mark (Southern Methodist University), Jesse Casana (Dartmouth College) and Thegn Ladefoged (University of
Auckland)
[124]
Field Systems, Urbanism, and State Formation in the Hawaiian Islands
The significance of urbanization and royal centers in the development of productive agricultural systems and state formation has
been minimized in the Hawaiian Islands. Today, thanks to several key methodological advances, especially remote sensing using
lidar, we are closer than ever to an integrated and fine-grained model of economic, political, and religious developments that speak
to historical processes that occurred independently many times in world prehistory. We begin by presenting the results from
research on the island of Hawai’i where aircraft mounted lidar has been used to map upland fields at level similar to pedestrian
survey over an area of 240 km2. Next, we discuss new maps of coastal settlement, including examples of royal centers, created
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  365
using the first use of UAV mounted lidar for large scale archaeological survey. Finally, we connect the upland agricultural zone and
the coastal habitation zone through a chronology of ritual and monument construction that shows a previously undocumented shift in
religious practice that appears to mark the transition to an archaic state society.
McCoy, Mark [147] see Hill, Austin
McCoy, Mark [77] see Edwards, Nicolette
McCoy, Mark [262] see Lambert, Spencer
McCoy, Mark [262] see Mulrooney, Mara
McCoy, Taylor (Eastern New Mexico University) and Heather Smith (Eastern New Mexico University)
[66]
Using Geospatial Methods to Analyze Previous Investigations at Blackwater Draw Locality 1
Blackwater Draw Locality 1 is the Clovis type-site and is located in eastern New Mexico. The site boasts over 85 years of
archaeological research conducted by a variety of institutions and researchers. The site is 640 acres in size, contains multiple
activity areas representing multiple time periods that, despite decades of research, still have the potential to answer important
questions regarding human adaptation throughout the late Pleistocene and Holocene epochs. Specifically, an inclusive geospatial
study of the locality has yet to be conducted. The goal of this project is to synthesize the available spatial data collected on
archaeological materials and geoarchaeological features into an ArcGIS database, making it easier to study the locality, propose
new research, and address questions concerning spatial variation in human adaptive behavior across the locality. Here I address
the capability of digital methods of spatial data management and analyses to allow researchers to examine Blackwater Draw in its
entirety across time and space. As a locality that has been excavated and researched using many methodological approaches and
research goals, I hope to provide an avenue to address new research questions that have, until now, been impossible.
McCoy, Taylor [77] see Smith, Heather
McCreary, Helen [107] see Gaffney, Chris
McCreary, Shane [190] see Levin, Samuel
McCuistion, Emily
[177]
Radiocarbon Dating the Lower Pecos Canyonlands and Evergreen Rosette Plant Baking
The Lower Pecos Canyonlands (LPC) archaeological region of southwest Texas is located at the eastern limit of the Chihuahuan
Desert and southern limit of the Great Plains, centered on the confluence of the Pecos River and the Rio Grande. Exceptional
organic preservation in the region’s dry rockshelters has beckoned archaeologists for 90 years, and excavations have yielded an
abundance of datable materials, including fiber and wooden artifacts, coprolites, quids, and charred remains from earth oven plant
baking. Earth oven facilities were built in most of the region’s large rockshelters, evidenced by burned rock midden talus spilling
from their entrances. Earth oven facilities were also built on river terraces and uplands. Plant baking of evergreen rosettes (e.g.,
agave and sotol) is important to discussions of diet breadth and intensification in the region. The LPC radiocarbon record consists of
over 400 assays spanning the Paleoindian through Proto-historic periods. The assays have been critically vetted to identify
potentially unreliable or irrelevant dates. Using Bayesian methods, the radiocarbon data are used to investigate timing and
frequency of plant baking. Interrelated topics are also explored with these data, including the manufacture of fiber goods from
evergreen rosettes, intermittent presence of bison, and human population fluctuations.
McCurdy, Leah (University of Texas, Arlington)
[20]
Construction Workers: Ancient Maya Building Labor Systems and the People Who Labor
This paper focuses on an architectural history and energetic analysis of ancient Maya monumental construction at El Castillo
acropolis during the Late Classic period at Xunantunich, Belize. One major analysis of that larger study concerns labor projected
from energetic estimates. For example, projections of quarry labor at global, regional, and local scales can result in interpretations of
labor supervision and workgroup composition. One of the less evidenced, but nonetheless interesting, extensions of this analysis
can lead to considerations of the personal investment of labor. By extrapolating from the local scale, we can consider individual
laborers and what sorts of impacts their experience in the quarry would have had in their lives. We can also explore agency in the
building process, at the finest scales, and the phenomenological perspectives of the people who actually did the building. This paper
explores that humanized or ‘peopled’ view of monumental construction.
McDaid, Chris (U.S. Air Force, Fort Eustis, VA), Patrick Barry (Colorado State University), Courtney Birkett (Colorado State
University) and Scott Seibel (AECOM)
[9]
Monitoring, Planning, and Treating Archaeological Sites for Climate Change
The Fort Eustis portion of Joint Base Langley-Eustis is a peninsula of 8,000 acres bounded by Skiffes Creek, the Warwick River,
and the James River on Virginia’s coastal plain. The installation has 233 identified archaeological sites. Thirty-one sites are subject
to erosion by the surrounding waterways. Beginning in 2010, the installation instituted a site monitoring program to document the
physical status of the sites. Data from that program revealed many sites were being impacted by erosion. The installation developed
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      366
a system to quantify current and potential future erosion damage for the thirty-one sites being damaged, as well as a system to
prioritize and triage the sites for future study and treatment. Since developing the system, the installation has recorded erosion data
to verify the model, worked to identify sites warranting stabilization, and stabilized significant sites. Additional analysis of the types of
sites being threated indicate a disproportionate number of Woodland period sites (1200 BCE–1600 CE) being impacted by erosion
than was expected, a finding that the installation is accounting for as it plans for future preservation activities in consultation with
federally recognized Native American Tribes with ties to the installation.
McDaid, Christopher [256] see Baxter, Carey
McDermott, Michael (Humboldt State University), Jeremy McFarland (Humboldt State University) and Marisol Cortes-
Rincon (Humboldt State University)
[7]
Understanding Landscape Modifications: Water Management in the Maya Lowlands of Northwestern Belize
The archaeological understanding of how ancient civilizations used and transformed the landscape has significantly improved with
the growing availability of lidar. The Maya significantly modified their landscape for religious and practical purposes; cultural
modifications used for water management and catchment is an important study area to better understand settlement patterns. The
goal of this study is to gain an understanding of a network of linear features, exposed through lidar visualizations, and their impact
on water management in the Dos Hombres to Gran Cacao Archaeological Project (DH2GC) area. This project will utilize GIS
hydrology toolsets, a lidar dataset, and other geospatial applications, to model and compare small scale surface water distribution
under various hydrological and landscape scenarios of three study sites, with the goal of applying it to a regional analysis in the
future.
McDermott, Michael [230] see Cortes-Rincon, Marisol
McDermott, Michael [206] see McFarland, Jeremy
McDonald, Jo [238] see McCarthy, John
McDonald, Morgan [63] see Russ, Jon
McDonough, Katelyn (Texas A&M University) and Jaime Kennedy (University of Oregon)
[195]
Paleoethnobotany of the Connley Caves, Oregon: Investigating Great Basin Paleoindian Plant Food Economies
Questions concerning human paleoecology and subsistence strategies continue to shape Paleoindian research in the Great Basin.
Despite significant advances in our understanding of human lifeways during the terminal Pleistocene, the relationship between
human populations and plant food communities is still unclear. Specifically, what was the role of plants in the food economy of early
Great Basin foragers? How did changing climatic conditions affect plant communities and how did humans respond?
Archaeobotanical data are required to address such questions, but preservation of perishable materials is rare. The Connley Caves
in central Oregon provide a unique opportunity to address these longstanding issues. Recent excavations at this site uncovered
multiple Younger Dryas age (ca. 12,900 to 11,600 cal BP) cultural components containing extensive Western Stemmed Tradition
tool assemblages, multiple hearth features, and preserved organics. This paper presents results of the paleoethnobotanical analysis
examining seasonality of site occupation and patterns of plant exploitation throughout the Younger Dryas.
[195]
Chair
McDonough, Katelyn [170] see Jenkins, Dennis
McDonough, Katelyn [66] see Quiroz, Itzel
McDonough, Katelyn [66] see Saper, Shelby
McElfresh Buford, Katie (Missouri State University) and Billie Follensbee (Missouri State University)
[191]
Finding the Right Niche: Altar, Throne, Stela, Sarcophagus? Overlap and Ambiguity in Olmec Large Stone Sculpture
Among the most diagnostic sculptures made by the Gulf Coast Olmec is the table-top altar/throne. This sculpture is best known for
its most common features: a wide, heavy cornice, a generally rectangular structure, and often, a niche in the front. Given the table-
top form, scholars originally interpreted these sculptures as altars, but many are much too large to have served as a sacrificial
platform. Apparently resolving this enigma was Grove’s discovery of the Oxtotitlan Cave painting illustrating an elaborately garbed
figure seated upon a throne, with supernatural imagery depicted on its heavy cornice, which is very similar to that on the Olmec
sculptures. The recognition and continued excavation of Olmec and Olmec-related sites have continued to add to the repertoire of
Olmec sculptures—but have also introduced ambiguity and uncertainty into traditional sculpture categories. Some sculptures
currently designated as thrones do not have niches but large, supernatural faces or multiple figures, while others may be lids to
stone boxes, stelae, or another type of niche figure. A study of altar/throne and niche figure variations, of the overlap of forms and
imagery, and a re-evaluation of possible functions, all together provide new insights into our understanding of Olmec sculptures.
McFarland, Douglas [8] see Brown, James
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    367
McFarland, Jeremy (Humboldt State University), Michael McDermott (Humboldt State University) and Marisol Cortes-
Rincon (Humboldt State University)
[206]
Landscape Ecological Zone Classification Using Airborne Laser Scanning Data in Northwestern Belize
Understanding human-environment interaction, landscape utilization and where people choose to settle are some major questions in
Maya archaeology. However, a lack of regional scale ecological zone mapping has been a disadvantage in answering these types
of questions. Light Detection and Ranging (lidar) is a leading tool in collecting the most comprehensive and accurate data for
measuring vegetation structure and classifying ecological zones on a regional scale. In 2016, a total of 274.6 km² of lidar was flown
by the National Center for Airborne Laser Mapping (NCALM) for a consortium of archaeologists under the auspice of the
Programme for Belize Archaeological Project (PfBAP), located in northwestern Belize. Using ground truth data collected from the
Dos Hombres to Gran Cacao Archaeology Project (2009–2019), criteria can used to define environmental zones and with secondary
derived lidar datasets, a decision tree model can be developed to identify these zones within the whole study area. An investigation
of the different ecological zones in the study area will help answer questions on ancient settlement choices and how these different
zones were exploited.
McFarland, Jeremy [230] see Cortes-Rincon, Marisol
McFarland, Jeremy [7] see McDermott, Michael
McFarland, Jeremy [53] see Mitchell, Spencer
McGilvray, Julie [165] see Gearty, Erin
McGlothlin, Teka [166] see Trubitt, Mary Beth
McGowan, Glenys [240] see Edington, Stacy
McGowan, Glenys [234] see Miller, Ian
McGrath, James (University of Iowa), Brandi MacDonald (University of Missouri Research Reactor) and Curtis Marean
(Arizona State University)
[5]
The Sourcing of Archaeological Mineral Pigments from PP5–6, Western Cape Province, South Africa via NAA, XRD, and SEM-EDS
Artifact sourcing data are useful for testing hypotheses about variation in human mobility, territory size, or the extent or nature of
exchange networks. Here we report the results of a recent sourcing analysis of 35 archaeological mineral pigments from Pinnacle
Point 5–6 (PP5–6) and the inferred changes in landscape use between MIS 5b and MIS 3 in the study area. This current study
builds on the dissertation work of Bernatchez, who conducted a survey of the research area and initial compositional
characterization of the PP5–6 mineral pigments. This poster outlines more recent tests utilizing NAA, XRD, and SEM-EDS to assess
the association between archaeological mineral pigments from PP5–6 and five deposits previously identified by Bernatchez. Results
of this study suggest that the Late Pleistocene occupants of PP5–6 likely utilized at least three mineral pigment deposits: 1) the
primary local deposit previously identified by Bernatchez, 2) another of Bernatchez’s possible local deposits, and 3) a third (or more)
unknown deposit(s). Additional research is needed to assess whether the unknown deposit(s) is local or non-local. Use of these
mineral pigment sources varied through time at PP5–6. This variation sheds light on shifting landscape use between MIS 5b and
MIS 3.
McGuire, Kelly (Far Western Anthropological)
[58]
The 40-Year Ride: Far Western Anthropological Research Group and the Past, Present, and Future of CRM
Starting as a small nonprofit of like-minded graduate students in anthropology, Far Western has emerged as one of the largest and
most respected companies in CRM. Sometimes by design, more often by simply responding to the daily challenges and opportunities at
hand, Far Western has put together a 40-year run. This run has continued through generational turnover of company staff and among
our agency counterparts; an ever-evolving political and regulatory landscape; advances in information systems and other technologies;
and rising Native American participation and empowerment, to name but a few of the forces affecting CRM. Is there a “secret sauce” to
all this? Probably not, but it’s worth reflecting on how we all got here and where we might be going.
McGuire, Randall (Binghamton University), Elisa Villalpando (Centro INAH Sonora), Alejandra Abrego (Centro INAH
Sonora), Hunter Claypatch (SUNY, Binghamton University) and Cinthia Campos (SUNY, Binghamton)
[79]
Digging the Trincheras Tradition in Sonora, Mexico
The international border between the U.S.-Mexico has long served as a barrier to integrate archaeological research in the Sonoran
Desert. The Trincheras Tradition Project has been working in northern Sonora, México since 1985. This project bridges the border
with collaborative archaeological research by Binghamton University and the Centro INAH, Sonora. In the fall of 2017 and 2018, we
completed NSF funded excavations in three Trincheras Tradition sites in the Altar Valley, near Átil, Sonora. These three sites
yielded components including the Early Agriculture Period, the Trincheras Tradition (two phases), the Hohokam Tradition and the
Proto-Historic O’odham. The project will use these data to answer questions about the Trincheras Tradition, specifically its
relationship to the Early Agriculture Period and to the Hohokam and O’odham Traditions. This will greatly increase our
understanding of cultural developments in the Aboriginal Sonoran Desert.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    368
McIntosh, Brandon (Washington State University) and Erin Thornton (Washington State University)
[76]
Ostemetric and Morphometric Analysis of Archaeological Turkey Assemblages from across the Mogollon Region of the U.S.
Southwest
This poster reports on the osteometric and morphometric analyses of archaeological turkey bone from sites dating from the Early
Agricultural Period (before AD 400) to the late Formative Periods (ca. AD 1450) across the greater Mogollon Region of the U.S.
Southwest. This span of time covers the introduction and intensification of turkey husbandry in the Southwest. The data presented
here are part of a larger study in the Mogollon Region that combines osteometrics, morphometric, stable isotope and ancient DNA
analyses to investigate turkey domestication in the southern regions of the Southwest. Research over the past decade has revealed
turkey management strategies were highly variable across the northern Southwest. This study extends this research into the
Mogollon Region, an area of the Southwest that has not yet received this level of investigation into turkey domestication. Through
morphometric analysis, turkey husbandry strategies are revealed by documenting the population structures of managed flocks
allowing for a more nuanced understanding of how turkeys were used in the ancient Southwest. Understanding variability in how
humans managed turkeys in the Mogollon Region provides a much wider view of a highly complex domestic relationship across the
Southwest in general.
McIvor, Locke (New Mexico State University)
[177]
Modeling the Hidden Panel Site
Rock art in the Big Bend region of West Texas remains an understudied area. In this poster I explore the Hidden Panel Site, a Late
Archaic (250 BC to AD 350) Diablo Dam style site that overlooks Chalk Draw. Three kinds of motifs are present at the site, projectile
dart points (basally notched), abstract geometrics and a figure that seems to relate to the horizon landscape of the draw. I will focus
on building a Structure for Motion (SfM) model of the site, to understand these motifs and how they possibly relate to the site in ritual
ways. The model will emphasize use of landscape views, movement through the site, and relating to the premise of light.
McKay, Kristin [183] see De Guzman, Margarita
McKechnie, Iain [271] see Gustas, Robert
McKee, Brian (University of Arizona)
[93]
Discussant
McKeeby, Zachary (University of Virginia)
[216]
Iron Production and Variation in Machili: Recent Archaeological and Geophysical Survey in Western Zambia
The Machili watershed in western Zambia formed a politically decentralized frontier zone for nearly a millennium as a sequence of
kingdoms, states, and trading networks were forged and dissolved on its periphery circa 700–1500 CE. While the Machili Valley
itself contains no evidence of political centralization, the presence of copper ornaments and cowrie shells at several sites confirms
direct or indirect connections with the Swahili coast, the Copperbelt region, and nearby regional polities between the Zambezi and
Limpopo rivers. Limited archaeological surveys in the late 1960s tentatively fit the Machili Valley into a larger context of Iron Age life
in Zambia, and into south-central Africa more broadly. This paper details early results from new survey work in Machili. A
combination of geophysical and shovel-test survey methods were used to re-survey previously documented sites, identify new sites,
and to study localized variations in iron production practices in the Machili Valley in the absence of, and on the periphery of, state-
level control. Results suggest geographic and temporal changes in settlement patterns, changes in smelting practices, and changes
in the spatial relationship between domestic areas and areas related to iron working such as furnaces and forges.
McKenna, Kathryn, Tim Baumann (University of Tennessee, Knoxville), Gerry Dinkins (University of Tennessee, Knoxville)
and Steve Ahlstedt
[78]
Check Out These Mussels: Gravel Hill Cave Site Mussel Analysis in Comparison to the Clinch River Breeder Reactor Plant Site.
The Gravel Hill Cave Site (40RE117), located along the Clinch River, was excavated by Bill Fischer in 1958 as a personal curiosity.
The site contained a unique stratigraphy of mollusks comprised of over 50 species, indicating an extended period of occupation
ranging from Late Archaic to Early Mississippian. This paper analyzes the site’s chronology of mollusks in comparison to 40RE108,
an open-air site located downriver. The comparison of these sites and their similar abundance of freshwater mollusks species and
various artifacts spanning several periods will contribute to a greater understanding of change over time in past occupation in East
Tennessee.
McKenzie, Emily (University of Alabama) and Katherine Chiou (University of Alabama)
[241]
Out of the Frying Pan and into the Fire: Measuring the Effects of Charring on Chile Pepper (Capsicum spp.) Seed Morphology
The chile pepper (Capsicum spp.) has cemented its place amongst New World peoples in prehistory as a fixture in medicine, ritual,
and cuisine. The timing and context of its domestication and spread throughout the precolumbian Americas, however, remains
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  369
unclear. Previous work on the identification of chili pepper seeds to species-level resulted in the development of identification keys
for the five domesticated Capsicum species (C. annuum, C. baccatum, C. chinense, C. frutescens, and C. pubescens). This work,
however, was conducted on modern seeds preserved through desiccation. In order to understand the taphonomic impact of
carbonization on chile pepper seed morphology, we measured the effects of charring under various experimental conditions on
modern chile pepper seeds. Through our comparison of the uncharred and charred morphology of our specimens, we are able to
determine how chile pepper seeds are affected by charring, contributing to ongoing efforts to track the adoption and movement of
chile peppers in the ancient Americas through morphometric methods.
McKenzie, Emily [147] see Hatcher, Lawford
McKenzie, Nancy [187] see Cagney, Erin
McKeown, Ashley [169] see Izzo, Victoria
McKeown, Ashley [215] see Karastamatis, Kallista
McKeown, C. Timothy
[49]
Discussant
McKinney, Holly [82] see Doering, Briana
McKinnon, Jennifer [221] see Bush, Dominic
McKnight, Matthew (Maryland Historical Trust)
[251]
Contact on the English Periphery: Evidence of Native-Colonial Interactions in the Monocacy Valley
In 2013, after a 43-year hiatus in archaeological attention, the Maryland Historical Trust and its partners returned to the Biggs Ford
prehistoric village (18FR14) in Frederick County, Maryland. They did so expecting to investigate two Late Woodland components: a
Montgomery Complex settlement and a large, palisaded Keyser village. What they did not expect to find were European trade goods
revealing a Native American presence that endured on the landscape much longer than presumed. This paper discusses
unpublished evidence of a late seventeenth or early eighteenth-century occupation at the site and examines both the ethnohistoric
and archaeological evidence for Native settlement and interaction with Europeans near the Monocacy/Potomac confluence. The
historic record reveals that the Monocacy Valley around the turn of the eighteenth century was a dynamic landscape inhabited by
multiple Native groups, frequented by European traders of diverse backgrounds, and a disputed frontier territory claimed by both the
Maryland and Pennsylvania English.
McLaren, Whitney [52] see Skinner, Dougless
McLeester, Madeleine (University of Notre Dame) and Jesse Casana (Dartmouth College)
[124]
Locating Wisconsin’s Past Indigenous Agricultural Landscapes Using Historical Aerial Photography
Wisconsin has the largest number of recorded precolumbian and early historic Indigenous ridged and hilled field systems in the
American Midwest, with over 450 known examples. But twentieth-century land use practices have destroyed or obscured more than
90% of these sites. Leveraging a comprehensive database of high-resolution aerial photographs dating to the 1930s, alongside both
modern aerial imagery and public lidar data, we systematically analyze sites in the Wisconsin River drainage basin where
Indigenous agricultural features were previously recorded in order to determine whether such features could be resolved in historical
imagery. Here, we present both our successes and challenges in detecting and interpreting archaeological field systems, effigy
mounds, and other features in 1930s aerial photographs. Results offer new perspectives on Upper Mississippian agricultural
landscapes and highlight the potential of historical aerial photography to reinterpret known sites as well as discover previously
unrecorded sites and features in regions that have been heavily impacted by modern development.
[124]
Chair
McLeester, Madeleine [124] see Casana, Jesse
McMahon, Todd
[248]
Developing a Resilient Colorado Curation Model: The Innovative Solution to Addressing the State’s Collections Care Needs
Colorado was for many years the center of a curation crisis. In response, Colorado relied on the establishment of somewhat informal
partnership institutions, such as universities, small local museums, and local regional repositories that have now been strengthened
by creating rules and procedures that have allowed turnkey, scalable, politically neutral, regional solutions to the State’s
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 370
archaeology and natural history specimen’s care needs. The State of Texas Curatorial Facility Certification program served as the
legal framework model that was modified and applied to Colorado. Instead of a separate certification program however, Colorado
relies on national and regional museum “accreditation” and assessment programs to build resiliency within the curation network. The
network also hopes to expand the ability for repositories to obtain trained volunteer assistance as well as museum studies students
and offer opportunities to museums to obtain grants for re-housing or interpretation. The end goal then is a program that we feel is
beneficial to all parties, as it strengthens local museum’s collections care, their access/use, and helps to promote a greater
appreciation for existing collections.
McNamee, Calla (Wiener Laboratory for Archaeological Science, ASCSA), Neil Weintraub (Kaibab National Forest) and
Daniel Sorrell (Western Cultural Resource Management)
[255]
Celebrating Decades of Collaboration: Interpretations of Grand Canyon Puebloan Land Use in the Upper Basin, Northern Arizona
Situated near the Grand Canyon, the Upper Basin has been largely overlooked in archaeological research, with study focusing on
easily accessible, larger, and often romanticized sites in surrounding areas. Through decades of work, Alan Sullivan, however has
demonstrated the Upper Basin’s importance for enhancing our understanding of the diversity of cultural practices employed in the
prehistoric Southwest. Our paper builds on intensive survey conducted during Sullivan’s Upper Basin Archaeological Research
Project (UBARP), by utilizing the extensive GIS and site databases from the Kaibab National Forest (KNF). We couple site
locational data with tabular data on size, architectural features, and artifact concentrations to investigate questions of changing
occupation, community organization, and land use. Our data confirm UBARP’s finding of intense occupation by Pueblo II community
clusters around small ephemeral drainages, while establishing the continued use of the area during the Pueblo III period. In the
identification of recent post-fire dense fetid goosefoot growth, KNF archaeology survey work has also contributed to Sullivan’s
emphasis on the importance of anthropogenic burning and wild resource cultivation for prehistoric populations in the area. The
combined UBARP and KNF research is a testament to the importance of collaboration for enriching our knowledge of regional
archaeology.
McPherron, Shannon. P [36] see Abdolahzadeh, Aylar
McRostie, Virginia (Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile)
[74]
Chair
McRostie, Virginia (Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile), Eugenia Gayo (Center for Climate and Resilience Research),
Claudio Latorre (Departamento de Ecología & Centro UC del Desierto) and Calogero Santoro (Universidad de Tarapacá)
[171]
Humans, Plants and Animals: Landscape Transformation and Management during the Formative Period of the Atacama Desert
Camelids played a key role in the adaptation of societies to the Atacama desert. It’s by the Formative period that traces of llamas
became ubiquitous within different archaeological sites located on wetter niches from the hyper arid core. Human colonization of
these ecosystems dialogues intensively with these animals. During this period a rise in humidity and the eclosion of legumes forests
complemented by Andean crops fueled a new social scenario. Semi-sedentary villages started to emerge, becoming highly
dependent on caravans that travel through the desert transporting the required supplies. During previous periods evidences of
camelids where found mainly in the highlands, and it has been proposed that these animals were hardly adapted to the lowlands. To
get a better understanding of these landscape transformation during the Formative, we analyze the diet of these animals, which
have not been assessed in the area before. Cuticles from several plants are expected to be found in their coprolites. By identifying
these plants and their patterns through different sites, we can read how human societies managed and established a resilient
system in this hyper arid area. Permanent settlements intimately tied humans, plants and animals and therefore these ecological
relations needs to be uncovered.
McRostie, Virginia [74] see Ugalde, Paula
Mdludlu, Ayanda [11] see Collins, Benjamin
Meadow, Richard [162] see Borreggine, Marisa
Means, Bernard (Virtual Curation Laboratory)
[17]
Discussant
Means, Bernard (Virtual Curation Laboratory)
[56]
“They left about the time I could begin to depend upon them”: Helen Sloan Daniels and the National Youth Administration Durango
Public Library Museum Project
One of the lesser known programs that funded archaeological excavations during the Great Depression was the National Youth
Administration (NYA). NYA archaeology has been overshadowed by projects funded by its more prominent “cousin,” the Civilian
Conservation Corps (CCC), and its older “sibling” the Works Progress Administration (WPA). Helen Sloan Daniels, who lived all but
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  371
four years of her life in Durango, Colorado, made both minor and major contributions to the archaeology and ethnology of the area
around her home town. Here, I focus on her work from 1936 to 1940 with the Durango Public Library Museum Project, which
employed shifting—and small—numbers of young men and women provided by the NYA. Daniels actively worked with professionals
on her project, consulting with them as she could. She and her technical advisor, I. F. Flora, made a particular effort to recover
material suitable for the then relatively new technique of dendrochronology. Samples recovered by the NYA workers extended the
local tree ring chronology back to AD 253.
Meanwell, Jennifer (MIT), Elizabeth Paris (U. Calgary) and Roberto López Bravo (UNICACH)
[196]
Micromobility of Potters in the Jovel Valley, Chiapas
The Jovel Valley of highland Chiapas is home to a variety of Late Classic and Early Postclassic Maya centers, including the sites of
Moxviquil and CV-38 discussed here. Recent excavations suggest that settlements on the valley floor, like CV-38, were largely
abandoned during the Early Postclassic period and that the residential zones of hilltop centers like Moxviquil expanded greatly,
suggesting changes in settlement and population movements away from valley floor centers. An earlier study of pottery from
Moxviquil suggests that potters in the Early Postclassic period were utilizing a variety of resources to make vessels, particularly
clays mixed with volcanic ash and intermediate sands from the Huitepec volcanic dome on the west side of the valley. However, the
valley floor and surrounding escarpments are mainly calcareous. Although these resources were still utilized to a limited extent in
the Early Postclassic, potters likely had to transition from valley clay and temper sources to new resources in the hills when they
abandoned the valley sites. This study looks at utilitarian pottery within the Jovel Valley during this time of population movement to
investigate how potters selected and changed their production to react to different local raw materials.
Medchill, Brian [229] see Morgan, Linda
Medina Hernández, Abril Ameyalli (CEA UNAM) and Fabiola Fernanda Hoyos Velasco (CEA UNAM)
[121]
Mitología y cosmovisión maya
Dentro de lo que hoy en día conocemos como astronomía, ésta no se basaba en explicaciones “científicas,” pues la observación
del cielo en Mesoamérica se vinculaba con la estructura ideológica de la sociedad. En este sentido, la astronomía maya se haya
estrechamente concernida tanto con los mitos como con la religión, ya que dicho conocimiento se empleaba para la explicación de
la vida y el universo. Dicho esto, en lo que pretendemos indagar es en cómo los animales se relacionaban con fenómenos
astronómicos y naturales, ya que por ejemplo con frecuencia al jaguar se le asociaba con la luna o la noche, y a la serpiente con la
frialdad y cuerpos de agua, esto mediante información extraída tanto de fuentes históricas como epigráficas, y de igual forma
analizar aspectos culturales que se presentaba al haber una asociación con estos animales.
Medina Martínez, Lorena
[165]
Análisis arqueológico de un predio en el centro histórico de la Ciudad de México
El surgimiento de la capital de la Nueva España en el siglo XVI fue un proceso sumamente importante. De entre las innovaciones
que se dieron se encuentra la arquitectura doméstica que se construyó directamente sobre las ruinas de lo que fue la capital
azteca. Esta arquitectura tenía que adaptarse a las características del terreno, a la necesidad de construir sobre las ruinas del
previo emplazamiento, a la reutilización de materiales de construcción y la rápida enseñanza a los indígenas para construir en poco
tiempo un nuevo estilo arquitectónico que hasta ese momento había sido desconocido para ellos. Con todo lo anterior, esta
presentación analiza los aspectos antes mencionados así como las diferentes ocupaciones que se han dado en el predio ubicado
en la calle de Justo Sierra, dicho análisis inicia con la ocupación prehispánica del período posclásico tardío hasta nuestros días.
Así, se propone analizar los restos arqueológicos arquitectónicos para entender como fue ocupado este espacio de la capital
novohispana así como entender como se fueron modificando los elementos arquitectónicos y la distribución espacial del predio a
través de los años.
Medina Rosas, Axayacatl (Student CEA-UNAM)
[121]
Identidad en función de las Unidades de Convivencia, en el sitio arqueológico de Corral de Piedra, en el estado de Durango,
México, durante el siglo X
Las unidades de convivencia son configuraciones espaciales, arqueológicamente compuestas por estructuras arquitectónicas, sus
elementos materiales contenidos y su entorno ambiental inmediato, en función de las cuales se puede discutir sobre la relación
entre identidad y espacio; considerando que ciertos aspectos de la identidad quedan plasmados en las relaciones de
posicionamiento y utilización, entre elementos naturales y/o culturalmente generados, como resultado de la apropiación espacial.
Por lo que, las estructuras arqueológicas del sitio de Corral de Piedra, en el estado de Durango, cuya ocupación ha sido datada
durante el siglo X, representan un punto de partida para construir un acercamiento en torno a la identidad de quienes ahí habitaron,
en un sentido de pertenencia a agrupaciones de convivencia habitual.
[121]
Chair
Mehmetaj, Haxhi [263] see Baci, Erina
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      372
Mehta, Jayur [18] see Hollingshead, Analise
Mehta, Jayur [222] see Ostahowski, Brian
Meierhoff, James (University of Illinois, Chicago), Paula Bryant (IIllinois State Archaeological Survey), Paula Porubcan
(IIllinois State Archaeological Survey) and Artur Stasiek (University of Glasgow)
[213]
Archaeology of the WWII German Prisoner of War Branch Camps of Chicago
WWII came to the American Homefront in the form of hundreds of thousands of German Prisoners of War. The captured
combatants were initially housed en masse at large base camps, but many smaller branch camps were established in the American
hinterlands to put the prisoners to work in local industries. While a largely forgotten aspect of the war, the nature of this labor put
prisoners from these branch camps into much closer contact with American citizens and their communities, while simultaneously
generating large sums of revenue for the U.S. Army. In the Chicago suburbs, German prisoners were installed within repurposed
Civilian Conservation Corps facilities to fulfill the need for wartime labor. Today, three Chicago branch camps are archaeologically
preserved within the boundaries of the Forest Preserves of Cook County. This poster discusses the archaeological research
investigating the transformation of these spaces from footprints of Roosevelt’s New Deal social programs into places of
incarceration. The recent analysis of a copious early mid-century ceramic midden informs on the provisioning of such camps, while
the identification of the POW enclosure at the large Skokie Valley camp shows parallels of segregation and exclusion also seen
during the era of the CCC.
Meierhoff, James [160] see Porubcan, Paula
Meinekat, Sarah [180] see Rademaker, Kurt
Mejía Ramón, Andrés (Pennsylvania State University), Nadia Johnson (Pennsylvania State University) and Christian John
(University of California, Davis)
[189]
A Bird’s-Eye View of Power: Subsistence, Monumentality and Water Ritual in Ancient Teotihuacan
Proponents of collective and autocratic models of Teotihuacan’s sociopolitical organization relate the control and ritual of water to
the development of complex society, but how such institutions materialize on the landscape remains poorly understood. We present
evidence from six-years of archaeological survey, excavation and remote sensing, suggesting that large amounts of energy and
social capital were invested in the construction and maintenance of systems to capture broadly-distributed rainwaters. Wide, shallow
canals—dammed at semi-regular intervals—served to retain highly erosive runoff while making waters available for diversion
irrigation and other purposes. Evidence of such systems exists in the contemporary archaeological record among the barrancas of
the Southern Teotihuacan Valley. These tiered reservoir systems were of sufficient importance to the builders of the ancient city that
they were monumentalized and memorialized in the construction of the Street of the Dead, which served as the destination of a
significant portion of the valley’s re-routed floodwater networks. This spatial and hydraulic axis mundi was incorporated into the
ideology and state ritual of Teotihuacan in radically different ways by different rulers, suggesting dramatic constrictions in political
accessibility as the city expanded, despite political origins rooted in broad-based public legitimacy.
[189]
Chair
Melendez, Juan (Washington University, St. Louis) and Emiliano Melgar (Museo del Templo Mayor)
[54]
Approaching the Craft Production of Greenstone Tesserae that Form Ancient Maya Mosaic Masks from a Technological Perspective
Craft production during the Classic Maya period was undoubtedly diverse and complex. One area that remains poorly understood,
due to the little evidence recovered to date, concerns the tools used by ancient artisans in the craft production of greenstone
prestige goods. One persistent question remains: what were the raw materials of the tools used to manufacture specific sets of
jewels? To address this question I consider greenstone tesserae that form 13 ancient Maya mosaic masks and present a
technological study based on micro-archaeological approaches. These prestige goods were found in Classic period tombs (AD 300–
750) of high-elite individuals from Tikal, El Zotz, El Perú-Waka’, and El Tintal. My results suggest that limestone, jadeitite, and hide
were the main raw materials of the tools used to provide the polished appearance on the anterior sides of the greenstone tesserae,
while to cut their edges obsidian was preferred. I interpret these results as indicative of a standardization in the production of a
specific set of jewels, namely the tesserae that form the greenstone mosaic masks.
Melendez, Juan [166] see Aquino, Daniel
Melgar, Emiliano (Museo del Templo Mayor-INAH) and Reyna Solís (Museo del Templo Mayor-INAH)
[10]
Archaeometry of the Lapidary from Zalla and the Identification of Teotihuacan Relics in Tenochtitlan
The new archaeometrical characterization of the lapidary objects from Xalla allowed us to distinguish local and foreign goods among
this palace compound inside the multiethnic settlement of Teotihuacan. In this paper, we will present different non-destructive
techniques (UVF, IRR, OM, SEM-EDS, and µRaman) employed on this lapidary assemblage to identify their chemical composition,
mineralogy and provenance, and the characterization of their manufacturing traces. Using these methods, we detected raw
materials from diverse geological origins, like jadeite, green quartz, serpentine, travertine, and amazonite, among others. With the
traceological analysis, we distinguish four technological patterns. The comparison of them with the lapidary traditions developed in
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   373
Classic Mesoamerica allowed us to identify them as Teotihuacan, Maya, and Zapotec. Also, we note specific relationships and
cultural preferences between some types of raw materials, objects, and techniques. Finally, the temporal and spatial comparison of
these lapidary items with other sites, like the Great Temple of Tenochtitlan, confirmed the existence of lapidary relics with the
Teotihuacan technological style in Postclassic sites.
Melgar, Emiliano [54] see Melendez, Juan
Mellett, Claire [238] see Tizzard, Louise
Meltzer, David [173] see Vander Linden, Marc
Menaker, Alexander (University of Texas-Austin)
[200]
An Interloping Inka in the Valley of Volcanoes
The Andagua Valley is composed of lava flows, volcanoes and anthropogenic features (terraces and canals) that were subject to
Inka imperial reign. The highland valley was in the southwest area of the Inka Empire, known as Condesuyos, one of the four
regions of Tawantinsuyu. Spanish colonial and Andean historical accounts describe how the Inka intensified local settlements and
constructed new sites in the region, resettling populations to labor in administrative and ceremonial sites dedicated to sacred
regional volcanoes and mountains (wak’a) (Albornoz 1989 [1582]; Cieza de León 1967 [1553]; Guaman Poma 1980 [1613]). The
Valley of Volcanoes presented a novel landscape to the Inka with the volcanic landscape of the Southern Peruvian Andes distinct
from the Cuzco region. The tensions of empire and colonial encounters are manifest in social memories and the material landscape.
An oral history recounts a battle waged by regional volcanoes against the interloping Inka and an ushnu (ceremonial platform) was
built under Inka auspices that articulates with the contemporaneous volcanic lava flows of Ninamama (Mother-Fire). Archaeological
evidence, (ethno)historic and ethnographic sources illustrate how Inka imperial expansion (AD1400–1532) sought to incorporate the
local landscape, expand settlements and intensify infrastructure in the valley.
Mendelsohn, Rebecca (Metropolitan Museum of Art) and José Luis Macías (Instituto de Geofísica, UNAM)
[157]
Volcanic Hazards and Human Resilience: A View from Izapa, Chiapas, Mexico
This paper introduces the topics of volcanic hazards and human resilience, raising key questions for discussion and highlighting the
significance of several landmark studies. We also present preliminary results of ongoing research at the archaeological site of Izapa,
Chiapas, Mexico, a coastal settlement occupied for nearly 3,000 years, from ca. 1900 BC–AD 1100. It has long been known that this
coastal capital was constructed to align with the summit of the Tacaná volcano. Yet despite the dominating presence of volcanoes
on the local landscape, the impact of volcanic activity on the inhabitants of Izapa is not often discussed. Recently, Macías and his
colleagues have documented a large-scale eruption of Tacaná sometime between 30 BC and AD 80, which may have contributed to
social unrest at the site. Further comparison between the Tacaná eruptive sequence and settlement pattern data reveal that this
event may have been one of several eruptions that impacted life for Izapeños. We discuss the current geological and archaeological
evidence for volcanic eruptions and human resilience at Izapa and speculate on why residents may have chosen to continue
inhabiting the site despite continued risk of volcanic hazards.
[157]
Chair
Mendoza, Rubén (CSU Monterey Bay)
[225]
Discussant
Meng, Fanxiu
[66]
Paleoindian Use of the North Bank at the Blackwater Draw Site: Debitage and Stone Tool Patterns
Blackwater Draw Locality No.1, the Clovis type site located in eastern New Mexico, is one of the most important Paleoindian kill and
camp sites in North America. Several episodes of archaeological investigations have occurred at the site, but analyses of cultural
materials and dissemination of results remain in varied stages of completion. For example, the systematic analysis of lithic artifacts
recovered from excavations at the site’s “north bank” are still lacking. The goal of this project is to explore Paleoindian behavior by
examining patterns in lithic tools and debitage from a theoretical perspective of technological organization and risk management.
Discussion will address results in light of similar analyses conducted on materials recovered from the south bank to better
understand variability in Paleoindian behavior through time, as well as across space at Blackwater Draw, New Mexico.
Meng, Fanxiu [77] see Smith, Heather
Meng, Qi
[35]
The Development of Regional Imbalance in Prehistoric Xinjiang: Indication of the Burial Records
The archaeological record of prehistoric Xinjiang is integral to our understanding of Eurasian prehistory, although this vast territory is
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    374
usually treated as a single culturally homogeneous area. The distinctive characteristics of different geo-cultural units within it are not
given enough attention in most studies. Archaeological discoveries (mainly of burials) made during the last two decades illustrate
the substantial regional variability in cultural and social development to be seen within prehistoric Xinjiang. The eastern portion is
characterized by continuity, whereas the western part displays discontinuity to a large degree. Hierarchical societies seem to
develop much earlier in the northern part compared to elsewhere in Xinjiang. Additionally, external influences from adjacent areas,
namely, Gansu and Qinghai in China, Western Central Asia, Southern Siberia and Mongolia, play important roles in shaping these
regional differences.
Mennenga, Moritz [238] see Segschneider, Martin
Mennenga, Moritz [107] see Wolters, Steffen
Menzer, Jeremy [175] see Franklin, Jay
Merchant, Joe [249] see Fleisher, Jeffrey
Mercier, Simon [189] see Costa, Philippe
Merkle, Ann (Washington University in St. Louis) and Michael Frachetti (Washington University, St. Louis)
[261]
Innovative Traditions: Material Culture and Identity in the Highlands of Medieval Central Asia
How does the occupation of an urban site in a semi-remote part of the medieval Central Asian landscape affect concepts of identity
and community? This presentation will discuss recent archaeological research from the highland medieval site of Tashbulak,
Uzbekistan. Located in the foothills of the Zerafshan Mountains, Tashbulak shows evidence of heavily insular pottery production
concurrent with rich interaction through trade with lowland metropolises such as Samarkand, Chach and Akhsiket. The pottery, trade
goods, and other archaeological evidence from the site all suggest that Tashbulak was a liminal site of syncretism, cultural
preservation, and innovation, which presents new possibilities in how we define cities, identity, and religion.
[261]
Chair
Merkle, Ann [48] see Frachetti, Michael
Merod, Zoe [56] see Mills, Rebekah
Mersmann, Joy and John Stauffer (Washington University, St. Louis)
[166]
North American “Chac and Roll”: Material Correlates of Thunder God Symbolism in American Bottom Archaeology
North American and Mesoamerican material cultures exhibit similarities that were seen by early diffusionists as evidence for
northward migrations that catalyzed social complexity among Mississippian period (AD 1050–1500) cultures. Iconographically,
assemblages from both geographic areas highlight thunder deities wielding celtiform objects as symbols of politico-religious offices,
but Mississippian examples frequently include “striped pole” motifs that resemble historic and archaeological features in the middle
of community spaces. These iconographic subjects reveal that arrangements of central pole features in relation to the mounds and
plazas of North American sites require greater attention. In this study, we examine the arrangement of Emergent Mississippian (AD
850–1050) and Mississippian period central pole features at the Cahokia site over time to identify shifts in community spaces and
interpret the distribution of authority among their inhabitants, using viewsheds modeled in a geographic information system. We
hypothesize a shift occurring circa 1150 AD, and run a viewshed analysis on both a modern DEM and on a recreation of a pre-1150
DEM. Using this data, we address the changing structure of politico-religious authority at Cahokia as mediated through highly visible
center poles.
Mertan, Tamer [83] see Ugras, Funda
Mesia-Montenegro, Christian (Universidad Cientifica del Sur)
[182]
Secularism and Religiousness in Late Formative Ceramics from Chavin de Huántar
The pottery from the ceremonial center of Chavín de Huántar has been the reason for considerable attention by numerous
researchers who have highlighted various qualities related to its manufacturing and iconography. Special attention has been put in
ceramics qualified as ceremonial, from closed contexts (Ofrendas Gallery) inside the ceremonial center and from pottery with icons
related to supernatural beings (sensu Rowe 1962). At the same time, in the last decades has been identified a ceramic ensemble
recently recognized as janabarroide, which within its various attributes presents a series of patterned designs whose Basic units
have “S”, “U” and “O” shapes. This type of pottery appears in Chavín de Huántar in contexts outside the monumental nucleus
(Campo Oeste, Wacheqsa, la Banda, etc), while ceremonial ceramics with abundant anthropomorphic designs are found
overwhelmingly in the nuclear area of the Ceremonial Center. In that sense the this paper argues the existence of an intrinsic and
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      375
controlled segregation context of the use of ceramics according to the meanings and / or nature of the purposes for which they were
produced, sometimes allowing the occasional coexistence of both sets.
Messal, Sebastian [107] see Lueth, Friedrich
Messal, Sebastian [107] see Ruby, Bret
Messenger, Olivia [167] see Wilson, Jeremy
Messinger, Emma, John Walden (University of Pittsburgh), Michael Biggie (Los Angeles Maritime Institute), Victoria Izzo
(Texas A&M University) and Kirsten Green (University of Montana)
[178]
Examining Intermediate Elite Ancestor Veneration and Neighborhood Identity Formation through Mortuary Practices at Lower Dover,
Belize
Changes in burial practices and the construction of mortuary shrines can reflect key shifts in community identity over time. The
comparison of mortuary traditions between three minor centers in the Lower Dover polity reveals public and ideological affinities,
and allows us to create a chronology of power dynamics to investigate how the rise of a major polity impacted the political and
ceremonial landscape. The Late Classic growth of the Lower Dover polity sees corresponding transitions in the strategies of
surrounding intermediate elites at the minor centers of Tutu Uitz Na, Floral Park, and Barton Ramie. This presentation documents
changes in shrine architecture, artifact assemblages, and mortuary customs at each of these three intermediate elite centers to
detect trends in identity formation, and gauge the reception to the rise of Lower Dover. Examining mortuary trends in each of these
respective neighborhoods illustrates whether intermediate elites were employing ceremonial strategies of compliance or conflict with
the ascendant apical elite at Lower Dover. The emphasis on ancestor veneration at points of political conflict may be a means to
amplify lineage and neighborhood-level identities in contrast with incoming political narratives from the emergent polity.
Metcalfe, Duncan [245] see Boomgarden, Shannon
Metcalfe, Megan [238] see Evans, Amanda
Metz, Micca (Environmental Science Associates)
[167]
The Beauty behind How Our Families Loved Us: An Analysis of the Decorative Coffin Hardware of Subadults in Bethel Cemetery,
Indianapolis, IN
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, a cultural phenomenon began to develop in America where death became romanticized.
This cultural shift can be observed today in the preservation of mass-produced coffin hardware found in the graves of both children
and adults from all socioeconomic backgrounds. Decorative coffins from this era set the cultural mood of a nation as its people
coped with their own mortality. This has been referred to as the “beautification of death movement” and it sought to idealize death
and maintain a sense of connection between the living and their deceased. These pieces of coffin hardware played a part in
preserving the identity of the deceased. Plaques that read “Mother,” “Father,” or “Our Babe” in etched calligraphy suggest that in life
as in death the occupant of such a coffin was a member of society, possessing a specific identity. For the children, buried before
their identities have solidified, their loss to their family was still romanticized within their decorative burials. The coffin hardware
recovered from the graves of children in Bethel Cemetery in Indianapolis, Indiana supports this notion of the beautification of death
and the preservation of identity.
Meyer, Brett
[76]
An Assessment of Late Prehistoric Shellfish Exploitations in Western Wisconsin
An analysis of 800 freshwater mussel shells representing 28 species from an Oneota shell midden at the State Road Coulee site
(47LC176) in La Crosse County, Wisconsin, represents the largest midden assemblage recovered from any of the many local
Oneota sites. Mussel assemblages from Oneota Tradition agriculturalists (ca. 800–500 BP) are typically recovered from pit features
and consist of species from varied habitats due to their dual use as a food source and as temper for pottery. The State Road sample
is examined for variation in habitat exploitation and is also compared to a recent synthesis of regional mussel exploitation.
Meyer, Jana (University of Bonn, University of New Mexico)
[148]
The Spatial Distribution of Jewelry at Tijeras Pueblo: A GIS-Based Study Using Hot Spot Analysis
Jewelry can serve as an indicator of wealth and as markers of cultural identity on several social levels. An unequal distribution of
jewelry may be culturally significant and archaeologically informative on the social structure of a site. Using geographic information
systems (GIS), I analyze the spatial distribution of jewelry within Tijeras Pueblo via optimized hot spot analysis. Data are drawn from
publications resulting from the 1970s excavations. This study addresses two interconnected research goals: first, to assess the
nature of the spatial distribution of jewelry within the site: is jewelry distributed equally or unequally? Second, to test whether the
observed distribution provides evidence for unequal access to prestige and wealth, or alternatively, for the presence of jewelry craft
production within the site. Results show an unequal distribution of jewelry with a statistically significant hot spot in the northwest
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     376
portion of the main occupation mound. Based on the otherwise dispersed distribution of jewelry from rare materials and of jewelry
blanks and raw materials, this hot spot is likely related to ritual activities associated with a kiva that is located in the same area,
rather than indicating unequal access to wealth or jewelry workshops.
Meyer, Kelton (Colorado State University)
[68]
Tangible Data from Text: 3D Reconstruction of Smithsonian Excavations in Trench E at the Lindenmeier Folsom Site, Northern
Colorado
The Lindenmeier site is a well-known multi-cluster distribution of Folsom cultural deposits in northern Colorado, and it represents
either repeated occupation events, a single large aggregation episode, or possibly a combination of aggregated palimpsests. At
least nine clusters of artifacts/faunal remains are known, spread across an area of more than 800 linear m and encompassing nearly
2,000 m2 of excavations. The horizontal distribution of materials is generally well-understood from Frank Roberts’ excavations with
the Smithsonian Institution in Areas I and II on the western side of the site, and prior refit analysis of lithics suggests some degree of
contemporaneity within these two areas. Lesser known is the source of variation in the vertical dispersal of cultural materials present
in site backplots, either through geological reworking and bioturbation or perhaps from reoccupation by Folsom groups or later
occupants. This paper critically assesses the utility of 3D provenience information for individually mapped specimens, recorded in
detail by Roberts’ crew between 1938 and 1940, as one means of addressing the reoccupation/aggregation issue at Lindenmeier.
Interpretations for a 3D cluster analysis of chipped stone and faunal remains are presented for Trench E, a presently unpublished
Smithsonian excavation from 1938.
[68]
Chair
Meyer, Lauren [186] see van Leeuwen, Willem
Meyer Garza, Fabiola and William Pratt (University of Texas, Austin)
[201]
Not in the Litter: An Analysis of a Late Integration Midden Deposit at Cochasquí
Little ceramic analysis has been conducted at Cochasquí since the 1990s, and none has been done on the assemblage collected at
the largest pyramid at the site, Pyramid G. A small portion of Pyramid G was excavated in 2018 and 2019, revealing a previous
pyramid surface lined with a cangahua wall as well as a zone apparently representing an intact midden abutting the wall which
appears to have been swept or washed off the buried pyramid surface. This carbon-rich zone full of burned bone, ceramic sherds,
and shell fragments may be the only intact midden associated with pyramid use ever found at Cochasquí. As such, this deposit has
the potential to reveal not only the date of this previous occupation of the pyramid, but also yield clues to the much-debated function
of the pyramid. This paper reviews the implications of a midden being found inside of a pyramid, presents a brief interpretation of the
different vessel types that were found, and analyzes the ceramic fragments from this apparent midden, comparing them to ceramics
recovered from intact pyramid fill in order to test whether this zone truly represents an intact midden deposit.
Meyers, Allan [197] see Kolega, Matija
Meyers, Maureen (University of Mississippi) and Amber VanDerwarker (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[1]
Regional Contexts of Sexual Harassment in the United States: A Comparison of the SEAC and SCA Surveys
Sexual harassment has long been rampant in the discipline of archaeology, and until recently, our collective understanding of its
pervasiveness and effects has been largely anecdotal. Recent surveys on the topic aimed at the memberships of the Southeastern
Archaeological Conference (Meyers et al. 2018) and the Society for California Archaeology (Radde 2018; VanDerwarker et al. 2018)
are beginning to provide the data necessary to understand the rates and contexts of harassment in American settings. Interestingly,
while both surveys report high rates of harassment, the rate reported by SEAC members is nearly 20% greater than that reported in
the SCA survey (68% vs. 50%). This large discrepancy, along with significant demographic differences between the two samples,
reveals the need for a geographically broader survey implemented by the SAA to account for differential factors leading to this
divergence. Our presentation explores this discrepancy with the goal of discovering which variable(s) associate with the lower vs.
higher harassment rates in these two broad regions—an exercise which may allow us to pinpoint specific changes that could be
implemented in different contexts to reduce this seriously problematic behavior.
[1]
Chair
Meyers, Maureen (University of Mississippi)
[87]
Discussant
Meyers, Maureen [123] see Cordell, Ann
Meyers, Stephen [63] see Tankersley, Kenneth
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  377
Meza Rodriguez, Carolina [150] see Jurado, Erik
Michael, Amy (University of New Hampshire)
[153]
Moderator
[153]
Discussant
Michael, Amy [240] see Blatt, Samantha
Michael, Amy [212] see Dubois, Katherine
Michael, Amy [184] see Friese, Crystina
Michael, Amy [270] see Peterson, Kateea
Michelet, Dominique (CNRS/Université de PARIS 1)
[20]
About the Art and Energetic Costs of Stone Making in the Maya Puuc Region
During the span of about two centuries (AD 760–960) Maya builders reached one of the pinnacles of the art of construction in this
area of the northwestern Yucatán Peninsula. Designed initially to estimate the relative construction costs of three types of residential
structures (with perishable materials only or with non-vaulted and vaulted masonry), an experimental program was carried out in the
mid-1990s in the western Puuc region with the participation of the French limestone-cutting specialist, Jean-Claude Bessac. Based
on a study of the stigmata left behind by the making of exposed stones across various buildings, the program included the
replication of different types of specialized stones using only lithic tools: simple external veneer stones, veneer stones with mosaic
decoration and with glyphs, interior veneer stones, vaulted stones, cornices . . . Although preliminary, this study provided several
interesting results that will be presented in this paper.
Micheletti, George (University of Central Florida) and Terry Powis (Kennesaw State University)
[130]
Spatial Analysis of Hinterland Settlement at the Ancient Maya Site of Pacbitun, Belize
The 2019 periphery investigation at the prehispanic Maya center of Pacbitun, Belize successfully ground-truthed, mapped, and
tested hinterland settlement hierarchically classified as minor centers and high-status commoner residences—each identified and
categorized using lidar data prior to the field season. Interestingly, analysis of ceramics collected from plaza excavations and looted
buildings suggests that the initial phase of construction for each group date to the Late Classic period (AD 550–800). While a Late
Classic construction origin for the largest and most complex periphery groups at a site that was founded a millennium and a half
earlier during the Middle Preclassic period (ca. 900 BC) was not expected, the dating aligns well with prior settlement research at
Pacbitun which indicates a dramatic rise in the periphery population. These constructions also coincide with Late Classic
sociopolitical turmoil evinced in the physical and functional alterations to site core architecture. I believe physical and spatial
attributes of Pacbitun’s periphery groups reflect these changes and support their Late Classic construction. This presentation will
examine spatial attributes associated with group configuration, location, orientation, and complexity which emulates the alterations
to socio-ritual practices of the royal elite and possibly demonstrates defensive strategies during a time of political instability.
Micheletti, George (University of Central Florida)
[155]
Discussant
Micheletti, George [197] see Skaggs, Sheldon
Michigan State University, [185] see Quates, E. W. Duane
Micon, Jonathan (University of Georgia)
[63]
Status, Signaling, and St. Lawrence Iroquoian Incorporation
This study employs regional demographic profiles and ethnohistoric literature as interpretive tools to argue that the social context in
which St. Lawrence Iroquoians (SLI) were brought into emerging Haudenosaunee and Huron-Wendat communities affected the
ways in which they signaled previous identities in their new social environments. During the sixteenth century AD, peoples identified
broadly as SLI relocated among villages belonging to the nascent Huron-Wendat and Haudenosaunee confederacies. It is often
argued that the incorporation of SLI into Haudenosaunee communities involved the adoption of captives whereas the incorporation
of SLI into Huron-Wendat communities involved the sheltering of refugees. In the case of individual captivity, it is expected that SLI
newcomers would be less likely to publicly signal prior identities than in a scenario where large groups of SLI were incorporated on
equal terms. High-value materials are more likely to convey social messages and reflect changes—or not—in status, ideology, and
displayed identities. This study tests this hypothesis by examining the frequency and regional distribution of SLI-associated high-
value materials on sites located in southern Ontario and central New York State dating to circa AD 1450–1600.
Middleton, Arthur [75] see Todd, Lawrence
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      378
Middleton, Sherri [148] see Portman, Katherine
Mierswa, Emily (Simon Fraser University)
[202]
The Ethos of Less Invasive Archaeological Methods: Case Studies from the Northeastern United States
If ethical archaeological field practice is one that maximizes information while seeking to minimize site disturbance, then minimally
and noninvasive methods should be applicable to a wide range of archaeological contexts. While minimally invasive methods have
been a part of archaeological inquiry since the mid-1980’s there has been no systematic exploration of why and when
archaeologists choose these methods. Before archaeologists can fully embrace these methods as standard practice, we need to
reflect and ask, “what is the relative value of these practices?”. This research constitutes a first step in this discourse by considering
what scientific and ideological considerations go into the choice to use minimally and noninvasive methods with case studies drawn
from the Northeastern United States. Understanding the context of less invasive methods in the field provides key background for
archaeologists as the discipline shifts and grows with new technology, methods, and ethical considerations into the 2020s.
Mietes, Esther [100] see Napolitano, Matthew
Mikeska, Christine (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill)
[22]
Understanding Patterns of Indigenous White-Tailed Deer (Odocoileus virginianus) Exploitation in the North Carolina Piedmont Using
Strontium (87Sr/86Sr) Isotope Analysis
The varied responses by Native communities within the American Southeast to European colonization resulted in a period of
dynamic social, economic, and political change. One such response to the colonial encounter was the development of a robust trade
in the skins of white-tailed deer. In this paper, I focus on the effects of the deerskin trade on the deer exploitation practices of Native
communities within the North Carolina Piedmont using strontium isotope analysis (87Sr/86Sr), identifying patterns of mobility and
estimating hunting territories. Through the analysis of archaeofaunal assemblages from five Piedmont sites dating from AD 1450 to
1710 in the Eno and Dan River drainages, I identify multiple patterns of change in Indigenous hunting behaviors. Situating these
contrasting patterns of exploitation within the broader context of European colonization and the deerskin trade, these results
highlight the dynamic and community-specific responses of Native communities to the disruptions and opportunities represented by
the colonial encounter.
Miklashevisch, Elena [25] see Mattioli, Tommaso
Milbrath, Susan (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[225]
Take My Heart, Take My Head: Death among Gods in the Codex Borgia
Ritual violence is well represented in the Codex Borgia, a masterpiece from early sixteenth century Central Mexico. Narrative
scenes depict Venus gods alongside deities honored during seasonal veintena festivals known from the Valley of Mexico and
Tlaxcala. The Aztec Tlacaxipehualiztli festival featured sacrifice of Xipe Totec’s impersonators during March. In the Codex Borgia,
the god himself is represented as the victim stretched out on a round stone. Venus gods appear alongside, indicating the planet
plays an important role. The 18-page narrative references specific veintena festivals to provide a chronological framework for events
involving the changing Venus phases. Another page in the narrative represents Quecholli, a November festival honoring Camaxtli.
Here we see this hunting god on a tzompantli, evoking a decapitation ritual described in the Aztec festival of Quecholli, when
severed heads were placed on Mixcoatl-Camaxtli’s skull rack. The Codex Borgia shows Camaxtli merged with the skeletal “lord of
dawn” at a time when Venus was transiting the underworld during Quecholli. Alongside, Quetzalcoatl extracts
Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli’s heart, meaning one Venus god kills the other, representing a transition in Venus phases. Then below we see
Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli’s decapitation, symbolizing the final underworld transformation of Venus, just prior to the Evening Star’s
reappearance.
Miles, Aimee [100] see Levin, Maureece
Millaire, Jean-François [243] see Hyland, Corrie
Millard, Andrew [199] see Adams, Alisha
Miller, Bryan (University of Michigan)
[62]
Imperial Impact: Population Dynamics and Social Landscapes of Inner Asia under the First Steppe Empire
This paper integrates survey, mortuary and genetic research into a multidisciplinary and multiscalar consideration of the impact that
large political regimes (i.e., empires) have on the social landscapes of individual communities and whole regions. In the case of the
first steppe empire of Inner Asia (the Xiongnu), while material accoutrements of political culture became increasingly homogenous
across vast areas of the steppe, constituents of local communities often shifted, resulting in highly intermixed local populations, and
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 379
individual locales were reorganized into new regional hierarchies that fed into the supra-regional polity.
Miller, Christopher [6] see Gonzalez, Juan
Miller, Christopher [11] see Matos, Daniela
Miller, D. Shane (Mississippi State University), James Strawn (University of Georgia), Derek Anderson (Mississippi State
University) and Kara Larson (Mississippi State University)
[180]
Renewed Investigations at the Hester (22MO569) and Beachum-Harrison (22MO1011) Sites in Amory, Mississippi
In 2017–2019, a 35 m2 block excavation, four test units, sixteen bucket auger tests, and 37 shovel tests were excavated at the
Hester site (22MO569) and Beachum-Harrison (22MO1011) sites to investigate the spatial boundaries and geoarchaeological
context of the site. Analyses of artifacts and sediments recovered from a 3 × 2 m locus during the 2017 excavations at the Hester
site suggest that the site contains Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene deposits that are stratified and near primary context. In this
paper, we discuss the results of the analyses conducted following the 2017 field season, which includes three new radiocarbon
dates from the Hester site, and survey and testing at the Beachum-Harrison site.
Miller, Ian (University of Oklahoma), Thomas Fenn (University of Oklahoma) and Glenys McGowan (University of
Queensland)
[234]
Ancient Economics in West Africa: A Study of Copper Production and Trade at Marandet, Niger
Copper metals, in high demand in ancient sub-Saharan Africa, were used as a medium of exchange, a material resource, and as
wearable adornments. Extensive remains of metal production found at Marandet, Niger, show that it played a key role in ancient
Trans-Saharan economies. Different copper alloys passed through and were produced at Marandet, and were disseminated along
local, regional and long-distance West African trade networks during the first and second Millennia AD. Likewise, different goods,
technologies, and ideas were exchanged through these networks across the Sahara and within sub-Saharan Africa. This paper
presents new scientific research on ceramic crucibles and metal samples from Marandet employing electron microprobe analysis
(EMPA) and 3D photogrammetry to explore anthropological and humanistic questions about past West African societies. Chemical
and microstructural data derived from EMPA provide a better understanding of technologies used and materials produced
connected to Trans-Saharan trade and commerce. 3D photogrammetry of the crucibles allows for reconstructing technological
aspects and variability of their production and use, while also providing new high-resolution documentation. Results of this research
provides new and insightful information about the role of Marandet in producing and traded these metals, and the structure and
interaction of ancient economies in the region.
Miller, Jennifer [38] see Radican, Kelsey
Miller, Kevin and Steve Carpenter (SWCA Environmental Consultants)
[194]
Excavation and Innovation at the Llano Terrace Site (41MS78), Mason County, Texas
The Llano Terrace site (41MS78) is a prehistoric campsite on the western terraces of the Llano River in Mason County, Texas.
Bisected by Ranch-to-Market (RM) 1871, the site is composed of stratified cultural components in deep alluvial sediments exposed
in roadcuts along both sides of the existing roadway. Cultural materials, mainly chipped stone tools and earth ovens composed of
fire-cracked local limestone, span the Early to Late Archaic (8800–2000 BP). Excavations targeted a Middle Archaic Calf Creek
component (circa 5300 BP), one of the more prominent components on this and nearby sites. The site contributes data to explore
the regional expression of a complex that extends from Texas to Missouri. Data recovery excavations posed several logistical and
interpretative challenges, including excavating on a steep slope over an active roadway, assessing past site damage from roadway
maintenance, collating geomorphological and cultural components across both sides of the wide RM 1871 roadway, and
determining chronology with a variety of tactics. The work utilized traditional excavation methodology combined with innovative
technologies (drones, optically stimulated luminescence dating, Structure from Motion photogrammetry) to comprehensively explore
the site. This paper discusses the preliminary results of these investigations and how the various challenges were successfully met.
Miller, Kye (PaleoWest Archaeology) and Jeremy Loven (PaleoWest Archaeology)
[193]
Curiosity and Collaboration: Interaction with the Tribal Public in Northwestern New Mexico
Between 2011 and 2019, PaleoWest Archaeology assisted the Bureau of Reclamation with the nation’s largest federally-funded
archaeology project, the Navajo-Gallup Water Supply Project (NGWSP) in northwest New Mexico. A substantial portion of the
project is on Navajo Nation tribal lands and the archaeological work conducted ahead of this water infrastructure project was of
great interest to local Navajo people and other descendant and consulting tribes. This presentation summarizes our experience with
the tribal public as part of NGWSP.
Miller, Mary
[265]
Visualizing Battle: What We Can Still Learn from Bonampak
Fire was instrumental to Maya life. They needed firewood for cooking and to burn the limestone that would allow for plain dry maize
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       380
to become nutritious nixtamal. And they used fire as a weapon of war. In the Bonampak murals, in a badly eroded scene, a warrior
leaps atop a temple to set it afire. Long thought to be a characteristic representation of Central Mexican warfare—whether rendered
at Chichen Itza or in Colonial manuscripts—this practice of burning the sacred architecture in the course of battle itself can be
demonstrated to be present among the Classic Maya. In fact, the practices of Mesoamerican warfare, from the taking of captives to
death on the battlefield to the burned, scorched destruction of city architecture, can be shown as present among the eighth-century
Maya.
Miller, Mason
[147]
A Presentation and Interpretation of YouTube Livestream Viewing Analytics from a Central Texas Excavation Project Public
Outreach
From mid October 2018 to early April 2019, archaeologists from AmaTerra Environmental, Inc., Texas State University and the
Center for Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted data recovery excavations at the
Headwaters Site (41CM204), in New Braunfels, Texas. Along with intensive excavations (proposed for presentation by others), the
project included a substantial public engagement component that included weekly livestreams on YouTube from the excavation site.
The videos, hosted by the archaeologists themselves and primarily developed by the author, provided live excavation updates,
question/answer sessions, and an in-depth explanation of a fundamental aspect of archaeological research (e.g., dating techniques,
measuring instruments, geoarchaeology). To date, the team has developed 14 live updates and two post-field recorded updates that
are still accessible on YouTube that have amassed nearly 3,000 views and more than 254 hours of viewing time (accessible at
https://bit.ly/2m5vVDT). This poster will summarize the Live Stream component and present interpretations from videos’ viewing
analytics provided by YouTube to identify topics of interest, viewer retention patterns, and more. Finally, the poster will provide
[sometimes hard-earned] tips and suggestions that the author has learned through developing the outreach.
Miller, Mason [194] see Parker, Adam
Miller, Mel (University of Tulsa)
[162]
Artifact Condition, Site Formation, and Artifact Utilization at the Fauresmith Site of Bestwood, South Africa
The Fauresmith site of Bestwood, Northern Cape, South Africa is a large lithic accumulation and a transitional lithic industry site. In
order to gain insight into site formation and artifact utilization at this and other lithic accumulation and transitional sites, we
documented artifact condition and identified microwear traces of artifact use. Raw material samples of banded ironstone were
collected from the Kuruman Hills and used in a series of postdepositional and functional experiments. To assess postdepositional
damage, an artifact condition ranking system was developed based on ridge width changes documented during tumbling
experiments. In addition, use-wear experiments were conducted for several tasks, including butchery, woodworking, and hide
working. The resulting edge damage and ridge width patterns on the experimental tools are compared to Bestwood artifacts
excavated from two areas of the site, allowing us to infer artifact condition and artifact utilization across the site. The results of this
research have implications for the formation of large lithic accumulation sites, the development and utilization of transitional lithic
industries, and niche construction and human impact on the environment in deep time.
Miller, Melanie (University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand), Iain Kendall (University of Bristol, England), Richard Evershed
(University of Bristol, England) and Christine Hastorf (University of California, Berkeley)
[61]
Protein from the Land, Not the Lake: New Interpretations of Human Dietary Patterns for Inhabitants of Southern Lake Titicaca,
Bolivia, Using Bulk and Compound-Specific Amino Acid Stable Isotope Data (1500 BC–AD 1100)
Decades of archaeological research on the Taraco Peninsula (Lake Titicaca, Bolivia) have provided detailed datasets indicating
dynamic subsistence practices including farming, herding, and fishing. Stable isotope analysis of human skeletal tissues has
focused on bulk isotope data (primarily bone collagen C and N isotope data) to track general dietary habits. Compound-specific
amino acid stable isotope analysis provides a further level of detail, allowing identification of foods from freshwater, marine, and
terrestrial environments. Our research combines these isotopic methods to study the diets of people living on the Taraco Peninsula
from 1500 BC to AD 1100. Earlier research identified an isotopic overlap between maize, a C4-plant, and fish from Lake Titicaca.
Using a multi-isotope approach, we analysed teeth (enamel and dentin) for bulk carbon and nitrogen isotope data and compound-
specific amino acid carbon isotope data. The δ13C values of Taraco Peninsula peoples rise over time, driven by increased
consumption of maize, not lake fish. Additionally, terrestrial protein sources, such as quinoa, were the primary dietary protein
sources, with less consumption of terrestrial meats and lake fish than anticipated. This research demonstrates the importance of
using multiple isotope datasets to reach more nuanced understandings of dietary practices in human history.
Miller, Myles (Versar)
[135]
Using Multiple Methods to Examine Multiple Radiocarbon Chronologies: An Example from the U.S. Southwest
Analysis of over 4,000 radiocarbon age estimates reveals changing frequencies in architectural forms, technologies, and settlement
patterns spanning the period of 3500–400 BP in the Jornada region of the American Southwest. Analysis of multiple summed
probability distributions reveals several distinctive trends throughout the terminal Middle Holocene and Late Holocene and
corresponding Middle Archaic, Late Archaic, and Ceramic cultural periods, revealing punctuated demographic swings and regional
abandonments, technological and subsistence developments, and the appearance of new ideologies and their associated
iconographic expressions. The use of summed probability distributions provides a first order approximation of chronological trends
and means of comparing trends among multiple dated phenomena. However, it is difficult to isolate the boundaries, or beginning
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 381
and ending dates, of the patterns. This lack of precision in bounding temporal periods hinders comparisons of the cultural
sequences with high resolution paleoenvironmental data and high resolution (tree-ring dated) cultural sequences in adjacent
regions. Bayesian modeling and kernel density estimation are two methods that offer a means of resolving this problem, allowing for
the temporal boundaries of certain trends to be isolated and refined. A comparison of phase boundaries determined through
Bayesian modeling and kernel density estimation is presented for multiple phenomena.
Miller, Myles [136] see Graves, Timothy
Miller, Naomi (Univ of Pennsylvania Museum & ISAW)
[124]
Discussant
Miller, Sarah
[87]
Moderator
Miller, Sarah, Sara Ayers-Rigsby (Florida Public Archaeology Network), Karen Walker (Florida Museum of Natural History),
Rachael Kangas (Florida Public Archaeology Network) and Michelle LeFebvre (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[146]
Resiliency and Adaptation Challenges Ahead for Florida’s Heritage Monitoring Scouts
Climate change is having an immediate and devastating effect on archaeological sites in Florida. The Florida Public Archaeology
Network’s Heritage Monitoring Scouts (HMS Florida) program empowers local communities to document the impacts of climate
change at various sites throughout the state. While archaeology reveals how people have lived in coastal areas through weather
events and past fluctuations in climate, the scale of modern climate change can be overwhelming. Our ability to document sites can
show humanity’s resilience to these fluctuations while also making it clear that adaptation and mitigation of coastal areas must be
paramount. This paper will explore two case studies from coastal Florida that have served as visceral points of focus for local
communities to see the impacts of climate change. At Shell Bluff Landing in the northeast part of the state a site stewardship
program was developed to closely document changes in time over the last year with alarming results. In the opposite corner of the
state at Calusa Island, a private land trust was created to protect local natural environments from the impacts of development. The
Calusa Land Trust has subsequently seen massive loss due to erosion.
Miller, Virginia (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[141]
The Disembodied Eye in Maya Art and Ritual Practice
The ritual use and display of skulls, digits, and femurs is well documented for the Maya and other Mesoamerican groups. But except
for the heart, few sources describe how organs and soft body tissues were curated during the brief time they could been have been
viable for manipulation or display. Nevertheless, there is rich corpus of Mesoamerican art demonstrating that such exhibitions must
have taken place. Extruded eyeballs, often with the optic nerve still attached, form part of the iconographic complex associated with
death, although rarely on a monumental scale during the Classic period. During the Terminal Classic and later, however, images of
human sacrifice and its aftermath become more prominent and public. In the northern Maya lowlands, pendant and detached
eyeballs are among the motifs represented, sometimes as adornments for humans and non-humans. Furthermore, crania from the
Sacred Cenote of Chichen Itza show evidence of eyeball extraction, suggesting that eyeballs were removed, presumably from
sacrificial victims, and manipulated postmortem. The active power of sight is demonstrated by the Classic-era practice of mutilating
the face, and especially the eyes, of rulers represented in sculpture and paintings. Did the ancient Maya also take out and display
the eyes of the defeated?
Miller, Virginia [225] see Tiesler, Vera
Mills, Barbara (University of Arizona)
[29]
Discussant
Mills, Barbara (University of Arizona) and Lynne Goldstein (Michigan State University)
[72]
The Demographics of Grants(man)ship: What We Know and What We Wished We Knew
As part of the SAA Task Force on Gender Disparities in Research Grant Submissions, we analyzed data from a number of sources
to better understand gendered imbalances in archaeological grant applications. In this paper we first summarize our results, as
reported in American Antiquity by Goldstein et al. (2018). We then reflect on some of the strengths and drawbacks in the data we
collected during the process of conducting our research. Strengths included the cooperation of program officers, the availability of
association-wide demographic data from the AAA, and the incorporation of extensive interviews with 36 female SAA members that
provided qualitative data to complement quantitative trends. Drawbacks include the lack of recent and comprehensive SAA surveys,
accessibility of certain forms of data from federal agencies (e.g., NEH and NSF), and a large enough interview sample to be able to
look at how gender, other dimensions of diversity, and workplace setting intersect. We close with suggestions on how this study
might be followed upon, and especially the need for continued research and monitoring of grant submissions and success.
Mills, Barbara [26] see Giomi, Evan
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    382
Mills, Barbara [160] see Knox, Corey
Mills, Barbara [184] see Molinares, Stephen
Mills, Rebekah (SIPA, Columbia University), Rachel Brody (Boston College), Valerie Watson, Lauren Brooks (PaleoWest
Archaeology) and Zoe Merod (Ithaca College)
[56]
Hidden Figures: The Women of Irish Archaeology
Last year among the top five hashtags in Ireland was #repealthe8th. On May 25, 2018, the amendment that largely banned all
abortions was repealed. With this vote, many Irish women felt their voices were finally heard. With women’s rights and activism at
the forefront in Irish politics how has the role of women in Irish archaeology changed? Following a similar trajectory to women in
American archaeology, those in Ireland faced similar plights. Until the building of the National Museum of Ireland in the late
nineteenth century, the Royal Irish Academy (RIA) and the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland (RSAI) held Ireland’s
archeological and antiquarian collections. Today, these societies continue to be influential in defining Irish archeology. Yet, it was
not until 1949 that the first woman was admitted as a full member to the RIA. The RIA, today, writes that “the profession [of
archaeology] is one of the most gender-equal professions in Europe,” historically that has not been true. Who and where are women
in Irish archaeology? We will explain how women have been active in archaeology well before they were officially invited and the
many contributions they have and continue to make in Irish archaeology.
Milton, Emily (Michigan State University)
[67]
Testing the Water: Challenges of Developing an Isotopic Baseline for the Central Andes
The abrupt topography created by the Andes mountains along western South America creates a close-knit series of vertically
diverse and sometimes harsh ecological zones. Evidence for early inter-zonal connections between multiple environments comes
from Terminal Pleistocene sites at both the highlands and the coast in Southern Peru. While oxygen isotopes are commonly used
for investigating trends in mobility and land use, complications remain for linking values with their local sources (Knudson 2009).
This poster presents the results of oxygen isotope samples taken over 12 months. The water sampling survey transects extended
from the coast to the highlands during wet and dry seasons. Preliminary results demonstrate the complexity of modern
environmental conditions and the necessity for region-specific testing in propagating secure archaeological baselines. While these
data demonstrate spatial and temporal patterns, further investigation is needed to show how modern environmental trends relate to
those of the past.
Milton, Emily [180] see Rademaker, Kurt
Minc, Leah, Marcus Winter (INAH Oaxaca) and Cira Martínez López (INAH Oaxaca)
[39]
Intra-valley Exchange before the Rise of Monte Albán: New Data from Trace-element Analyses of Rosario Phase Ceramics
The Rosario phase (ca. 700–500 BCE) in the Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico, represents the period immediately preceding the rise of
Monte Albán and predates processes of political centralization associated with the emergence of the Zapotec state. Relatively little
is known about intra-valley interactions during this early time, beyond interpretations based on settlement pattern analyses. As part
of our on-going INAA program to assess ceramic exchange in the valley, we here present provenance data on fragments of more
than 1,000 ceramic vessels drawn from well-dated Rosario (N = 849) and Rosario/ MA Early I (N = 154) contexts from sites in all
three arms of the valley. Comparisons of their chemical signatures with natural clays collected throughout the valley, as well as with
wasters from known ceramic production sites, have allowed us to distinguish more than a dozen distinct ceramic-producing regions
and to track the movement of different pottery wares within the valley. Our results indicate a much greater degree of exchange
interaction than expected and have significant implications for understanding the economic and political geography of this key time
period.
Minerbi, Joanne (California State University, Northridge) and Elisabeth Rareshide (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[254]
To Be a Scholar Is to Be Relevant: Sharing Knowledge with the Public
Academic learning and publishing can be insular in nature and use opaque language. We are groomed to communicate with peers
and mentors. We are incentivized to publish content for an audience of similarly educated individuals. However, in the current anti-
intellectual political and cultural environment, it is crucial that we communicate with the public. Moreover, we have a moral call to do
so. Professional or academic status is neither an excuse nor a barrier to fulfilling this obligation. We present a case study in public
outreach to the Fernandeño Tataviam Band of Mission Indians (Southern California). Our lithics educational workshop was initially
offered to a family-oriented audience on two occasions. It was later presented as a professional, in-service seminar to the tribe’s
Native American cultural monitors. Through approachable language, an accessible format, demonstrations, and experiential
learning, participants learned about the deep history of lithic technology, mechanics of working with stone, and the kinds of
information that we can learn from this cultural material. We encourage our fellow archaeologists to creatively share what they have
discovered with the public. Our project emphasizes the value of giving back to the community, especially to the very people whose
cultural heritage we study.
Mink, Philip (University of Kentucky)
[255]
Let Them Eat Cheno-ams: Alan Sullivan and Beheading the King Corn Mythos in Grand Canyon Archaeology
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       383
Prior to Alan Sullivan’s research Formative Period, Grand Canyon subsistence settlement models presumed prehistoric peoples
settled in localities based on the proximity to areas most conducive to growing maize. These obligate models have been slowly
revised by Sullivan and his student’s research over the past 30 years. The excavation of Site 17 in the Upper Basin of Kaibab
National Forest produced the first compelling evidence that corn might not actually be the “king” of subsistence prehistorically in the
Grand Canyon. Instead research in the Upper Basin has suggested a subsistence strategy where prehistoric peoples actively
engineered the landscape through fire and other techniques to encourage abundance in a variety of wild resources that could be
exploited with little need for maize. These facultative models seem to fit the data recovered from the archaeological record better
than the poorly substantiated ethnographic analogies. This paper will focus on my research that expands Sullivan’s ideas beyond
the Upper Basin to the Grand Canyon, as a whole.
[255]
Chair
Minkoff, Mary (James Madison’s Montpelier)
[259]
A Cup, a Saucer, and Power: An Examination of the Relationship between Enslaved People and Overseer at James Madison’s
Montpelier
This paper will examine how archaeology can be used to ask and answer new questions about power dynamics at plantations across
the American Mid-Atlantic and Southeast through the analysis of the materials at James Madison’s Montpelier. Using fragments of
matching teawares recovered archaeologically from both the enslaved field laborers’ quarters and the nearby overseer’s house as an
entry point to this analysis, this paper will explore the complex relationships between the elite white plantation owners, the hired white
overseers, and the enslaved African Americans. Using historical documents and archaeological remains it will explore the varying
limitations on social and physical mobility, aspirational ideas, as well as access to material goods, specifically ceramics, between these
three groups. By including the overseers in this discussion, a group that is often left out of the historical documents and modern
historical and archaeological research, this paper strives to tell a more complete story of the plantation.
Minnis, Paul (University of Oklahoma)
[98]
Discussant
Miranda, Paula [143] see Scheinsohn, Vivian
Miron Marvan, Esteban
[221]
History and Archaeological Heritage and the Modern Maya
Modern Maya peoples have been denied of their right to appropriate their own history and archaeological heritage. After almost
three decades of multiculturalism in Mexican laws and state rhetoric there is still a lot of colonial ideas, practices, and laws that
prevent the participation of indigenous communities in the heritage discourses and their involvement in the management of
archaeological heritage. This paper is about the current perceptions of history, archaeology and heritage among the Maya Ch´ol of
northern Chiapas, who have articulated, without the help and despite the Mexican national state, a sense of history and time in their
landscapes. The Ch´ol and the modern Maya peoples are interested to hear from the words written by the Classic Maya in
languages related to what they talk now, and they have their own questions to ask the historical and archaeological record. They
want the world to know that they walk next to us carrying the wisdom of their ancestors.
Miron Marvan, Esteban [197] see Campiani, Arianna
Misarti, Nicole [243] see Alfonso-Durruty, Marta
Mistretta, Brittany (University of Florida)
[22]
Nourishing Social Bonds: Tracing the Costly Signals of Caribbean Communal Rituals in Archaeofaunal Remains
Ceremonial centers from the precolumbian Caribbean are traditionally defined on the basis of exotic or elite ceramic and lithic
artifacts and architectural features such as plazas and ball courts. Thus, rituals at these centers are confined solely to interactions
between elite individuals who facilitated and managed ritual practices. However, increasing evidence in Caribbean archaeology
suggests that groups likely gathered at designated ceremonial centers that served as neutral grounds for conducting public ritual
exchanges to build and maintain alliances. Presented in this paper are preliminary results from a zooarchaeological analyses of
faunal assemblages from MC-6, a Later Ceramic ceremonial center in the Turks and Caicos Islands. This research reexamines
interpretations that confine rituals to elite activities through zooarchaeological analyses and within a human behavioral ecology
framework to identify markers of costly signaling strategies as evidence of rituals that involved group interactions and communal
cooperation as a means of community building. Costly signaling behaviors have been linked to communal rituals because they
communicate a dedication to ritual participation and upholding group obligations. Incorporating communal activities into the
spectrum of ritual practices provides a more complete understanding of the function of ceremonial centers in the social dynamics of
precolumbian Caribbean societies.
[22]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   384
Mitchell, Douglas, Laurene Montero (Pueblo Grande Museum), Mark Chenault (WestLand Resources Inc.) and Todd
Bostwick (Verde Valley Archaeology Center)
[71]
Sixty Years of Unpublished Data from Pueblo Grande Museum: Analysis of Artifacts from the Platform Mound and Surrounding
Areas
In the late 1980s, the Pueblo Grande Archival Project began with the goal of assembling and publishing the results of archaeological
investigations conducted from 1929 through the 1980s. Pueblo Grande is one of the most important prehistoric Hohokam village
sites in southern Arizona, containing a platform mound, ball court, and other public architecture. Three volumes of the Archival
Series were published by the late 1990s providing details of the mound and history of the Museum. The artifact studies volume was
begun in the mid-1990s, but languished. Over the last three years, a team of specialists analyzed selected artifacts and ecofacts
collected from the Pueblo Grande Platform Mound and immediate vicinity to explore research themes pertaining to use of one of the
few (and possibly largest) remaining intact platform mound complexes in the Phoenix Basin. Despite challenges with using legacy
collections, these analyses of marine shell artifacts, ground stone, projectile points, pottery, wooden tools, faunal bone tools,
ornaments, and food residue, suggest wide-ranging cultural interaction and exchange throughout the occupation of the site with an
emphasis on specialized activities on the platform mound.
Mitchell, Mark [198] see Mandel, Rolfe
Mitchell, Spencer (University of California, Santa Barbara), Marisol Cortes-Rincon (Humboldt State University), Cady
Rutherford (University at Texas, San Antonio), Jonathan Roldan (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Jeremy McFarland
(Humboldt State University)
[53]
Ritual Deposits of N950: A Ritual Site in the Hinterlands of Dos Hombres, Belize
In this paper, we consider the ritual deposits found within the N950 site, which is located on the Dos Hombres to Gran Cacao
Archaeology Project (DH2GC) in northwestern Belize. The site possesses a central shrine, seven monuments, a ball court and multiple
subterranean features. All these features create a small-scale, yet complex ritual landscape in the hinterlands of Dos Hombres. Several
of these features possess associated ritual deposits. By analyzing the excavation data, the spatial arrangements of the features through
geospatial analysis and ethnographic accounts of modern-day Maya religious practices, we will present the potential purposes of these
deposits. This would ultimately enable us to understand N950 within a regional social and economic context.
Mitchell, Spencer [230] see Cortes-Rincon, Marisol
Mitchell, Spencer [239] see Mailler, Mary
Mitchell, Spencer [178] see Rutherford, Cady
Mitrovica, Jerry [162] see Borreggine, Marisa
Mizoguchi, Koji (Kyushu University, Japan) and Junko Uchida (Institute of History and Philology, Academia Sinic)
[205]
A Lot More Than Burying the Dead: How Certain Mortuary Strategies Were Chosen at the Late Shang Kingly Mortuary Ceremonies
This paper will compare and correlate the events and/or trends of the Late Shang Kings, which have been ‘recorded’ in such
classics as Shiji and the Bamboo Chronicles and recognized their ‘factuality’, including the achievements and failures of the
respective kings and the events that happened during their reigns, with actual mortuary strategies adopted at the burial ceremonies
of the respective kings. Why a certain strategy was chosen/adopted by the person/group who decided as to how a king should be
buried will be interpreted. It will be suggested that the kings themselves were involved in the decision as to how their mortuary
ceremonial process should be conducted.
Mlyniec, Michael [176] see Almer, Calista
Mlyniec, Michael [50] see Fitzhugh, William
Moates, Jeffrey (FPAN), Eric Prendergast (Cardno) and Rebecca O’Sullivan (Florida Public Archaeology Network)
[193]
Erased to Re-Placed: Collaboration in Search of Zion Cemetery, a Segregation-Era African American Burial Ground in Tampa,
Florida
In June of 2019, the Tampa Bay Times broke an explosive story on the discovery of death certificates and historic maps indicating a
previously unknown cemetery might lie under a tangle of roads, public housing, and commercial buildings. Florida Public
Archaeology Network staff had been working with the reporter for several months, assisting with background research and GIS
work. Once the story broke, Tampa Housing Authority (THA) contracted with local archaeologists at Cardno to assess the claims
and conduct an archaeological survey. THA formed an Archaeological Advisory Committee of residents, community leaders, and
local activists to guide the management of the erased cemetery. CRM and public archaeologists joined the committee in a real-time
decision making process open to the press and the community at large. This paper details the importance of a unique collaboration
between CRM professionals, public archaeologists, and the press in a project of high public interest.
Moates, Jeffrey (FPAN)
[220]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     385
Moe, Jeanne (Institute for Heritage Education)
[103]
Ruthann Knudson: Legacy of Education and Public Outreach
Ruthann Knudson was always a proponent of archaeology education and public outreach. As her student at the University of Idaho,
I got to see Ruthann in action early in my career. Ruthann’s dedication to involving the public stuck with me, and everywhere I went
for school and employment, I volunteered to go to schools for presentations on archaeological inquiry and stewardship. While
working for the Bureau of Land Management in Utah, I was lucky to be a founding member of the National Project Archaeology
program, which now serves nearly 40 states with high-quality archaeology education for teachers, students, and informal educators.
After retirement, Ruthann moved to Montana and, true to form, became a force to be reckoned with in archaeology and public
outreach. Ruthann was an inspiration, a friend, and mentor to all. This paper traces Ruthann’s influence on archaeology education
and the history of Project Archaeology and the program’s impact on the profession.
Moeller, Maddie [63] see Herzner, Louis
Moes, Emily [233] see Ray, Erin
Molina Muñoz, Priscilla [189] see Costa, Philippe
Molinares, Stephen (University of Arizona; LSWHTA), Tony Viola IV (University of Ariozna), Sara Chavarria (University of
Ariozna) and Barbara Mills (University of Ariozna)
[184]
Translating Archaeology to Teach Teens
If future generations don’t care about the field of archaeology it will die. As such this poster highlights the processes involved in the
development and implementation of strategies for translating academic sources dense with specialist vocabulary into easily
accessible language to better engage with non-specialists and relate anthropological issues and theories to their everyday lives.
These strategies were used by Linking Southwest Heritage Through Archaeology (LSWHTA), a unique program sponsored by the
National Park Service (NPS), which is co-managed by the University of Arizona’s College of Education and School of Anthropology,
being trialed in Tucson, Arizona. The project aims to get high school students more engaged with national parks and to get them
thinking about future careers in the NPS, education, archaeology or anthropology. A discussion on the handouts we tailored for each
trip and some of the hands-on activities that we designed for our participants will also be included. Our goals were to give them a
better understanding of what went into the technologies used by ancestral peoples, how we tailored expert lectures, lessons,
presentations, tours for a high school audience, and finally our techniques for guiding discussions toward key themes among
participants.
Mollenhauer, Jillian (Metropolitan State University of Denver)
[191]
Out of Olmec: Continuity and Disjunction in Veracruz Stone Sculpture
Gulf Olmec sculpture is renowned for the cultural, political, and aesthetic precedents it helped to establish in prehispanic
Mesoamerica. Often its legacy is discussed in relation to the artistic traditions of succeeding civilizations that emerged to the south
and west of Olman. However, there has been little recognition of the impact Olmec sculpture had on the later cultures of Veracruz.
Many examples of Gulf Coast sculpture outside the Olmec heartland have remained virtually ignored by scholars, likely as a result
of cultural biases rooted in Western aesthetic sensibilities and the tendency to elevate certain categories of representation over
others. Yet, in overlooking these objects we have neglected to see the patterns of continuity and disjunction in Gulf Coast sculpture
that lead us from the monuments of the Olmec to those of their Classic and Postclassic successors. This paper attempts to trace
these routes of affect and influence through the sculptural traditions of ancient Veracruz.
Mollerud, Katy (Peabody Museum, Harvard University)
[96]
Discussant
Mollerud, Katy (Peabody Museum, Harvard University), Robert Cook (Ohio State University), Sarah Johnson (Peabody
Museum, Harvard University) and Annie Greco (Peabody Museum, Harvard University)
[264]
Endings and Beginnings: Revisiting the Peabody Museum’s Early Collections from Hopewell and Fort Ancient Sites in Ohio
Some of the earliest excavations conducted by the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, in the late
1800s concentrated on two of the most important sites in the Eastern Woodlands, Turner and Turpin. These two sites are located a
few miles apart along the east bank of the Little Miami River near Cincinnati, Ohio. Turner is a major Hopewell mound complex of
considerable renown with some of the only examples in the region of human figurines, gold, and silver. Turpin is a major Fort
Ancient village and mound site with early evidence for Mississippian migration into the region. Here we present preliminary results
from our ongoing study of these seminal collections. Specifically, we focus on chronological and cultural relationships identifying the
temporal placement of Turpin’s unusual Peach Orchard component as well as heretofore unrecognized relationships between
Turner and Turpin, including Fort Ancient reuse of Hopewell mounds at Turner.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       386
Monaco, Farrell
[118]
Discussant
Monaghan, John (University of Illinois, Chicago), Laura Junker (University of Illinois, Chicago), Ame Garong (National
Museum of the Philippines), Michael Canilao (University of the Philippines) and Caleb Kestle (Univeristy of Illinois,
Chicago)
[188]
Ethnography and Archaeology of a WWII Plane Crash in the Philippines: Social Meanings among the Ifugao
Ethnographers and archaeologists who have long experience working in the areas of the world touched by WWII conflicts, both
working in the U.S. government and at universities, provide significant insights into local histories and unique culturally-constructed
understandings of the WWII period. We present a case study of collaboration with Ifugao tribal leaders and local Ifugao residents
living near a WWII crash site, agencies associated with indigenous peoples, Philippine National Museum archaeologists and cultural
property specialists, and University of Illinois at Chicago archaeologists and ethnographers. The downing of a plane in a corn field in
Ifugao in the 1940’s was etched in the “memory culture” and local history of that time for the Ifugao living near the site of WWII
wreckage. Cultural mores and historical references conveyed to the team of Philippine and American scientists were key to eliciting
significant data on what happened that day in the 1940’s when the American plane came down. Culturally appropriate ritual
associated with the initial discussions about collaboration with the indigenous group and rituals of solidarity completed at the end of
the collaborative project were key to the recovery effort.
Monagle, Victoria (University of New Mexico)
[97]
Zooarchaeology and the Legacy of Georgia O’Keeffe
Georgia O’Keeffe, an American artist and icon of the twentieth century, is famous for her modernist portrayals of skyscrapers,
flowers, and Southwest landscapes. Her works, tools, and homes have since been preserved and shared with the public by the
Georgia O’Keeffe Museum and Research Center located in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Among the artifacts preserved by the Museum
is the collection of animal bones O’Keeffe used as inspiration for many of her works. In 2019, the Museum approached the
University of New Mexico Anthropology Department to document and identify this collection as a means to further connect the public
with O’Keeffe’s artistic process. In this presentation, I discuss the zooarchaeological results of this project, its benefits to the
museum and the community, and the potential it suggests for public archaeology and community outreach in the American
Southwest and beyond.
Monahan, Eilis (Cornell University)
[210]
“Structural Violence”: Warfare, Fortress Architecture, and Social Inequality on Bronze Age Cyprus
During the Middle-Late Bronze Age (MCIII-LCI) transitional period on Cyprus, fortresses were built atop hills, plateaus, and
mountainsides across the island. Yet, prevailing accounts of society on Cyprus during this period now barely mention violence, and
in recent decades, several of the monumental fortresses have been reclassified as animal enclosures or redistribution centers, thus
divorcing these structures from their potential roles in violence and war. This paper argues that the study of societal change on
Bronze Age Cyprus is being hampered by what Lawrence Keeley has aptly called the “pacification of the past.” Using the fortresses
as a case in point, I consider how these structures served a dual-purpose in Cypriot society, operating both as effective defensive
structures and as powerful centers for the renegotiation of social relations into the hierarchically stratified structural inequality that
would characterize subsequent periods. In this manner, the fortresses are understood as active participants, and even catalysts, in
the transformation of coercive violence into other forms of social control.
Monge, Susan (University of Illinois, Chicago)
[76]
Zooarchaeology of Culebra Bay, Guanacaste, Costa Rica
Excavations in Guanacaste, Costa Rica, especially around the Culebra bay area, have yielded a great amount of well-preserved
faunal materials and yet few archaeofaunal studies have been carried out. The lack of trained specialists and comparative
collections available has been previously addressed by other researchers working in lower Central America. To try and close this
gap, I will present the preliminary results of a faunal analysis carried out between June and August 2019 with vertebrate material
recovered in the 1970s by excavation teams under Frederick Lange’s direction. These materials were analyzed by referring to the
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute’s comparative collection in Panama City, allowing for taxonomic and ecological
assignations as well as descriptions of butchery and non-dietary usage, i.e., for fashioning multiple ornaments and tools. The
presence of at least one species of turkey (Meleagris sp) enhances knowledge about trade routes and human migration in a multi-
cultural region at the crossroads of population movements from as far north as Mesoamerica. The presentation of these results
seeks to expand the knowledge of archaeology in general from lower Central America and the potential for future research projects,
where ancient DNA and multi-elements stable isotope analyses could complement the visual morphometric analyses.
Monnig, Maghan [212] see Morris, Riley
Monroe, Cara [233] see Fournier, Nichole
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       387
Montero, Gabriela (University of Kentucky)
[119]
Postclassic to Colonial Ceramic Adaptations in the Eastern Lower Papaloapan Basin
The concepts of conquest and colony have significant ontological implications. Before the arrival of Europeans, social groups in
prehispanic Mesoamerica had already faced many political adaptations to dominant groups, such as the Aztec empire. Some
authors have emphasized that economic integration to the Aztec empire was accomplished through a conquest process, yet the
Spanish conquest is often perceived as a major rupture point in history. While social and political changes might be more visible for
this time period, this idea leads to the common understanding of native populations as a single group of people who adapted to the
new regime in the same ways everywhere. As likely happened within Aztec domination, interactions between native populations and
Europeans had different implications in each locality, which need to be studied individually. Within this context and through
assessing ceramic production, consumption, and distribution, one question that emerges is how people adapted their technologies
to the different cultural landscapes. This poster focuses on late Postclassic to contact period adaptations within ceramic production
in the Gulf Coast region of the Eastern Lower Papaloapan Basin, Mexico, to investigate how agency and power were exercised by
the social groups involved to construct their new cultural landscapes.
Montero, Laurene [71] see Mitchell, Douglas
Montgomery, Shane (Cornerstone Environmental)
[155]
Discussant
Montoya, Amy [172] see McBrinn, Maxine
Monzon, Juan [147] see Hatcher, Lawford
Moody, Angela
[184]
NRCS Conservation Partnership Invitation
The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) is an agency committed to “helping people help the land.” With help from its
partners NRCS, helps people prepare voluntary and participatory conservation plans for the lands on which they make decisions.
TX-NRCS considers cultural resources in its conservation planning for the similar reasons it protects the natural resources. Keeping
natural resources in balance helps provide the basis for a healthy and profitable farm environment; protecting cultural resources
provides the basis for understanding past land use. The stewardship of these nonrenewable resources is inspired by the
conservation ethic that underlies the NRCS mission. All employees who carry out any of NRCS’ cultural resources compliance
responsibilities at the field and State Office levels require training. We invite partners in conservation, like you, to help train Texas
planners to recognize and protect your heritage. Contact the TX-NRCS Cultural Resource Specialist with your ideas.
Moody, Bryony (University of Sheffield), Caitlin Buck (University of Sheffield), Gianna Ayalla (University of Sheffield), Keith
May (Historic England) and Thomas Dye (University of Hawai’i at Manoa)
[24]
Automation of Bayesian Chronology Construction Using a Graph Theoretic Approach
This paper will discuss developing software for handling the relative and absolute dating evidence obtained during single context
excavations. Dye and Buck have developed a graph-theoretic approach to representing archaeological sequence diagrams, such as
the Harris Matrix. First, they use formal mathematical graph theory to construct “stratigraphic directed graphs”. Second, they have
established that a “chronological directed graph” can be constructed algorithmically from a stratigraphic directed graph. The
chronological directed graph models the stratigraphic relationships needed to construct Bayesian chronological priors. This paper
will discuss progress on developing the theory for producing stratigraphic directed graphs, and their conversion into a chronological
equivalent. Furthermore, we will discuss how this theory has informed decisions when developing software. Our software will enable
the construction of multiple chronological directed graphs, taking into account uncertainty in prior chronological information,
therefore, we must consider how to archive these. Other questions might be: how should we handle an archaeologist’s inferences
about once-whole contexts; how desirable is it to enforce shared semantics in order to standardise record-keeping and processing;
what tools are needed to help archaeologists move from the full stratigraphic record to reduced versions which contain only the
nodes to be dated via Bayesian chronological modeling?
Moore, David [186] see Harris, Brendan
Moore, James
[169]
Landscapes of Oblivion: Forgetting, Burial Grounds, and Placing the Past
Forgetting is a cultural act. Memories of burial grounds do not fade away bleached by time. This paper explores the anthropology of
forgetting: examining the role of burial grounds as meaningful places in cultural landscapes. The materiality of the burial grounds
gives presence to descent, kinship, sodality and the generational transfer of wealth and property. The eighteenth-century Moore-
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   388
Jackson burial ground is such a place. Over generations, Moore burial markers were placed to memorialize the social means—
marriages, inheritances and kinship—by which farmers acquired land that allowed their offspring to become farmers. The expansion
of industrial capital in nineteenth-century New York brought a new social landscape of capital and alienated labor marked out by
industrialized waterways, factories, mansions and workers’ housing. In this landscape, commercial cemeteries provided places for
the landless: both factory owners and their workers. Family burial grounds could be forgotten in plain sight.
Moore, Summer (International Archaeological Research Institute Inc.) and Michael Graves (University of New Mexico)
[262]
Reading between the Lines: A Detailed Examination of Stratigraphy at Nuʻalolo Kai and Implications for Investigating the
Postcontact Component
The collection of artifacts from Nuʻalolo Kai is one of the most significant legacy collections from the Pacific. Excavated in the 1950s
and 1960s by archaeologists from the Bishop Museum, the site yielded well-preserved, deeply stratified deposits from the early
settlement period to the post-contact period. Several recent research projects have worked to inventory the site’s artifacts; one
surprising finding to emerge is the apparent contemporaneity of traditional Hawaiian artifacts and foreign materials in the collection’s
post-contact components. Previous work on the collection has relied on a system of cultural levels created by the original
investigators, which separated the deposits into a series of layers at uniform depths within each structure. In this paper, we present
a fine-grained analysis of the data that identifies and focuses on excavation units and their associated materials where there are
clear stratigraphic separations and an absence of intrusive features. We draw upon the existing artifact identifications that include
both historic Euromerican and traditional Hawaiian materials. Using this revised analysis, we interpret those materials whose
stratigraphic associations are confirmed and investigate the factors that may have contributed to their contemporary use and
deposition at Nuʻalolo Kai.
Moore, Tom (Durham University, UK)
[48]
From Household to Kingdom: The Emergence of Centrality in the Social and Settlement Networks of Later First Millennium BC
Western Europe
The emergence of massive complexes, known as “oppida,” in the final centuries of the first millennium BC in temperate Europe
marked a fundamental transformation in the scale and complexity of Iron Age societies. Research on these monuments has often
emphasized their relationship with the expanding Roman Empire, rather than how their emergence related to longer settlement
trajectories in the Iron Age. Focusing on case studies from Britain and France, this paper will discuss how recent evidence
demonstrates oppida emerged within landscapes that were increasingly intensively occupied, the result of longer-term demographic
increases which began in the fourth–third century BC. It illustrates how, oppida were born from existing long-term trajectories in
settlement patterns whilst also marking a radical dislocation in social organization. This represented a transformation from dispersed
forms of power to the emergence of more centralized locales through which power was articulated, and at an increasingly regional
scale. The emergence of oppida, often in distinct ways and manifest in diverse forms, is argued to be intertwined with long-term,
continental-wide demographic transformations which took place in the later first millennium BC.
Moragas, Natalia
[133]
“Closed for Refurbishment”: Teotihuacan from Classic to Epiclassic
The collapse of Teotihuacan has been a recurrent topic for the archaeology of Mesoamerica but few cases can be considered real
collapses. Teotihuacan provides us with one of the few real cases of the end of a culture, centered on a city with very specific
peculiarities. In this paper, the general image of the main proposals about the collapse of Teotihuacan will be reviewed, taking into
account the archaeological evidence prior to the events of the period of AD 550–600 as well as the subsequent modifications that
are identified in the city.
Morales, Carlos [163] see Hernández, Enrique
Morales, Juan Julio [198] see Martínez Vázquez, Dante Bernardo
Morales, Paulino [7] see Horn, Sherman
Morales, Pedro [233] see Somerville, Andrew
Morales, Reinaldo, Jr. (Norfolk State University)
[141]
1492 BC: Invention and Heredity in Precolumbian Painting
Archaic rock paintings from Northeast Brazil provide clear examples of how similarities in style can indicate regional interaction
spheres across hundreds of kilometers, distances that were quite reasonable ca. 1492 BC. For example, paintings from Serra da
Capivara National Park in Piauí share remarkable similarities with paintings from neighboring states and led archaeologists to
postulate a “Nordeste Tradition” to explain this widespread cultural phenomenon. This reflects a degree of cultural continuity that
Terence Grieder proposed for the much of the precolumbian Americas. These paintings, however, share significant similarities to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     389
Archaic rock art traditions of the American Southwest. This forces art historians and archaeologists to confront basic assumptions
about style analysis—how painting styles reflect cultural continuity or independent innovation—and provides a vehicle to test and
refine the analytical tools of our related disciplines. As Grieder (1982) wrote, “Culture is the product both of heredity from cultures
which are ancestral to it and of its own adaptation to its environment,” and “some kind of migration is a factor in virtually every
society—with migrants providing unconventional responses in their new environments and starting new chains of inventions.” This
rock art either reflects some common inheritance or remarkable formal coincidences.
Morales-Aguilar, Carlos (Université Paris 1–Panthéon Sorbonne)
[163]
In the Land of the Codex-Style Ceramics: New Insights on Classic Maya Settlement Organization in the Mirador Basin, Petén,
Guatemala
Since the archaeologist Michael Coe named a group of Maya polychrome vessels as Codex-style, many scholars have given
attention to study their iconography, epigraphy, and, art history. However, little is still known about the archaeological context of
these ceramics. The northern Petén underwent significant transformations in settlement organization between the Early and Late
Classic period, that is marked by the increase of population. The “Preclassic” cities were reoccupied, and new settlements emerged
in a particular pattern of residential groups clustered around central plazas and patios. The apogee of the area was reached during
the late seventh through the middle eighth centuries, which coincides in time with the production of Codex-style vessels. Based on
recent archaeological research, this paper provides new evidence of Codex-style ceramics from 36 archaeological sites that
contribute to our understanding of the Late Classic settlement organization in the Mirador Basin.
Morales-Aguilar, Carlos [163] see Hansen, Richard
Morcote Ríos, Gaspar [198] see Robinson, Mark
Morehart, Christopher [269] see Villasenor Iribe, Eunice
Morello Repetto, Flavia (Instituto de la Patagonia, Universidad de Magallanes), Luis Borrero (CONICET-Argentina), Manuel
San Román (Universidad de Magallanes), Fabiana Martin (Universidad de Magallanes) and Marta Alfonso-Durruty (Kansas
State University)
[119]
Elizabeth Island (Strait of Magellan) at the Crossroads of Marine and Terrestrial Worlds of Fuego-Patagonia
Isla Isabel or Elizabeth Island is a landmark of great historical, ethnographic, archaeological and biogeographical importance within
the Strait of Magellan, and deeply integrated into Magellanic cultural history for at least the last 2000 years BP. Its location and
environmental location make the island a key reference for the environmental and cultural extremes of the region. A summary of the
historical and archaeological records gathered through archaeological studies, taphonomic research and the analysis of the
collections that Junius Bird gathered and deposited in the American Museum of Natural History (New York) is presented. In addition,
the results are discussed from the perspective of cultural geography and its importance for the populations of Patagonia and Tierra
del Fuego, Chile. The conclusions of this multidisciplinary study indicate that the archaeological contexts of Isabel Island respond to
its unique situation at the crossroads of the marine and the terrestrial worlds of Fuego-Patagonia. Acknowledgement: Grant
FONDECYT 1190984.
Morello Repetto, Flavia [61] see Reyes, Omar
Morello Repetto, Flavia [177] see San Román, Manuel
Moreno, Federica [4] see López Mazz, José
Moreno, Michael [147] see Newell, Zachary
Moreno de Sousa, João Carlos [73] see Okumura, Mercedes
Morer, Ignacio [48] see Fulminante, Francesca
Moretti, John (Museum of Texas Tech University)
[142]
A Thick-billed Parrot from Bonnell (LA 612) in Southeastern New Mexico with Comments on the Archaeological Occurrence of the
Species in the American Southwest
Bonnell (LA 612) is significant as a Glencoe phase (AD 1200–1400) Jornada Mogollon settlement in the Sacramento Mountains of
southeastern New Mexico. In a recent review of faunal remains recovered from the 1950s excavations, detailed comparative
analysis demonstrates that a tarsometatarsus represents Rhynchopsitta pachyrhyncha, the Thick-billed Parrot. Skeletal remains of
Thick-bills, morphologically distinct from macaws, are known from 10 archaeological sites in Arizona and New Mexico. Thick-billed
Parrots are specialist pinecone feeders that inhabit temperate mountain forests in the Sierra Madre Occidental of Mexico. A review
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   390
of the archaeological occurrences illustrates that six sites, including Bonnell, are located within or nearby pine forest habitats
suitable for Thick-bill ecology. Another three sites are situated within arid environments, but contain clear evidence of prehistoric
cultural utilization of forest resources. This biogeographic distribution, combined with evidence from extant ecology, historic
occurrences, and reintroductions, demonstrates an association between these sites and viable Thick-bill habitats. Southwestern
archaeological Thick-billed Parrots, therefore, likely were procured within the region. This natural occurrence is in contrast to the
cultural importation of Southwestern macaws. Accordingly, Thick-bills from Bonnell and other sites provide important evidence of the
natural distribution of this presently endangered species.
Moretti-Langholtz, Danielle (College of William & Mary) and Buck Woodard (American University)
[251]
Provenance and Power: Decolonizing Powhatan’s Mantle
Popularly known as “Powhatan’s Mantle” the shell-decorated animal skin is an iconic object of material culture from sixteenth-
century Virginia. On display in the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, England, we argue that the mantle’s provenance and possible
links to indigenous cosmology have been obscured by four centuries of colonial domination and interpretation. This paper will review
the mantle’s known chain of possession from archival and historical references to the Tradescant family and more recent direct
physical observations of the object. In an effort to decolonize the mantle we draw on indigenous cosmologies as a possible way to
relink the mantle to a dynamic and symbolically-rich Algonquian world view.
Morgan, Christopher (University of Nevada, Reno), Gustavo Neme (National Scientific and Technical Research Council),
Adolfo Gil (National Scientific and Technical Research Council) and Miguel Giardina (National Scientific and Technical
Research Council)
[15]
Risk Seeking and Risk Mitigation in the High Argentine Andes
Using the Z-score model, we evaluate the costs and benefits of risk seeking behaviors, and the means by which risks were
mitigated, at El Indígeno, a massive high-altitude residential site in the south-central Andes. Our model suggest that though climatic
amelioration during the site’s main period of occupation (1500–800 cal BP) may have played a subsidiary role in reducing some of
the risks associated with long term and intensive high altitude occupations, the probability of increased social rewards likely played
the principal role in encouraging long-term, seasonal site occupations. Some of the risks associated with these occupations were
offset by transport of foodstuffs from lower elevations.
Morgan, Christopher [243] see Neme, Gustavo
Morgan, Kathryn [165] see Diserens Morgan, Kasey
Morgan, Linda (GRIC Cultural Resource Management Program), John Hoffman (GRIC Cultural Resource Management
Program), Kyle Woodson (GRIC Cultural Resource Management Program), Chris Loendorf (GRIC Cultural Resource
Management Program) and Brian Medchill (GRIC Cultural Resource Management Program)
[229]
Hohokam Pottery Manufacturing Specialization at Lower Santan Village along the Middle Gila River, Southern Arizona
The Gila River Indian Community Cultural Resource Management Program has completed extensive data recovery investigations at
Lower Santan Village with over 2,500 cultural features investigated at this prehistoric Hohokam settlement. The village is located on
the north side of the middle Gila River on the southwestern flank of the Santan Mountain bajada. The village reached its maximum
extent in the late Sedentary period around AD 1150, and subsequently declined in size dramatically in the Classic period (AD 1150–
1450). Previous work has shown that pre-Classic period structures at the site have a disproportionately high incidence of pottery
manufacturing tools, and the most recent investigations identified a pit house with an exceptional density and diversity of items
associated with pottery production. The room assemblage included raw clay, wasters, pottery anvils, polishing stones, and several
finished vessels. This house also had a high incidence of non-local items like shell jewelry, but was otherwise similar to other
previously investigated habitations, and appears to have been a residential structure. These data suggest that this household
specialized in pottery production, possibly on a full-time basis. This paper examines this unique pit house artifact assemblage as
evidence for specialized pottery production at Lower Santan Village.
Morgan, Robert (USDA Forest Service, Francis Marion National Fores), Matthew Taliaferro (USDA Forest Service, Francis
Marion & Sumter Natio) and Elizabeth Toney (USDA Forest Service, Francis Marion & Sumter Natio)
[77]
Predictive Modeling on the Francis Marion & Sumter National Forests
The Francis Marion and Sumter National Forests use descriptive predictive models to identify where in project areas archaeological
resources are more likely to be present. The ACHP has recognized that predictive models, if tested and found to be reasonably
efficient, can assist Federal agencies in meeting the identification standards set out in the National Historic Preservation Act. In
order for predictive models to be sufficiently strong to be used in compliance, they must address issues of data quality and statistical
modeling and fully utilize the capabilities of geographic information systems (GIS) technology. Here, we describe the current
descriptive model used on the Francis Marion and Sumter National Forests and the challenges and opportunities related to its utility
while presenting new predictive models that graphically illustrate and quantify the descriptive variables. We hope hope these initial
analyses will assist in the development of a more rigorous and easily applicable predictive model for the Francis Marion and Sumter
National Forests.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    391
Morris, Rebecca (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[197]
Palace Plans: A Comparative Study of Spaces at Las Ruinas de Arenal, Belize
This paper examines the architecture and spatial organization of Maya palaces using excavation data from Las Ruinas de Arenal,
situated in the Mopan River Valley of Belize 5 km south of Xunantunich. This medium-sized center consists of three groups
connected by sacbeob: a ceremonial complex with an E Group and ball court (Group A), an eastern shrine group (Group C), and an
elite residential and administrative complex (Group B). Joseph Ball and Jennifer Taschek investigated the site in 1991–1992, and
the Mopan Valley Preclassic Project began a long-term project in 2015. In 2019 preliminary investigations were initiated at the
palace group. These excavations targeted architectural features associated with the articulation of distinct spaces and the regulation
of movement between them. This paper presents the results of these exploratory excavations in Group B within a broader
comparative framework of similar residential and administrative complexes in the Maya Lowlands in order to shed light on the
potential organization of spaces and activities at the elite palace complexes.
Morris, Riley (University of Missouri) and Maghan Monnig (University of Missouri)
[212]
Lararia in Pompeii: A Spatial Analysis
The presence of lararia and household religion within Roman societies is a known cultural practice. This study was conducted to
gain a greater understanding of where lararia are distributed spatially within Pompeiian homes and businesses as it relates to socio-
economic status and participation in household religion. The distribution of lararia was investigated through survey of both public
access and permit-only areas of Pompeii Scavi. Data regarding house size, individual room size, individual lararium dimensions,
and qualitative descriptions of the lararia were collected. Preliminary results suggest that lararia in larger, wealthier Pompeiian
homes were present in more prominent, social areas of the home whereas smaller properties had similar numbers of laraia housed
in more private areas. We have concluded from our data that the distribution of lararia directly correlate to the level of interaction
with household religion, with wealthier households participating in ancestral worship in a more public manner.
Morris, Sarah [170] see Horn, Marty
Morrison, Alex (International Archaeological Research Institute) and Timothy Rieth (International Archaeological Research
Institute)
[262]
Integrating Legacy GIS and Historic Preservation Data: Examples from Hawaii and American Samoa
Historic preservation practitioners are particularly well placed for generating large scale syntheses of settlement pattern data and
radiometric estimates. However, for the most part, data generated in cultural resource management settings rarely become
integrated into well thought out research programs or journal publications. In this presentation we discuss our efforts over the last
decade to develop integrated spatial and temporal databases of GIS and radiometric estimates from the islands of American Sāmoa
and Hawai’i. These databases are largely developed using data acquired in historic preservation contexts and through internships
and educational programs. We discuss the various ways in which these databases are being used to address regional scale
research questions in Samoan and Hawaiian prehistory. Finally, we note that legacy data present a unique set of advantages and
challenges that must be taken into consideration before any analytical work can effectively be done.
Morrison, Alex [262] see Filimoehala, Darby
Morrison, Heather (Canyon de Chelly National Monument)
[5]
Portable X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis of Pictographs at Canyon de Chelly National Monument
In my research, I focused on an actively deteriorating rock art site that lacked complete documentation located in Canyon de Chelly
National Monument of Navajo Nation. My research employed a range of advanced site recording procedures and investigated the
non-destructive portable X-Ray Fluorescence (pXRF) elemental analysis of pictographs. The aim of the research was to determine
the role of pXRF in heritage site management for rock art documentation and to evaluate the accuracy of pXRF analysis for the
identification of mineralogical differences between various shades of color. The pXRF examination generated qualitative data
regarding southwestern rock art pictographs, the chemical composition of the coloring agents for red, yellow, black, green, white,
and orange pictographs, and insight into pre-contact rock painting procedures. The research highlights the effectiveness of pairing
pXRF analysis with recording procedures such as D-stretch and photogrammetry for effective Southwestern rock art investigations.
Morriss, Veronica (University of Chicago)
[261]
Power, Piety, and Production: Revisiting the Coastal Fortifications along the Islamic Maritime Frontier
The Early Islamic maritime frontier of Syria-Palestine was supported by an extensive network of fortified coastal cities, forts, and
watchtowers. The fortified outposts that served as nodes in this network are frequently associated with the word ribat, a complex
term that was applied to a variety of structures through time. This term is problematic and has complicated the analysis of these
coastal forts. While typically only discussed in terms of defense, this paper will look beyond their role in conflict to examine them as
multifaceted sites. It will draw comparisons and contrasts with the North African ribat, as well as the so-called Desert Castles of
Syria, Jordan, and Palestine. This paper will propose that these fortifications were important tools for legitimization, places of
exchange, centers of religious practice, and potentially loci for settlement.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     392
Morrow, Juliet (Arkansas Archeological Survey) and Stuart Fiedel (Louis Berger Group)
[103]
Toward More Accurate Reconstructions of Paleoindian-Era Social Systems
Given that we can now reconstruct biological histories of individuals and their relationships with others, we should revisit the topics
of sex, gender, and the division of labor. Today it’s possible to study these facets of Native American lifeways during the Paleoindian
era with new data sources.
Morse, Stanton, Byron Smith (University of Texas, Austin), Marisol Cortes-Rincon (Humboldt State University), Jeremy
McFarland (Humboldt State University) and Michael McDermott (Humboldt State University)
[230]
A Remote Sensing Integration of Hinterland Landscapes: Results of Mapping the Dos Hombres Western Peripheral Zone
This study presents the findings of a remote sensing-based map digitization endeavor by examining archaeological settlements and
their correlations to reclassified ecological neighborhoods along the western peripheral zone of the Classic period (250–900 CE)
site, Dos Hombres. Located within the Rio Bravo Conservation and Management Area (RBCMA) of northwestern Belize, Dos
Hombres was continuously occupied from the Middle Preclassic (1000–400 BCE) to the Terminal Classic (CE 800–1100). Previous
archaeological settlement research along Dos Hombres’s western peripheral zone indicates a variety of structural and geotechnical
features resting under high jungle canopies with low-density surface vegetation. Additionally, an airplane equipped with both
multispectral sensor (MSS) and light detection and ranging (lidar) capabilities was flown over Programme for Belize (PfB) land
during the 2016 field season as a part of a larger collective project. A digital elevation model (DEM) of the study area was created
from the lidar to georeference the hand-rendered survey maps. As a result, further analyses in various geographical information
systems (GIS) were conducted to generate digitally capable maps and geospatial models with the hope of stimulating collaboration
among regional specialists. To accomplish collaboration desires, a regional geodatabase is currently being created.
Morse, Stanton [230] see Smith, Byron
Moses, Victoria (University of Arizona)
[22]
Sacrifice, Meat Consumption, and Bone Working at the Curiae Veteres: Zooarchaeological Findings from the Sixth- and Fifth-
Century BCE Levels of the Palatine-Pendici Nord-est Excavations in Rome, Italy
Recent archaeological projects, such as those of the Palatine-Pendici nord-est excavation, are bringing new materials and new
clarity to the processes of social change that lead to urbanism in Rome, Italy. The Curiae Veteres sanctuary, located in the heart of
Rome on the northern slopes of the Palatine Hill, gives exceptional insight into the earliest rituals of Rome. Here, the large deposits
of animal remains dating to the sixth and fifth centuries BCE mostly relate to three activities: animal sacrifice, communal
consumption, and bone working. These faunal materials are evidence for early Roman ritual, social structure, and economy. The
remains are mostly from the common domesticates across early Roman sites, including pig, cattle, and sheep/goat. However, dog
crania and paws, complete cattle skulls with perforations for affixing the skulls to walls, and a range of wild animals such as owl,
vulture, crow, and seabass, show the diversity in the offerings and significance of animals at the site. Partially worked cattle
metapodials and deer antlers were abundant, showing the development of a new industry in the area. The activities conducted at
the Curiae Veteres during the birth of Rome laid the groundwork for the city that followed.
Moss, Jeremy (National Park Service) and Steven Shackley (UCB-Berkley)
[203]
Patterns of Obsidian Procurement and Use at Chaco Canyon, New Mexico
This paper examines patterning in the use of obsidian at Chaco Canyon from the Archaic period to AD 1300 using X-ray
fluorescence results and chipped stone analyses. The study is based on over 1700 obsidian artifacts from over 40 sites in Chaco
Canyon, and is one of the largest obsidian provenance studies in the southwest. There are major shifts in obsidian procurement and
use over time, suggesting shifting alliances, and trade networks, and possible changes in ritual use or access to mountain
environments over time. The closer Mount Taylor obsidian sources dominate during the Basketmaker III period (AD 500–750), but
are supplanted by Jemez Mountains obsidian by the AD 900s. This shift appears dramatic considering the obsidians are of equal
quality. Obsidian source patterning and diversity differs at small habitation sites compared to Great Houses, suggesting divergent
exchange mechanisms. Several rare obsidian sources are represented by projectile points only, perhaps reflecting instances of
ritual deposition of arrows or trade in finished projectile points. The diversity of obsidian at some sites suggests social interaction
with areas not represented by pottery studies or existing models of cultural development, perhaps reflecting the multi-ethnic nature
of Chacoan society.
Most, Rachel (University of Virginia)
[98]
The Legacy and Work of Stephen E. Plog
Stephen E. Plog, David A. Harrison Professor of Archaeology at the University of Virginia, is, and has been for several decades, a
major force in American archaeology, specifically in the Southwest. This paper launches a well-deserved session in honor of
Professor Plog and provides an overview of his career, his research, and the impact he has had on many students at both the
undergraduate and graduate level. His career began with a stint as a photographer and kitchen hand at the Vernon field school in
1968 and 1969. He then moved on conducting fieldwork and research in Oaxaca, Mexico; Black Mesa and Chevelon, Arizona; and
Chaco Canyon, New Mexico. This work was conducted while Steve took on numerous administrative positions at the University of
Virginia including program director, Department Chair, and Associate Dean for the College of Arts and Sciences. While doing all of
this, he continued teaching both undergraduate and graduate level seminars influencing just over four decades of students. His
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 393
contributions to the discipline are profound and significant and will be briefly outlined in this paper before hearing from several
generations of former students, all now colleagues.
[98]
Chair
Motta, Laura [234] see Gavériaux, Fanny
Motti, Josefina [173] see Nores, Rodrigo
Moxham, Jasmin [202] see Garcia-Herreros, Jorge
Moyes, Holley (University of California, Merced) and Erin Ray (University of New Mexico)
[137]
Lost Rites of the Ancient Maya: The Corn Offerings of Eduardo Quiroz Cave
In 2018 the Las Cuevas Archaeological Reconnaissance (LCAR) project began investigations at the well known site of Eduardo
Quiroz cave in western Belize. The site was investigated in 1963 and reported in an excellent monograph by David Pendergast in
1971. The goal of the LCAR was to assess any recent damage to the site, to produce a new site map, and to document the cave’s
architectural features. Located in an area unreported by Pendergast was a deposit that constitutes a practice unknown in cave
archaeology and unique to Maya cave ritual. Located beneath an overhang were 16 clusters of a white clay-like material containing
impressions of hundreds of small corn cobs and other plant materials. In this paper we discuss this unusual find as well as other
corn offerings from sites in Belize dating from the Late Classic to the Postclassic period and contextualize these rites within a
sociopolitical framework.
Moyes, Holley [237] see Voorhies, Barbara
Mraz, Veronica, Mike Fisch (Kent State University), Metin Eren (Kent State University), Owen Lovejoy (Kent State
University) and Briggs Buchanan (University of Tulsa)
[232]
Thermal Pretreatment of Stone Increases Toolmaking Skill
Intentional heat treating of toolstone has been documented to have begun at least by 70K BP; however, the advantages of such
treatment have been debated for decades. There are two schools of thought with regard to its purpose. One, is that it merely
reduces the force required for flake propagation. A second is that it also alters flake morphological properties. We systematically
tested these hypotheses by generating flakes from chert cores exposed to three different temperatures (ambient, 300°C, and 350°C)
using automated propagation procedures that bypassed any human agency. While the force propagation magnitude is altered by
heat treatment, the flakes were not. We examined these flakes according to nine measures of morphology. None differed
significantly or systematically within the three temperatures. While our results confirm that heat treatment does reduce the force
needed for flake propagation, they also demonstrate that heat treatment has no significant effect on major morphological aspects of
flake form.
Mrozowski, Stephen (Fiske Center for Archaeological Research, University of Massachusetts, Boston)
[112]
Hybrid Architectural Forms in Colonial New England
The period following King Philip’s War (1675–1676)—also known as Metacomet’s Rebellion—saw many Indigenous communities
dealing with instability and rapid change. As the eighteenth century progressed, more and more Indigenous land was sold to or
appropriated by English colonists. The history of this colonial encounter is being rewritten through several long-term projects
involving collaborations between university and CRM-based archaeologists and the tribal nations of New England. One of these—
the Hassanamesit Woods Project, a long-term collaboration between the Fiske Center for Archaeological Research at the University
of Massachusetts Boston and the Nipmuc Nation—has focused on the Nipmuc community of Hassanamesit located in what is today
Grafton, Massachusetts. Employing a combination of spatial and material cultural analysis as well as documentary, geophysical, soil
micromorphological, and botanical analyses this paper presents an overview of the various Nipmuc architectural forms unearthed
during close to two-decades research. Several types of building forms and landscape features are discussed as part of a broader
examination of the steady dispossession of Hassanamisco land.
[112]
Chair
Mt. Joy, Kristen (Texas Army National Guard)
[52]
Integrated Cultural Resource Management Plans: Dream versus Reality
Department of Defense Instruction 4715.16 mandates installations to use an Integrated Cultural Resource Management Plan
(ICRMP) to implement cultural resources programs for regulatory compliance. Over the years, service branches have experimented
with standardized templates, alternate procedures and other documents to meet the requirements set forth in the DoD Instruction.
However, aligning cultural resource investigation and management projects with the installation’s projects and mission can be a
challenging endeavor, not just in creating a functional plan to read, but in the action that plan is implementing. Texas Army National
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  394
Guard’s existing ICRMP is currently undergoing a five year update and serves as an excellent opportunity to analyze lessons
learned in working to achieve a positive and successfully integrated balance of cultural resource preservation goals within a larger
framework of active military installations.
Mt. Joy, Kristen (Texas Army National Guard)
[113]
Moderator
Mueller, Natalie (Washington University in St. Louis) and S. Margaret Spivey (Harvard University)
[166]
Poverty Point Objects as Icons: Plant and Animal Imagery
The Late Archaic Poverty Point site (ca. 3600–2800 BP) contains a unique combination of monumental architecture and material
culture that have made it a flashpoint in discussions of hunter-gatherer complexity and lifeways for decades. Poverty Point Objects
(PPOs) are the site’s hallmark artifact. PPOs are small baked-clay objects, thought to be used for boiling or roasting food, that are
found at Poverty Point by the millions. Their composition, common forms, and distribution outside of the Poverty Point have been
investigated, but they have never been considered from an iconographic perspective. This is curious because they were likely the
key token that visitors to the site took back to their faraway homes, and thus represent a potent means for the long-distance
communication of ideology. Here, we consider plant and animal effigy PPOs and offer some preliminary ideas about their function
and symbolism.
Mueller, Natalie [78] see Belcher, Megan
Muianga, Décio (University of Uppsala) and Enio Tembe (Kaleidoscopio, Research in Culture and Public Pol)
[250]
One Hundred Years of Mozambican Archaeology: Past, Present, Future, and Challenges
Mozambique as a country located in the East but also in Southern Africa and has a diversity of important archaeological evidences
revealed over the last 100 years as a result of individual enthusiasm and systematic academic research. Since then, however, large
parts of this past remains poorly explored and its archaeological heritage is still largely explained in terms of better known
sequences to the south, west and north. This essay examines chronological and archaeological methods, heritage policy and
practice in Mozambique over time. Drawing on archival research and interviews with practitioners, the essay problematizes current
conventions on how and what is been done to explain and understanding the longevity of the prehistoric evidences continuously
uncovered. The prehistoric understanding of the complex uncovered past studied has been done in a fragmentary manner. We
show that more cooperation/sharing of results is needed between archaeologists working in Mozambican prehistory and history for
the new trend of discussions that we want to engage in theory, methods and practice of the discipline. Thus, we argue that major
challenges to archaeological practice in Mozambique are subsidiary to academic discussions on the disciplinary boundaries.
[250]
Chair
Muianga, Décio [250] see Stempfle, Sabrina
Mulder, Stephennie
[261]
The Ceramics of Balis: Toward the Recovery of Lost Heritage
This paper will present a major new analytical study of an important Islamic-period archaeological ceramics assemblage produced
during 12 years of excavation of Balis, a medieval Syrian city. With over 1,000 photographs and drawings compiled over my 10
years as head ceramicist on the site, this study will be among the most comprehensive Islamic archaeological ceramics studies
published to date. Balis was a ceramic manufacturing center with hundreds of kilns, and the study has the potential to transform our
understanding of medieval Islamic ceramic production, use, and aesthetic value—particularly for early Islamic ceramics, about which
is little known. Publication of this catalog is more urgent than ever because Balis has been under the control of various groups in the
Syrian conflict, including ISIS, and looting has been extensive. This project, then—aside from its archaeological value—will form one
contribution to cultural heritage preservation in a region endangered by war.
Mullen, Alice (University of the Witwatersrand)
[204]
Rereading Art, Rewriting History in San Rock Art: Indigenous Ontology versus Academic Interpretation
Archaeology loves a category. From typologies to temporal separations, we tend to divide the past by type. The irresistible draw of
‘Big Man’ theories have impacted, sometimes negatively, upon interpretations of Africa’s past. The process of decolonizing this past
involves questioning the validity of the categories we employ. In the case of the rock art of the Drakensberg Mountains in southern
Africa, a reexamination of nineteenth-century |xam and twentieth-century San ethnographies of Botswana with recognition of San
ontology as relational has allowed scholars to identify disconnects in recent rock art interpretations. This paper uses a ‘class’ of
imagery, the Significantly Differentiated Figures (oversized, highly embellished anthropomorphs), as an example of such
disconnects, and offers new avenues for interpretation of these images within a new animist framework. The paper also speaks to
wider developments within rock art research, following the ontological turn in social sciences.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  395
Muller, Jordin, Brendan Ermish (University of Utah) and Shannon Boomgarden (University of Utah)
[245]
Historic Excavation of Irrigation Systems and the Implications for Prehistoric Agriculture
Range Creek Canyon is an isolated canyon on the Tavaputs Plateau in Eastern Utah. The canyon has a deep history of human
occupation ranging from Fremont farmers 1,000 years ago to historic homesteading and modern cattle ranching. For the past 17
years the University of Utah Archeological Field School has been documenting and researching the prehistoric and historic events of
this canyon. Research has focused on productivity of maize farming by conducting actualistic experiments designed to replicate the
decisions made in the past under varying environmental constraints. The experiments primarily record the costs and benefits of
various farming techniques, particularly those related to irrigation. In Range Creek Canyon, evidence for Fremont age farm fields on
the valley floor are found between 50 cm and 75 cm below the present ground surface. Historic farming activities often mask
prehistoric features located below the ground surface. Prehistoric ditches in particular where often reused by European settlers. In
2019, the field school excavated a historic irrigation ditch found adjacent to a Fremont residential site to document its depth and
shape. Exposing the historic ditch informs on past irrigation techniques and guides our search for additional data related to the
Fremont farming activities in the area.
Muller, Jordin [245] see Boomgarden, Shannon
Muller, Jordin [245] see Ermish, Brendan
Muller, Letícia [161] see Kipnis, Renato
Mullins, Patrick (University of Pittsburgh) and Brian Billman (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill)
[174]
Transition in a Place Between: Salinar Phase (500 BCE–CE 1) Settlement Patterns in the Chaupiyunga of the Moche Valley
In the Moche Valley, the dusk of Chavín brought the end of millennium-long traditions of large ceremonial centers (Guañape Phase,
1600–500 BCE) and ushered in a long period of socio-political fragmentation and endemic conflict (Salinar Phase, 500 BCE–CE 1).
Synthesizing two full-coverage pedestrian surveys of the Moche Valley chaupiyunga conducted by Billman (1990–1991) and Mullins
(2017–2018), we focus on chaupiyunga settlement patterns in order to better understand this period of socio-political transition and
change. As the main coastal-highland borderland of the Moche Valley, the chaupiyunga landscape exhibits many scars of the ebb
and flow of coastal and highland people and polities throughout prehistory. Our settlement pattern analyses use measures of visual
interconnectedness and demographic tethering to articulate the changing connections built between peoples and places during the
transition from the Guañape to Salinar Phases. Though Salinar Phase chaupiyunga populations were somewhat bound to the older
Guañape Phase landscape and its huacas, they simultaneously were forging newer connections with newer places. We argue that
these new connections were intertwined with changing norms in land ownership and tenure, likely over coca-fields, eventually
contributing to the endemic conflict characteristic of this phase.
[174]
Chair
Mullins, Patrick [174] see Billman, Brian
Mulrooney, Mara (Pacific Legacy Inc.) and Mark McCoy (Southern Methodist University)
[262]
The Production of Obsidian Pupils for Moai Eyes: New Geochemical Sourcing Data on Legacy Artifact Collections on Rapa Nui
(Easter Island)
Rapa Nui’s only anthropological museum, The Museo Antropόlogico Padre Sebastián Englert, cares for extensive legacy collections
of obsidian artifacts. Since its founding in 1973, the museum has served as the island’s only repository for archaeological
collections, and its holdings include tens of thousands of all types of artifacts and samples from hundreds of research projects
carried out on the island. Among these are obsidian artifacts from domestic contexts as well as distinctive flaked obsidian pieces
created to be the pupil set inside the inlaid coral eyes of moai (statues). Although some of these legacy collections lack secure
provenience, they still hold much value for research using modern techniques. Here, we describe our analysis of selected legacy
collections of obsidian artifacts using portable x-ray fluorescence. Utilizing portable, non-destructive technology, we were able to
examine island-based museum collections to investigate obsidian procurement and production without the need to transport artifacts
from the island for analysis. We discuss our findings relative to other recent research on obsidian technology on Rapa Nui.
Mundell, Leah [184] see Ekdahl, Amanda
Mundt, Jessica (VCP Alexandria) and Jasmine Heckman (Veterans Curation Program)
[187]
The Veterans Curation Program: Public Archaeology
The Veterans Curation Program was created with the mission to rehabilitate U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) archaeological
collections while providing temporary employment and vocational training to veterans. In the 10 years that the VCP has been in
operation, it has evolved into a dynamic public archaeology effort that engages non-archaeologists in the field of archaeology on a
daily basis. This poster explores the varied approaches to public archaeology within the Program and the results of these efforts.
[187]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      396
Mundt, Jessica [187] see Reid, Amy
Munoz, Cynthia (UT San Antonio), Raymond Mauldin (UT San Antonio), Robert Hard (UT San Antonio), Michelle Carpenter
(UT San Antonio) and Kristin Corl (UT San Antonio)
[179]
Isotopic Signatures of Hunter-Gatherers on the Texas Gulf Coast: Cayo del Oso (41NU2)
The Cayo del Oso site (41NU2) is a large prehistoric cemetery along the Texas Coast. The site is one of several cemeteries in this
zone, some of which start to be used by hunter-gatherers more than 7,000 years ago. Known since the 1890s, the removal of over
180 interments from 41NU2 is documented, but the site likely contains hundreds of other burials. Our database consists of just over
50 individuals with valid stable carbon and nitrogen isotopic values from collagen and apatite. Most of these individuals are directly
dated by radiocarbon. They primarily come from the work of A. T. Jackson (Jackson et al. 2004) who, in 1933, excavated a 50 × 40
foot area and recovered 105 individuals. The dated individuals in Jackson’s excavation show a narrow time range. Based on the
medians of radiocarbon dates, over 80% of these burials fall between 1282 and 1382 cal BP. Collagen stable carbon isotopic values
(δ13C) are about –10‰, carbon values from apatite are around –6‰, and nitrogen values (δ15N) average over 12‰. These data are
consistent with a dependence on estuarine resources. Lower inputs from freshwater steam and terrestrial resources may suggest
reduced access to these nearby zones.
Munoz, Cynthia [179] see Mauldin, Raymond
Munoz, Samuel [255] see Schroeder, Sissel
Muñoz, Lizette (University of Pittsburgh), Susan deFrance (University of Florida), Nicola Sharratt (Georgia State
University), Verónica Rosales (Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos) and Alejandra Tazza (Universidad Nacional
Mayor de San Marcos)
[260]
Plants, Animals, and Pottery: Local and Regional Interaction at Tumilaca la Chimba during the Late Intermediate Period
Stylistic analyses of material culture have long been central to archaeological reconstructions of cultural diversity in Andean South
America during the Late Intermediate Period (LIP). Coupled with recent applications of compositional analyses of craft goods,
artifact form and style also offer insight into inter and intra-regional trade and exchange between late prehispanic groups. In this
paper, we complement existing object-focused perspectives by considering how diet and culinary choices were affected by and
contributed to local processes of ethnogenesis and to inter-group interactions during the LIP. We discuss the results of faunal and
archaeobotanical analyses of both pre-AD 1250 early LIP (Tumilaca occupation) and late LIP (post-AD 1250) Estuquiña domestic
and mortuary contexts at the site of Tumilaca la Chimba, in the upper Moquegua Valley, Peru. We examine the archaeobotanical
and faunal data in conjunction with data derived from compositional analyses of pottery to suggest that despite evidence for growing
hostilities in the later LIP, extra-local interactions, particularly with the coast, increased through time, but access to non-local
resources was restricted to specific products.
Muñoz, Lizette [143] see Weaver, Brendan
Munro, Andrew (College of Professional and Continuing Studies, University of Oklahoma) and F. Joan Mathien (Chaco
Culture NHP Museum Collection, Hibben Center)
[197]
Bonito Phase Architectural Syntax and Social Change
Two multi-century architectural traditions are documented among ancestral Pueblo structures in the San Juan basin, including
orientations to the south-southeast and the cardinal directions. Beginning in 2007, new surveys at 21 Great Houses and two stand-
alone Great Kivas were conducted under a series of NPS and BLM permits. These confirmed the two orientation traditions and
identified two additional architectural traditions at Chaco. One group of Great Houses is oriented to the east-southeast, and many
Great Houses are built at locations where solstice sunrise or sunset can be observed to interact with local horizon foresights. One or
more of the four traditions are confirmed for every assessed structure save three. Temporal analysis of these four traditions provides
an additional line of evidence for multi-cultural collaboration at Chaco during the Early and Classic Bonito Phases. In addition, the
analysis highlights consistent cosmological associations among Late Bonito Phase Great Houses at Chaco that clarify their likely
purpose. Using multiple lines of material culture evidence to provide context, we suggest that Late Bonito Phase Great Houses (esp.
“McElmo Units”) were designed as spaces for performative ritual activity conducted by regional antecedent sodalities that had
detached from elite lineages after 1100 CE.
Munro, Kimberly (Louisiana State University)
[174]
Revitalization and Acts of Renewal at the Kareycoto Mound: The Terminal Early Horizon at the Cosma Complex, Ancash, Peru
This paper examines the Upper Nepeña Valley,along the Jimbe River branch and its tributaries. Numerous Early Horizon centers
were documented throughout the upper valley, with a distinctive settlement pattern and construction to sites within the lower and
middle valley. Survey and excavation at the Cosma Complex has highlighted a localized tradition of renewal rites and infant
interments occurring between 700–300 BCE. Reutilization of the large Late Preceramic mound known as Kareycoto, for feasting
activities in conjunction with juvenile and infant interments are a distinct marker for Cosma. Carbon dates have pointed to a lull in
use of Kareycoto, from the Initial Period until approximately 700 BCE, corresponding to the transitional time period after Chavin’s
collapse. At this point, Kareycoto is reinterpreted as a center for revitalizing rituals associated with infant and other votive offerings.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    397
The reuse of this Preceramic mound to inter juveniles as the last construction phase may indicate the effort of the prehistoric Cosma
community to retain and return to earlier localized traditions. Work in Cosma contributes to our understanding of post-Chavin
activities in the central Andes, and how local people may have returned to former religious monuments in order to establish regional
claims to local landscapes.
Munson, Jessica (Lycoming College)
[29]
Living on the Edge: Alternative Network Models for Socio-spatial Analysis in Archaeology
Recent studies using network analysis in archaeology seek to understand the interactions and structures that defined past societies.
Such approaches are based on graph theoretic models that are simplifications of reality used to conceptualize and describe
relationships, either qualitatively or quantitatively, between a set of components interacting in a social system. The appeal of this
approach stems from its explicit emphasis on the relationships between the entities of interest. Frequently, those relationships are
inferred based on the assumption that similarity in site assemblages is a proxy for the existence of a tie. This approach, however,
runs the risk of circular reasoning if assumptions about the types of ties are not made explicit. Other approaches consider physical
location and geographic distance for reconstructing archaeological networks. While the phenomena archaeologists study using
networks is inherently both social and spatial, these models rarely take into consideration the broader landscape and natural
features on which these processes play out. This paper presents an alternative approach to identify ancient communities based on
dendritic network topology. The basic model is described and illustrated with a case study using settlement pattern data recently
collected by the Proyecto Arqueológico Altar de Sacrificios from the Upper Usumacinta Confluence Zone.
Munson, Jessica (Lycoming College)
[155]
Discussant
Murakami, Tatsuya (Tulane University), Shigeru Kabata (Kyoto University of Foreign Studies) and Julieta Lopez
(Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México)
[128]
Social Acceleration in Terminal Formative Central Mexico: Urban Growth, Volcanic Eruptions, and Regime Shifts
The Terminal Formative period (100 BC–AD 250) in Central Mexico is characterized by population nucleation at major centers and a
series of volcanic eruptions that devastated the southern Basin of Mexico and Puebla-Tlaxcala region. Our research at Tlalancaleca,
Puebla, suggests that, after the Plinian eruption of Popocatepetl around AD 70, urban growth and monumental construction
accelerated resulting in frequent changes to the built environment. Parallel to these changes, we see the appearance of new
construction techniques, new architectural styles, and the “fire shrine” as a new kind of public building. The convergence of
environmental, technological, organizational, and ideological changes at an increased pace would have fostered unpredictable
future for inhabitants at Tlalancaleca and perhaps in greater Central Mexico. Such a chaotic moment might have contributed to
making old regimes susceptible to change or outright replacement. We argue that acceleration of coupled socio-environmental
changes triggered regime shifts, resulting in the creation of the Teotihuacan state and the decline of Formative cities. Finally, we
discuss divergent and convergent trajectories of social transformation between Central Mexico and the Maya area and their
implications for better understanding the Terminal Formative/Protoclassic from a Mesoamerican perspective.
Murata, Satoru (University of New Hampshire) and Adam Kaeding (University of New Hampshire)
[14]
From Rural Hinterlands to Urban Centers: Investigating Ancient Maya Settlement in the Lower Belize River Watershed
One of the primary objectives of the Belize River East Archaeology (BREA) project has been to identify and document
archaeological sites in a relatively understudied part of north-central Belize that encompasses the lower Belize River Watershed. In
this area, which measures roughly 6,000 km2, the BREA team has been pursuing such a goal with a suite of methodologies tailored
to the wide range of micro-environments characterizing the survey area. The methodologies employed include informant survey,
pedestrian reconnaissance, Total Station and unmanned aerial (drone) mapping, as well as surface/subsurface sampling and
excavation. This has resulted in the identification of nearly 100 discrete archaeological sites comprising thousands of archaeological
structures. Using a series of site typologies, we classify and compare the ancient Maya settlement in the lower Belize River
Watershed, which ranges from urban political centers to rural residential hamlets. This regional settlement study demonstrates how
site location and settlement histories were shaped by the micro-environments found in this low-lying coastal zone (i.e., the rivers,
creeks, wetlands, estuaries, dense forests, open savanna, etc.) and how these natural features impacted people’s movements and
their relationships with the landscape as human-environment interactions changed through time.
Murata, Satoru [14] see Willis, Mark
Muro, Luis (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú/Ministerio de Cultura)
[106]
From Discrete Frontiers to Crosscutting Religious Networks: Religious Monuments and Cultural Syncretism in the Peruvian North
Coast and Highland, Ninth–Eleventh Centuries AD
Colonialist perspectives of territorial expansion envision the social entities as spatially defined by discrete frontier boundaries. Under
this approach, the distribution of objects a given cultural style parallels the area of influence of the groups that produced such style.
This approach, however, fails to account the dissemination of intangible expressions of culture. In this paper, I seek to re-position
the role of religion in the debates of cultural change, syncretism, and ethnic symbiosis in Andean archaeology. By drawing on my
own research in San José de Moro and its monumental landscape, I look to further investigate the relationships between the built
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  398
landscape, religion, and cultural identity in Peruvian northern region during the ninth and eleventh centuries AD. Particular and
recurrent features in religious monumental buildings, from both the Peruvian north coast and highland, suggests that coastal and
highland societies were interlinked not only through trade networks and political affinity but also shared religious worldviews and
death ideologies, which can be better understood as cross-cultural religious networks.
Muros, Vanessa (Cotsen Institute of Archaeology), Emily Rezes (UCLA/Getty Conservation Program), Lavina Li (Queens
University) and Elena Bowen (UCLA/Getty Conservation Program)
[268]
Preservation and Conservation Education at the Corral Redondo Archaeological Project
Cultural heritage preservation has been an integral component of the Corral Redondo Archaeological Project. The emphasis has
been not only on the conservation of archaeological objects but also the integration of archaeological conservation education into
the field school module. In this paper we will present the conservation efforts undertaken over two seasons that centered on the
preservation of artifacts at the Museo Escolar Lumbreras Salcedo and the reinstallation of the museum. Methods for the
examination and documentation of the collection, first aid conservation measures, and archival storage and display approaches will
be highlighted. We will also discuss how field school students were incorporated into the various preservation initiatives
implemented as a way to introduce them to archaeological conservation and the types of cultural heritage work that can be
conducted in the field.
Muros, Vanessa [268] see Jacobs, Iris
Murphy, Beau (University of New Mexico), Frances Hayashida (University of New Mexico), César Parcero-Oubiña (Spanish
National Research Council), Mariela Piño and Andres Troncoso
[224]
Imperial, Indigenous, or Something In-between: Investigating the Layout of an Inka Administrative Center in Northern Chile
While there are over 1,000 imperial Inka archaeological sites across the Andes, the logic behind many aspects of Inka settlement
planning are poorly understood. Notably, comparative research has begun to elaborate on the role of the built environment in the
politics of inequality and conquest, with architecture often used to strategically reorganize subjects and embed political symbolism
into the landscape. This study approaches this issue with an evaluation of Inka provincial administrative settlement design, and how
settlement planning may have been used by the empire as a tactic of social manipulation. The presentation brings past Inka
scholarship on this theme—as well as cross-culturally based theory—to bear on a case study of the layout of Turi, a local settlement
co-opted by the Inka as an administrative base in northern Chile. The political significance of pathways, access points, specific
buildings, and the larger settlement plan is evaluated, as well as the authors’ ongoing attempts to isolate strategic imperial design
features from the mixed Inka-local settlement. Several potential sociopolitical scenarios that may explain patterning in the currently
visible architectural features—and the substantive differences between them—are discussed.
Murphy, Megan
[214]
Identifying Global Trade Connections at Fort Vasquez, a Nineteenth-Century Trading Post
Fort Vasquez was constructed in 1835 at the end of the North American Fur Trade in northeastern Colorado. The site was
excavated in the 1970s by Dr. James Judge and a handful of field school students. The excavation revealed thousands of artifacts,
many of which were trade goods that illustrate the impressive global trade connections of this nineteenth-century adobe outpost. It
was not until 2018 that the artifacts were subjected to an in-depth analysis to determine these exact connections. This poster
presents my analysis of several trade good categories including clay pipes, glass trade beads, ceramics, and a hawkbell, and the
origins of said artifacts. This case study ultimately places Fort Vasquez in a web of global consumerism and colonial expansion in
an increasingly connected world during the nineteenth century.
Murphy, Nell (American Museum of Natural History)
[96]
Moderator
Murphy, Timothy
[204]
Contemporary Human Behavior at Rock Art Sites: Learning from Our Interactions
This paper discusses current visitor behavior at rock art sites using frameworks of phenomenology and landscape archaeology to
understand a human desire to connect with important landscapes and histories. This perspective is a reflexive approach to
understand the usefulness of qualitative observations that can lead to meaningful research questions, site management, and
preservation of rock art.
Murray, John (Arizona State University), Scott Keohane (Arizona State University) and Andrew Zipkin (Arizona State
University)
[38]
Experimental Identification of Heat-Treated Silcrete Using Colorimetry and Reflectance Spectrophotometry
The heat treatment of stone for tool production represents one of the oldest technologies for transforming the material properties of
a natural product to better suit human needs. The earliest evidence for such technology is the heat treatment of silcrete at the South
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                          399
African Middle Stone Age site Pinnacle Point 13B, ~164,000 years ago. Despite its importance for early human cognition and
technology, relatively little is known about the origins of heat treatment due to methodological constraints faced by researchers.
Traditionally archaeologists identified heat treatment using color change determined by an expert analyst. This is a relatively reliable
method, but it is difficult to replicate across analysts and studies. To address this issue, we used a UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer to
record nanometer-scale wavelength reflectance and calculate CIE L*a*b* color values for experimentally heat treated and unheated
silcrete from three South African sources, with multiple nodules from each source. Results indicate that colorimetry is useful but
insufficient for discriminating heated from unheated silcrete. This is in part due to variability in initial natural color intra- and inter-
source. Our study suggests that quantitative colorimetry should be supplemented by additional variables to build a robust method for
identifying heat treatment in the archaeological record.
Murray, John [38] see Carroll, Peyton
Murray, John [38] see Martin, Miles
Murray, Sarah (University of Toronto)
[210]
Violence, Destruction, and Commodity Distribution in Early Greece
This paper examines the relationship between violence, inequality, and states through a case study of commodity distribution across
a period of sociopolitical transition during the Greek Bronze Age. During the Late Bronze Age the so-called Mycenaean states were
organized as hierarchical bureaucracies likely established at least in part through consolidating means of coercive force. Due to
circumstances that remain poorly understood, these states were destroyed around 1200 BCE and a period in which strong state
structures are not apparent archaeologically followed. In order to assess the way that the violent destruction of wealth at this time
may have impacted levels of inequality, I present a comprehensive database of select commodities known from sites in Greece
dated prior and subsequent to 1200 BCE. Gini coefficients describing these data show a great increase in the spatial equality of
commodity distribution after the destruction of the Mycenaean states. The evidence therefore seems to bear out a hypothesis linking
periods of radically decreased equality with large-scale destruction or violent redistribution of capital.
[210]
Chair
Murray, Sarah [210] see Leppard, Thomas
Murtha, Timothy [202] see Schroder, Whittaker
Murungi, May [11] see Val, Aurore
Musch, Abigail (American Museum of Natural History), Anna Semon (American Museum of Natural History) and Thomas
Blaber (American Museum of Natural History)
[119]
Artifact Analysis from STP Surveys Provides Perspective on Landscape Use
Between May 2017 and May 2019, American Museum of Natural History archaeologists conducted limited shovel test pit surveys in
an effort to locate a sixteenth- or seventeenth-century Spanish fort and an early French settlement on a western portion of St.
Catherines Island, GA. In total, 278 STPs were excavated, many prehistoric shell middens identified, and over 1,000 artifacts
recovered. The majority of artifacts collected were prehistoric ceramics, spanning the Late Archaic to the Mississippian period.
Additionally, lithics, historic ceramics, glass, brick, pipe fragments, and nails were found. While the artifact and spatial analyses
showed no conclusive evidence of the early Spanish or French settlements, this project has provided a greater understanding of
landscape use of this area over time.
Musser-Lopez, Ruth (CSUSB)
[204]
Tonantzin? Circling ‘Round the Rock Art at Petroglyph Corral, Nevada
Rock art can be fully loaded with cultural dynamics ready to interpret, yet in a professional archaeological context such
interpretations are often stigmatized and lumped together as religious or ritualistic “hocus pocus” then underreported or carelessly
described. Attempts to determine function or cultural “norms” by ascribing purpose and counting elements or motifs (i.e., how many
representational, curvilinear, rectilinear or abstract elements) in the same way one would catalog pot sherds slights the importance
of placement of the art and location of the site that contains it. At Petroglyph Corral, Nevada (26LN4699), a hermeneutic approach
was taken to interpret the function and meaning of rock art, not beginning with counting but by circling around the art taking into
consideration placement, the entangled slate of motifs on natural breaches and stains, earth’s “feminine places,” iconography and
metaphor, ethnography, linguistics, identity, memory, monumentality associated with apparitions, and a new world perspective to
invite an interpretation having to do with the phenomenon of the mother goddess Tonantzin of classical Aztec mythology, the
Nahuatl, and Proto Uto-Aztecans.
Myagmar, Erdene [62] see Vlok, Melandri
Myers, Emlen [221] see Siegel, Peter
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 400
Myers, Joshua (Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis) and Alex Badillo (Indiana State University)
[167]
Bethel Cemetery: SfM Photogrammetry and Digital Mapping in Burial Excavation
During the summer of 2018, cultural resource management professionals in collaboration with local universities excavated a
nineteenth-century cemetery in an urban setting as a component of planned infrastructure expansion by the Indianapolis
International Airport. Project managers designed and employed structure from motion (SfM) photogrammetry to document burial
excavations. SfM photogrammetric methods was not only an expedient and efficient method for mapping, but it also provided project
researchers the data necessary for bioarchaeological study. In the end, the photogrammetry team had recorded and digitally
reconstructed 3D models of over 300 exhumations. This paper summarizes the procedures and protocols of 3D mapping of burial
excavations at Bethel cemetery, presents the resultant 3D models, and demonstrates how these models can be used in GIS.
Myrbo, Amy [59] see Beamer, Dawn
Naegele, Kathrin (Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History), Yadira Chinique de Armas (University of
Winnipeg), Silvia Hernandez Godoy (Grupo de Investigación y Desarrollo, Dirección Pro), Ulises Gonzalez Herrera
(Instituto Cubano de Antropología, La Habana, Cuba) and Johannes Krause (Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human
History)
[173]
Investigating Diversity in the Prehistoric Insular Caribbean: An Integrated Approach
The Caribbean was the last major region of the Americas to be settled by humans and the first to suffer the impact of European
colonization. This major disruption erased most variation in indigenous languages, cultures and genetic ancestries shaping the past
and present of people in the Caribbean. Decades of archaeological studies have already uncovered a tremendous diversity in
material culture and lifestyles, suggesting several waves of migration into the region during the last ~6,500 years, in sharp contrast
to the oversimplification by European chroniclers. Archaeogenetics can add detail to this research topic by studying the genetic
diversity and history of pre-colonial human populations. Limited DNA preservation and low genetic resolution challenge population-
genetic analyses using traditional tools. In this project, we established and maintained close collaboration with archaeologists and
physical anthropologists through systematic reports, regular visits and international workshops organized to bring together
disciplines that study human history. This has immensely increased our understanding of the variation in past Caribbean societies,
one that might have been overlooked by a data-driven approach only. In various meetings, we shared knowledge about methods
and analysis and discussed the terminologies used to describe ancient societies to not perpetuate outdated concepts anchored on
post-colonial narratives.
Nagaoka, Lisa (University of North Texas)
[226]
The Anthropocene as a Meme
The Anthropocene has become a powerful concept to frame human-caused environmental change. As the only discipline that
studies people’s relationship with the environment into deep time, archaeology gains long-sought-after relevance by associating the
archaeological record with the Anthropocene. However, there are issues with this relationship. The Anthropocene has several
definitions and points of origin. Teaching archaeology in the context of the Anthropocene should address the different agendas and
implications of each. The geologic Anthropocene will likely cover only the post-1950s modern era. On the other end of the spectrum
is the Anthropocene that goes back to the origin of humans. In the former, the Anthropocene can be compared and contrasted to the
archaeological record; with the latter, the record is the evidence for the Anthropocene. The older Anthropocene would appear to be
more favorable for archaeology. However, temporal and spatial variability of human impacts on the environment is often minimized.
Evaluating the relationship between archaeology and the Anthropocene provides an opportunity to discuss with students wide-
ranging concepts such as unit construction, the archaeological record as repeated experiments, the role of variation in evolution,
and the philosophy of the human-nature dichotomy.
Nagaoka, Takuya [100] see Ono, Rintaro
Nakatsuka, Nathan (Harvard Medical School), Vera Tiesler (Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán), Jakob Sedig (Harvard
Medical School), Douglas Price (University of Wisconsin, Madison) and David Reich (Harvard Medical School)
[173]
Ancient DNA from Campeche, Mexico, Reveals a Socially Segregated Population in the First Two Centuries after Hispanic Contact
The Spanish Colonial period was an unprecedented time in Mexican history, when previously disparate populations began living
together under Hispanic leadership and Catholic faith, often unwillingly. Spanish colonists established urban strongholds in the
native territories, often bringing African slaves and servants with them. In these settlements, Native, European, and African
populations intermixed for the first time. We present ancient DNA data from 10 individuals buried in the multiethnic cemetery of the
central plaza of Campeche, Mexico, which was used between 1540 and 1680. In combination with archaeological, biomorphological,
and isotopic data, aDNA provides a collective life history, which mirrors the diverse proveniences, living conditions and deaths of
Hispanic founder generations. Although buried together in the same Catholic churchyard, the combined insights into the population
affinities and lives of the deceased reveal a high degree of social segregation. We conclude that the mixing across continental
groups may not have been as ubiquitous within early colonial Spanish strongholds as historically held, and became common only
later in time. Also of methodological note is the excellent DNA acquisition from petrous portions, which despite the advanced
disintegration of this tropical skeletal assemblage reached high genomic yields.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     401
Nakatsuka, Nathan [173] see Nores, Rodrigo
Napolitano, Matthew (University of Oregon), Scott Fitzpatrick (University of Oregon), Geoffrey Clark (Australian National
University), Esther Mietes (D7 Archeologie) and Amy Gusick (Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County)
[100]
Clarifying the Evidence for Early Settlement in Southern Yap, Western Caroline Islands
The initial human settlement of Yap, a group of four small islands in western Micronesia, is one of the least understood colonization
events in Remote Oceania. Unlike Polynesia, where multiple lines of evidence such as linguistics, genetics, and material culture
analyses coalesce around a coherent narrative of initial colonization, these same lines of evidence have resulted in major
discrepancies that place colonization between 3300–2200 years ago with a possible homeland originating from somewhere in Island
Southeast Asia or New Guinea and/or the Bismarck Archipelago as Lapita culture was developing. A clear understanding of Yap’s
early settlement has been hampered by a lack of systematic archaeological fieldwork and limited geomorphological reconstruction,
making it difficult to model where early sites may have been located. Here we present results of systematic subsurface survey,
excavation, preliminary paleoenvironmental and geomorphological reconstructions, and nearly 40 new cultural and non-cultural
radiocarbon dates that shed new light on evidence for the earliest known settlement in Yap.
[100]
Chair
Napolitano, Matthew [135] see Hanna, Jonathan
Napora, Katharine (University of Georgia), Victor Thompson (University of Georgia), Robert Speakman (University of
Georgia), Alexander Cherkinsky (University of Georgia) and Robert Horan (Georgia Department of Natural Resources)
[231]
Ancient Trees and Modern Seas: Toward Operationalizing Paleoenvironmental and Archaeological Data from the U.S. Southeast to
Improve Twenty-First-Century Resource Management and Climate Change Policy
Deep-time data has the potential to greatly improve our preparations for the widespread effects of climate change in coastal regions.
In this paper, we discuss how the paleoenvironmental and archaeological results of our multimillennial tree-ring-based analysis of
ecological fluctuation and cultural resilience on the Georgia Coast may be able to be employed for climate change policy and
resource management in the twenty-first century.
Narasimhan, Vagheesh (Harvard Medical School)
[173]
Understanding Natural Selection in Humans from Time Series Data
A key question in the study of human population history, is to understand how phenotypic traits respond to changes in selective
pressures and evolve over time. By combining data from the ancient DNA record, tracking the frequency of alleles through both time
and space and obtaining information from modern medical studies detailing the genetic basis of both monogenic and polygenic
traits, we can examine the role natural selection has had in shaping the genomes of modern humans. Using a dataset comprised of
ancient DNA from humans in Europe over the past 10,000 years, we examined how cultural transformations such as the transition
from hunting and gathering to food production impacted the genomes of ancient humans, particularly in regions associated with
immune response and metabolic changes though to be affected by changes in diet. We also examined changes in polygenic risk for
anthropometric traits whose phenotype can be directly assessed from the archeological record to get a better understanding of how
both the genotype and phenotype of ancient humans changed with time leading up to the present day.
Nash, Brendan (University of Michigan), Michael Rivera (University of Texas, Arlington) and Miranda Berry (University of
Texas, Arlington)
[37]
Analysis of the Late Archaic Lithic Assemblage from Way Ranch
A late Archaic occupation at Way Ranch way was identified in two areas near the proximal end of the floodplain on the outside of a
bend in the Blanco River near San Marcos Texas. Both areas contained formal tools and manufacturing debris, and one contained a
burnt rock midden. Projectile point styles recovered from the two areas have been dated to end of the late archaic at other sites in
Texas. In one area, points above and within the midden more often have concave bases, while points below the midden, convex
base points occur at a higher rate. As well as identifying a distinct style shift, the lithic material recovered from the two areas can
inform us about site function; the fracture patterns exhibited by the projectile points combined with the large amount of late stage
debitage indicates that this was, at least partly, a re-tooling camp.
Nash, Carole (Geographic Science, James Madison University)
[9]
Prioritizing What We Don’t Know: Climate Change as a Catalyst for Upland Survey
The upland forests of the Appalachians are among the most diverse natural communities in the temperate world, providing the
setting for a study of change and flexibility as an essential feature of existence, both for pre-contact and historic cultures. However,
upland archaeology has lagged due to the long-held belief that upland sites have limited signatures and are thereby less likely to
provide significant information on cultural processes. Currently, archaeological sites here are compromised by climate change
processes such as drought and high winds that create conditions for frequent wildfires, as well as extreme precipitation events that
lead to severe erosion, flash flooding, or rapid mass wasting. The lack of research makes it difficult for decision-makers to develop
prioritization plans in the face such threats. A GIS-based analysis of settings that are most likely be impacted by catastrophic
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        402
climate-related events, coupled with archaeological models of pre-contact site locations, provides a process for identifying areas in
the greatest need of survey. Such work is being carried out in Shenandoah National Park, where archaeologists ground truth the
geospatial analysis to further refine decision-making for future work.
[9]
Chair
Nash, Carole (Geographic Science, James Madison University)
[220]
Discussant
Nash, Donna (UNCG)
[260]
Postcolonial Moquegua: The Long-Term Impacts of Wari Imperialism
Long-lived empires such as the Wari polity have enduring effects on the regions they subjugate. The withdrawal, collapse, or
overthrow of a colonial state does not result in a return to pre-imperial lifeways, political relations, or religious rationales for power
relations. In the past, many scholars have attributed the features of early LIP groups in the Moquegua drainage to Tiwanaku while
ignoring the substantial way that Wari colonists transformed the landscape of the upper drainage and the impact of interpersonal
relations between Wari state agents and local groups on the coast, middle valley, and highland grazing areas (all ecozones from
which Wari settlers drew resources). The sustained Wari presence in Moquegua for more than three centuries undoubtedly changed
the valley and its inhabitants forever. In this paper I examine the legacy of Wari colonial institutions in Moquegua from the
perspective of the political economy and document how Wari political and ritual practice were maintained or rejected in the
subsequent Late Intermediate Period.
[260]
Chair
Nash, Donna [242] see Blackman, David
Nash, Donna [5] see Wieland, Spencer
Nash, Donna [86] see Williams, Ryan
Nash, Donna [260] see Witte, Emilee
Nash, Steve [156] see Baxter, Erin
Nauman, Alissa [5] see Pike, Sabrina
Navarro-Farr, Olivia (The College of Wooster)
[209]
Moderator
Navarro-Farr, Olivia [223] see Freidel, David
Navarro-Farr, Olivia [5] see Hulen, Cyrus
Navarro-Farr, Olivia [213] see Rolph, Kevin
Navas, Ana (University of Texas, Austin)
[39]
Compositional and Technological Analysis of Panamanian Colonial Utilitarian Wares
In Panama, as in other regions of the Caribbean and Latin America, several archaeologists have reported the presence of colonial
utilitarian wares, also known as colono-Indian ware, creole ware, and coarse hand-made earthenware. Previous research on this
ware focuses on refining the typologies and identifying traits that could be related to African, Spanish, and Indigenous traditions.
Inspired on recent research that approaches production and consumption of colonial technologies as contextually constructed, I
study the configuration of new communities of practice for the production of pottery in colonial Panama. Compositional and
technological analysis through neutron activation and petrographic methods of 192 sherds from Central and Eastern Panama inform
the recipes and techniques used for ceramic production during the precolumbian and colonial periods. This study provides new data
to address the production and consumption of Panamanian colonial utilitarian wares beyond the identification of identity and
definition of typologies, and new insights to understand the contribution of non-Europeans to the construction of colonial Panama.
Naveros Guizado, Marco Antonio [224] see Black, Valda
Nebbia, Marco
[48]
Trypillia Mega-Site Networks: Understanding the Centrality of the Largest Settlement in Fourth Millennium BC Europe
The emergence of the largest settlements in fourth millennium BC Europe triggered a number of questions regarding their proto- or
even ‘fully urban’ nature. For long time scholars have been debating on this matter focusing the attention on the intrasite features of
Trypillia mega-sites, thus overseeing the implication of understanding how they originated within a long-term settlement trajectory.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      403
This paper will look at the role of the Trypillia settlement network in the development of mega-sites as poly-nodes of mid-scale
regional site clusters as well as ‘central places’ of a supra-regional settlement system. First and second order characteristics of point
pattern analysis are investigated in order to propose a way of measuring the centrality of these mega-sites within their coeval
settlement network, as well as understanding the scale of their hinterlands. Concepts like seasonality and heterarchy are used to
explain the development and the social organization of mega-sites, which are conceived as temporary gathering places where an
‘urban-like’ identity starts to develop. The relational nature of the proposed approach could facilitate its applicability to other regional
contexts which would allow for a more formal cross-regional comparison of long-term settlement trajectories.
[48]
Chair
Neeley, Michael (Montana State University) and Josh Chase (Bureau of Land Management)
[186]
Revisiting the Henry Smith Site: New Work at a Late Prehistoric Site in the Northwestern Plains
The Henry Smith site (24PH794), a late prehistoric bison kill with associated drive lines, cairns, and effigy figures, first gained
notoriety in the late 1970s with the seizure of illicitly obtained artifact collections from local artifact collectors. As part of the
subsequent mitigation process, the Bureau of Land Management conducted limited testing and mapping of the site to assess the
damage, remaining potential, and integrity of the site. Following a long hiatus, the BLM and Montana State University initiated
renewed investigation of the site complex in 2016–17. Early on, it became apparent that the site was even more extensive than
originally reported and constituted an engineered landscape, with diverse feature types and activities intertwined across the
landscape representing a long time span. This poster presents the results of the renewed work through the combined use of
excavation, aerial survey, and mapping. Our results indicate a varied, complex, and repeated use of the landscape over the past
1500 years.
Neff, Hector (California State University, Long Beach), Clifford Brown (Florida Atlantic University) and Kelsey Willis
(Florida Atlantic University)
[126]
NAA Evidence for Extension of the Providencia-Miraflores Interaction Sphere into Northwestern Nicaragua
The Cosigüina Ceramic Complex, recognized recently in excavated Late Formative samples from Chinandega, northwestern Pacific
Nicaragua, shows close typological similarities with the Providencia and Miraflores Spheres of southeastern Guatemala and western
El Salvador. Usulutan, Fine Red, Polished Black-Brown, and other decorative categories are close enough in some cases to merit
use of the same type names used farther west. The typological similarities presumably could have arisen through direct importation
of vessels, faithful replication of production practices, or a combination of the two. In order to investigate these possibilities and to
develop a baseline of local ceramic compositional profiles, 200 ceramic pastes were recently analyzed by neutron activation
analysis. While the vast majority fall into two presumed local compositional groups, a smaller subset diverge from Nicaraguan
profiles and instead show compositions similar to groups from western El Salvador and southeastern Pacific Guatemala.
[126]
Chair
Neff, Hector (California State University-Long Beach)
[237]
Discussant
Neff, Hector [237] see Daniels, James
Neff, Linda
[254]
Transforming Archaeological Learning into Action: Service Learning as a Teaching Strategy
A popular watering hole throughout history and prehistory, Turkey Tanks is small basalt canyon that was home to Flagstaff’s earliest
settlers. The canyon landscape is also the focal point for a service learning project designed for anthropology undergraduate
students and local CRM technicians to learn survey methods within the context of a meaningful project for the U.S. Forest Service
Flagstaff Ranger District. Distinguishing it from a community service project where there is typically a large amount of service with
little or no learning, the service learning model combines a large amount of service with a large amount of learning. The long-term
service goal is to identify and evaluate the potential boundaries of an archaeological district for a National Register of Historic Places
archaeological district nomination. Through a series of small projects, participants learn artifact analysis through Forest Service-
sponsored workshops and then apply and commit to volunteer survey work where they learn how to identify and record
archaeological sites. While the survey area has provided a retreat for many visitors throughout time, this canyon continues to benefit
students and the community in a long-term campaign to solve a problem that establishes this important local as a part of our
national memory.
Neff, Matthew, Rachel Channell and Lawrence Todd (GRSLE)
[65]
A Post-fire Archaeological Assessment, Documentation, and Monitoring Protocol: Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, Wyoming
Large, intense wildland fires in the twenty-first century have presented Rocky Mountain archaeologists with opportunities and
challenges. Little to no archaeological inventory has been conducted in many montane environments and the materials exposed
post-fire often provide the first glimpse into the prehistoric archaeological record of these vast areas. While destruction of wooden
structures can be part of such fires, a more common impact is to the near-surface archaeological record; once exposed it is
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       404
susceptible to a variety of threats including looting, rapid deterioration of organic materials, trampling, and erosion. Changes in
climate are likely to increase the occurrence and intensity of wildland fires across North America, challenging researchers and
resource managers with unprecedented problems. Using examples from Shoshone National Forest, NW Wyoming, a multi-year
program is described that includes: 1) rapid, post-fire initial assessment and planning, 2) intensive survey and surface
archaeological documentation, 3) implementing coupled field methods that incorporate ancillary data capture such as burn intensity,
thermal alteration, trampling alteration, and erosional changes as part of the archaeological work, and 4) long-term, post-fire
monitoring.
Negash, Agazi [249] see Kappelman, John
Negrino, Fabio [38] see Keller, Hannah
Neiman, Fraser [98] see Galle, Jillian
Neitzel, Jill (University of Delaware)
[229]
Entangled Stories of the Magician’s Burial
The biography of the Sinagua man interred at one of the U.S. Southwest’s most well-known Ancestral burials encompasses
multiple, intersecting stories. At the center is the singular life of the person known today as the “Magician”, who was born around AD
1130–1135 and died around AD 1175 at the site of Ridge Ruin in north-central Arizona. But the Magician’s stories extend for more
than a millennium beyond this 40–45 year span. Key developments in this expanded time frame include: 1) the archaeological
discovery, excavation, and documentation of the Magician’s physical remains and grave goods; 2) a period of stasis during which
some archaeologists assessed his published data and significance; 3) documentation and reassessment as part of Forest Service
compliance with the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA); and 4) reburial by the culturally affiliated
Hopi Tribe. During each of these stages, shifting sets of individuals with different cultural and institutional affiliations affected what
happened to the Magician. Together, their entangled histories comprise a roughly 1,000-year cycle in which the final act once again
laid the Magician to rest.
Neller, Angela (Wanapum Heritage Center, Grant County PUD) and Lourdes Henebry-DeLeon (Central Washington
University)
[49]
The Time Is Now: Ethics, Inclusivity, and Relationships in Archaeological Practice
The time is now for ethical practices in archaeological interpretation. Building relationships with Native American descendent
communities offer opportunities for inclusive partnerships that can change the framework of archaeological practice. Any project
involving collections associated with descendant communities should include those communities as equal partners. Archaeological
collections are tangible, nonrenewable resources that connect descendent communities to their history. There are archaeologists
who work with descendent communities but for many NAGPRA can be the starting point. You can stop upon completion of your
NAGPRA requirements or you can take what you learned and move beyond it to an ethical practice of inclusivity. Divisiveness in
archaeology will continue if it remains a field of work that is largely disrespectful and insensitive to tribal concerns and beliefs. Isn’t it
discouraging that after thirty years since the passage of NAGPRA, archaeologists and tribes are not equal partners and colleagues
in the practice of archaeology?
Neller, Angela (Wanapum Heritage Center, Grant County PUD)
[96]
Discussant
Neller, Angela [49] see Henebry-DeLeon, Lourdes
Nelson, Erin (University of South Alabama), Jessica Kowalski (University of South Alabama) and Howard Cyr (University of
Tennessee)
[222]
Landscape Change at D’Olive Creek, a Pensacola Culture Site in Lower Alabama
Geoarchaeology and excavation within the southeastern portion of the D’Olive Creek site (1BA251) indicate Native American
occupation of the site was contemporaneous with extreme weather events. In portions of the site, thick deposits of wind-blown sand
separate midden accumulations along the creek banks. This paper explores: 1.) landscape change at D’Olive Creek resulting from
extreme storm events, and 2.) the ways in which Pensacola culture people interacted with the changing landscape of the site.
Nelson, Shaun (Utah National Guard), Ephriam Dickson (National Park Service) and Jane Stone (Independent Museums
Professional)
[52]
Camp Floyd: Cornerstone of Utah’s Military Cultural Landscape
In 1857, 2,500 soldiers under the command of Colonel Albert Sydney Johnston entered Utah to suppress the “Mormon Rebellion.”
Johnston’s soldiers established a permanent military post southwest of Salt Lake City known as Camp Floyd. It would become the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    405
largest military post west of the Mississippi and influence the regional economy and culture. In 2009, the Fort Douglas Museum,
Utah National Guard, and Camp Floyd State Park formed a partnership to conduct excavations on the site. The results are
summarized in a final report, and have broad implications for the future management of this important site.
Neme, Gustavo, Adolfo Gil (IDEVEA/CONICET), Christopher Morgan (University of Nevada, Reno), Miguel Giardina
(IDEVEA/CONICET) and David Harvey (University of Nevada, Reno)
[243]
Human Occupation at High Elevations: Excavations at the El Indígeno Archaeological Site
The human occupation of high elevation environments has a long history in archaeological research around the world. In the
southern Andes between 34° and 35° SL, several archaeological sites were recorded above 3000 masl, referred to as Aldeas de
altura (high elevation villages). These are characterized by the presence of rock habitational structures, high ceramic density and
occupations dated during the last 2000 years. At 3300 masl, El Indígeno site is among the larger concentrations of hunter gatherer
habitational structures in southern Andes and contains 136 ring stones in the main cluster. With it’s discovery in 1972 the site caught
the attention of many archaeologists from Argentina and Chile. However due to the challenging location very limited field work has
occurred at the site. For this reason, many of the questions persist and the debate about its origin and function are still open. In this
paper we communicate the results of the recent fieldwork at the El Indígeno site, present the new radiocarbon dates, and include
the site in the regional archaeological debate.
Neme, Gustavo [15] see Morgan, Christopher
Nesbitt, Jason [5] see Johnson, Rachel
Netherly, Patricia (Vanderbilt University) and Tom Dillehay (Vanderbilt University)
[23]
The South American “Archaic”: Terms, Transformations, and Pathways
The so-called “Archaic” or “Preceramic” period can be understood as a stage with distinctly new lifeways. In South America and
especially in the Central Andes, this roughly 6,000-year period extends from the terminal Pleistocene to the Middle Holocene. It is
understandably different, both spatially between different environments and temporally involving socio-economic changes and
developments of different local communities across the continent. In the Central Andes, there were different pathways to the Archaic
and multiple origins of its constitutive processes, namely sedentism, domestication of plants and animals, initial urbanism, and social
complexity (equality and inequality), However, despite these differences, the different pathways have a number of distinct elements
of universal value and interest. The transformation of these constituent pathways and processes created the necessary conditions
for developing permanent communities and provided the foundations for urban society and political complexity in Andean, northern
and eastern South America.
Neto, Manuel [11] see Matos, Daniela
Neuhoff-Malorzo, Patricia
[53]
New Geophysical Survey Data from Tzak Naab
Construction of buildings in ancient Maya culture is often infused with ritualistic aspects of culture and belief. This is generally
discussed with respect to deposits unearthed during excavation. These ritual manifestations in construction and building specifics
can also reflect either changes or continuities in social and economic allegiances. Evidence for these shifting alliances can be found
by examining spatial patterns. This presentation will focus on the spatial data gathered from the Maya site of Tzak Naab.
Specifically, how the differences in the geophysical data, often reflecting changes in architectural trends, can also indicate
modification in social and economic connections.
Neuman, Amy [192] see Weber, June
Neumann, Frank [11] see Val, Aurore
Neves, Eduardo (University of São Paulo)
[161]
Discussant
Neville, Holly (University at Albany, SUNY)
[178]
Glyph Block Organization in Classic Period Palenque Texts
Monumental architecture in Classic period Maya polities often contained hieroglyphic passages carved into their surfaces. These
passages were planned and executed with glyphs arranged in glyph blocks, which took on many different organizational patterns. At
the Classic period site of Palenque, there are glyph blocks with widely varying concentrations of glyphs, anywhere from two to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    406
twelve glyphs comprising a single block. This poster will analyze the arrangement of individual glyphs into blocks, as well as their
orientations with regard to main glyphs and syllabic morpheme glyphs.
Newell, Savannah (Indiana University) and Jonathan Karty (Indiana University Bloomington, Mass Spectrometry)
[169]
Up in Smoke: Detection of Tobacco Use in Skeletal Remains from the Prehistoric Midwest
North American research on tobacco in prehistory has largely focused on pipes and residues, paleoethnobotanical remains, and
historical inferences. This project determines individual tobacco use by detecting nicotine in human skeletal remains from the
Midwest. Archaeological rib samples were taken from 50 adult individuals (27 females, 22 males, and 1 indeterminate) representing
five Illinois sites spanning from the Middle Woodland to Mississippian time periods (~2000 BP to 500 BP). Modern samples (n=3)
were added to the study for comparative analysis. Nicotine and cotinine, nicotine’s primary metabolite, were extracted and detected
using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Nonparametric tests showed that there was no significant difference
between individuals buried with pipe and those without (n=0.765) and between males and females (p=0.185). There is a significant
difference in nicotine content based on age (p=0.035), time period (p=0.033), and site (p=0.039). Overall, and perhaps
unsurprisingly, those individuals of older age show higher levels of nicotine. Interpretations based on site are difficult because
several sites have samples from fewer than five individuals. The mean nicotine content from Late Woodland is nearly twice that of
both Mississippian and Middle Woodland, suggesting smoking practices distinct from both earlier and later components.
Newell, Zachary (Center for Study of the First Americans, Texas A&M), Andrew Robbins (Texas A&M University), Michael
Moreno (Texas A&M University), Morgan Smith (Social, Cultural, and Justice Studies Department,) and Ji-Wan Han (Texas
A&M University)
[147]
Digital Excavation of Osseous and Lithic Artifacts Embedded in Bone
Osseous and lithic projectile points used in hunting often impact bone and sometimes the point tips become embedded in the bone.
We obtained high resolution CT scans of the osseous tip fragments in the rib of a mastodon at the Manis Site, Washington, as well
as a lithic point tip fragment embedded in the skull of the Alexon Bison, Florida. We used open source medical imaging software, 3D
Slicer, to digitally excavate and create models of these osseous and stone projectile fragments. This noninvasive technique allows
us to use 3D modeling programs to refit the fragments and digitally reconstruct the original forms of the points. Physical models of
the embedded points are then created by 3D printers.
Newitz, Annalee (New York Times)
[70]
Discussant
Newland, Michael and Alex DeGeorgey (Alta Archaeological Consulting)
[221]
Human Cremains Recovery in Wildfire Disaster Areas
The Camp Fire was the deadliest and most destructive wildfire in California history burning over 18,800 structures and destroying
the town of Paradise. In many instances, the cremated remains of previously deceased family members were stored within the
home. A volunteer group of archaeologists and canine forensic teams banded together to recover cremains lost during the firestorm.
This paper tells the story of our recovery effort and describes how archaeology can be used to help those affected by natural
disaster. This effort represents a new application for archaeology.
Newlander, Khori (Kutztown University)
[30]
Sourcing Chert Artifacts in East-Central Pennsylvania
In Pennsylvania, archaeologists have long sourced chert artifacts back to their geographic-geologic origin based on the visual
analysis of macroscopic attributes. On this basis, archaeologists have documented the movement of stone over enormous
distances, defining vast territories or trade networks that stretch across much of the Middle Atlantic region. But is it really that
simple? While our colleagues in other regions subject their chert artifacts to microscopic and chemical analyses to determine from
where they originated, are we in Pennsylvania lucky because our rocks are “easy”? Probably not. Focusing on a Late Archaic-Early
Woodland site in east-central Pennsylvania, I explore some of the challenges of sourcing chert artifacts in the region. In particular, I
note the necessity of determining the intra-source variability that exists in chert quarries across the region as a first step for
confidently sourcing chert artifacts and interpreting their conveyance.
Newman, Richard (Museum of Fine Arts, Boston) and Emily Kaplan (National Museum of the American Indian)
[258]
Characterization of the Binder Used for Late Intermediate Period Ica Painted Wooden Boards
Wooden objects excavated by Uhle and others from LIP sites in Ica, Peru have been identified variously as guara boards for
watercraft and ceremonialized agricultural implements. Leaving aside the function and meaning of these objects for the moment,
these oversized wooden objects are often elaborately carved and decorated with paint, metal sheet and pins, and sometimes
feathers. The binder used for the paint has not to date been identified. As part of a larger study to identify plant resins used as paint
binders in the pre-colonial and colonial Andes, we compare paint samples from these “boards” with a group of likely plant exudates
and results from analysis of other painted Andean objects including colonial wooden drinking cups called qeros.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     407
Newsom, Bonnie [9] see Kelley, Alice
Newton, Kathryn, Paige Ford (University of Oklahoma), Meghan Dudley (University of Oklahoma), Sarah Luthman
(University of Oklahoma) and Delaney Cooley (University of Oklahoma)
[97]
Oklahoma Public Archaeology Network (OKPAN) Engagement and Collaboration with Oklahoma Tribal Nations
Since its inception in 2017, the Oklahoma Public Archaeology Network (OKPAN) has strived to foster relationships with each of the
thirty-nine tribal nations in Oklahoma. As an organization, we attempt to bridge traditional archaeological interests with
contemporary Native concerns and perspectives. Our organization seeks to engage and collaborate with tribes through the
development of K-12 curriculum, classroom visits, community days, research investigating the earliest occupations in Oklahoma,
cultural resource management, as well as other forms of public outreach. In this paper we briefly discuss the successes and
challenges of these endeavors and introduce our nascent “Tribal Collaboration Forum Series.” The series emphasizes the diverse
perspectives of descendant communities to bridge gaps in communication and outreach between stewards of the past in Oklahoma
and beyond.
Nguyen, Ai Du [100] see Weisler, Marshall
NH, DHR (New Hampshire Division of Historical Resources) and Mark Doperalski
[190]
Surveying New Hampshire’s State Reservations: Maximizing the Benefits of Public Archaeology
Archaeological resources on state-owned lands belong to the people. Agencies managing these lands are obliged to be good
stewards of these archaeological resources on behalf of the citizens. Unfortunately, funding is often not commensurate with the
mission at hand; and as a result, the stewardship of such resources is not always what might be desired. A recent emphasis, by the
New Hampshire Division of Historical Resources, on completing state-sponsored archaeological field schools and volunteer-based
surveys on state-owned lands is maximizing efforts directed toward teaching archaeological field methods and increasing public
awareness by also directly contributing to the inventory, documentation, and management of archaeological deposits on state-
owned lands in New Hampshire. Investigations such as these are contributing interpretive data that can be used by state land
managers in the creation of interpretive displays to be placed in park facilities and signage to adorn trail systems, campsites, and
other recreational areas as well as inform interpretive programming. Newly informed interpretive displays, signage, and
programming not only create more interest in, and awareness of, archaeological resources on state-owned lands, but also aid land
managing agencies in providing outstanding educational and inspirational experiences that in turn are likely to increase visitor
attendance and revenue.
Nichols, Deborah (Dartmouth College)
[54]
Discussant
Nichols, Deborah (Dartmouth College), L. J. Gorenflo (Penn State) and Ian Robertson (ASU)
[102]
Basin of Mexico: Prehispanic Population History
The Basin of Mexico Survey and the Teotihuacan Mapping Project were landmark projects in the history of archaeology. One goal of
both projects was reconstructing prehispanic population history to improve our understanding of cultural evolution in this region. The
population histories and estimates generated for the great city of Teotihuacan and the Basin as a whole significantly changed our
understanding of prehispanic Mesoamerica. The abandonment of many rural settlements in the Basin of Mexico at the time of
Teotihuacan’s dramatic growth in the first century AD had been unknown, as had the impact of the city’s collapse on regional
settlement and demographics, the geographic influence of Tula on Basin settlement, and the rapid growth of Aztec population. But
those demographic reconstructions warrant revisiting. In this paper we discuss several factors that complicate demographic
reconstruction in the Basin and at Teotihuacan, including challenges of surveying multicomponent sites, the need for refined
ceramic chronology, difficulties in linking urban and rural demographics, limitations on surface visibility of sites due to the effects of
erosion and deposition, effects of varying land use on surface remains, and the general challenge of establishing contemporaneity
within and among sites.
Nichols, Deborah (Dartmouth College)
[152]
Discussant
Nichols, Deborah (Dartmouth College)
[181]
Discussant
Nichols, Deborah [5] see Johnson, April
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      408
Nichols, Kristi Miller (Alamo Trust Inc.)
[113]
Discussant
Nicodemus, Amy (University of Wisconsin, La Crosse)
[22]
Animal Economies and Emergent Complexity in the European Bronze Age
The Bronze Age is marked by dramatic social changes throughout much of the Old World. In Eastern Europe, and elsewhere, we
see the emergence of regional hierarchies characterized by political and economic centralization and heightened status
differentiation. While focus traditionally has been placed on the manufacture and exchange of metals, significant changes in
livestock management systems can also be seen at this time. At central settlements, such as Pecica-Şanţul Mare (Romania), animal
husbandry shifts from employing risk-buffering to resource-maximizing strategies, intensifying the production of high-value animals
and their products. This, in part, reflects the desire to increase exportable commodities. Other changes are responses to local elite
demands for high-quality meat, including the implementation of provisioning systems and ritualized feasting. Restructuring of animal
production and consumption practices is tightly integrated within, and central to, broader economic changes that lay the foundation
for complex polities in the European Bronze Age.
Nicolas Lorenzo, Dennis (National Pedro Ruiz Gallo University)
[182]
De la costa a la Amazonia: Un estudio sobre las rutas de interacción multirregional del Periodo Formativo Medio y Tardío en el
Norte del Perú.
El objetivo principal de esta investigación consistió en identificar y definir las rutas de interacción multirregional utilizadas durante el
periodo formativo medio y tardío (1200-550 aC) entre la costa norte y la región amazónica en el norte del Perú, destacando la
localización de asentamiento con arquitectura e iconografía de este periodo en la zona altoandina de Lambayeque (Kañaris e
Inkawasi). La zona altoandina de Lambayeque se localiza en una región intermedia que conecta la costa de Lambayeque con la
región amazónica. En esta región, para el periodo formativo medio las rutas se definieron mediante la localización de petroglifos y
pequeñas plataformas rectangulares en la parte media y alta de las cuencas, mientras que para el formativo tardío se observa un
incremento notable de sitios con arquitectura, y la ruta se define por sobre las cordilleras. Finalmente, mediante el análisis GIS, se
infiere que el cambio sucedido entorno a la localización de las rutas del formativo medio al tardío está relacionado por el costo de
viaje y a la intensificación de las relaciones multirregionales en la región, relacionado al fenómeno chavín en los andes centrales
entre el 800 y 550 a.C.
Nicolay, Scott (University of California, Merced)
[137]
“Tlaloc” and “Chicomoztoc” in the North: Evidence for Chthonic Concepts from Mesoamerican Cosmovision in the Caves of the
Greater Southwest
Claims for contact between Mesoamerica and the North American Southwest predate by centuries the inception of archaeology as a
scientific discipline. However, despite such long-standing assumptions and the accumulation of evidence from the archaeological
record, including ball courts, copper crotals, cacao, and macaws, as well as material manifestations of Mesoamerican ideologies,
the timelines, sources, and mechanisms for these transmissions remain elusive. One of the most dramatic (if controversial)
indicators for long-distance contact is the presence of the Mesoamerican storm god known in Nahuatl as Tlaloc in hundreds of
images in rock art from New Mexico, Texas, Chihuahua, and Sonora, as well as on portable objects, including ceramics and painted
effigies from at least five caves. Two other Southwestern caves, both among the most important cave shrines in the region and at
least one of which has been culturally modified, present unusual morphologies suggesting that they may have functioned as
representations of Chicomoztoc, the Nahua “seven caves” of emergence. This paper presents new findings for both concepts and
reconsiders their presence in the Southwest as well as the timing of their arrivals, suggesting that while Tlaloc may have arrived
centuries earlier than previously recognized, the Chicomoztoc model may be even older there.
Nielsen, Anna [235] see Habu, Junko
Nielsen, Christina, Jen Anderson (TxDOT) and Kevin Hanselka (TxDOT)
[186]
TxDOT Excavations at the Hardeman Midden Site (41DN612)
From April through June 2019, a team of TxDOT and SWCA archeologists excavated the Hardeman Midden site (41DN12) in
Denton County. The site lies on a terrace of Denton Creek and consists of a burned rock sheet midden (a site type not common in
this area) with an intrusive historic refuse component. Preliminary geoarcheological analyses identified five strata at the site. The
midden occurs in Stratum III, correlating with the West Fork soil which dates to within the last 2,000 years (Late Archaic to Late
Prehistoric periods). Six other burned rock features were identified in underlying cultural horizons interpreted to encompass the last
4,000 years (Middle to Late Archaic periods). Besides burned rock, the most abundant materials encountered were mussel shell and
faunal remains. No lithics were recovered. Given the site’s stratigraphic integrity, ongoing investigations will focus on identifying
isolable components and include geoarcheological, artifact, feature, faunal, and macrobotanical analyses.
Nielsen, Christina [176] see Cody, Mercedes
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    409
Nielsen-Grimm, Glenna and Richard Hansen
[163]
Excavations on El Leon
Preliminary testing of the structure identified as El Leon, at the site of El Mirador have determined that the latest additions to the
structure are probably late preclassic, with the central construction dating to the Middle Preclassic. Evidence suggests that this area
of the site, the Central Plaza, is an early ritual center. El Leon is the western building of an E group.
Nieves, Ana (Northeastern Illinois University)
[141]
Body Quilcas: Tattooing and Body Painting in Ancient Peru
Terence Grieder’s studies of the artistic traditions of the ancient Americas resulted in thorough descriptions of form, style, and
manufacturing techniques. But his work went beyond the descriptive as he did not shy away from the discussion of meaning and
symbolism, for which he relied on ethnographic analogy. With the understanding that art is a semantic system, Grieder’s
comprehensive approach allowed him to address both the system and the content, combining his observations and data with a more
speculative interpretive approach. In an effort to discuss both system and content, this paper focuses on the images depicted on the
bodies of larger figures in Andean ceramics, particularly those of the Nasca civilization. Are these images representations of body
painting and/or tattooing, or are they strictly symbolic forms? Casting a wide net in order to discuss the significance of these images,
I integrate various lines of evidence, starting with the objects themselves. I also address the physical evidence of tattooing and body
painting in the Andean region. Comparisons to both local and distant practices, as well as a discussion of relevant Andean
concepts, also help us understand these images.
Nikitina, Daria [9] see Wholey, Heather
Nims, Reno (University of Auckland)
[262]
Methods and Ethics for Data Reuse: A Zooarchaeological Case Study from Aotearoa New Zealand
Legacy zooarchaeological datasets are regularly collated to construct regional understandings of human-environment interactions in
the past, but they are often systematically biased by recovery and identification methods, undermining the validity of archaeological
interpretations. In Aotearoa New Zealand, few assemblages of animal remains have been collected with fishbone analysis in mind,
and previous work based on legacy assemblages may seriously misrepresent the actual nature and range of traditional Māori
fisheries. Because such archaeological claims have real-world consequences for historically oppressed descent communities,
archaeologists should critically and transparently evaluate the quality of all data we use to construct such knowledge, especially for
datasets that are perceived as foundational. Archaeologists should also consider consulting descent communities in accordance
with principles of indigenous data sovereignty before reusing data or reanalyzing legacy collections, just as we would prior to
beginning new excavations. This paper summarizes a recent project from northern Aotearoa New Zealand based on legacy
fishbone assemblages, presents methods for assessing data quality in comparative studies, and considers the ethics of data reuse.
Nina Vargas, Hortensia [4] see Capriles, José
Niquette, Charles (Cultural Resource Analysts Inc.)
[58]
The Founding of Cultural Resource Analysts Inc.
Cultural Resource Analysts (CRA) was founded out of necessity when my previous employer filed Chapter 11. CRA grew through
entrepreneurial desire, wisdom guided by experience, and trust in the expertise of others. Starting out as a one-man company that
could only do prehistoric archaeology in a very small region of the country, CRA has been transformed into a one stop shop for
nearly any kind of historic preservation requirement. Our success has been our people, their expertise, and a collaborative effort to
provide exceptional research results and, most importantly, to our continued success, customer satisfaction. Today, CRA offers all
aspects of historic preservation services (except underwater archaeology) to our clients.
Niquette, Richard (University of Kansas), Bryon Schroeder (Center for Big Bend Studies of Sul Ross State Univ) and Rolfe
Mandel (Kansas Geological Survey)
[8]
Preliminary Results of Geoarchaeological Investigations at the San Esteban Rockshelter (41PS20), Southwest Texas
The San Esteban Rockshelter is located in the Alamito Creek drainage of the Big Bend region, southwest Texas. The site is
associated with a perennial tinaja, which made it an attractive location for human occupation in this arid region for at least the past
10,000 years. The shelter has been subject to undocumented collecting since the early 1900s, yet preliminary testing in 2000
revealed intact cultural deposits. In the summer of 2019, the University of Kansas Odyssey Research Program launched a
geoarchaeological investigation to determine the extent and age of sedimentary and cultural deposits in the shelter. Despite the
magnitude of previous disturbances, the 2019 study revealed extensive intact cultural deposits dating from the late Holocene
through the historic period. In addition, potential for older intact deposits is indicated by the recovery of mid-Holocene hafted bifaces
retrieved from backfill. This poster presents the preliminary results of the 2019 investigation. Continued research at San Esteban will
address many questions of past lifeways in southwest Texas.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  410
Nishimura, Yoko (Gettysburg College)
[248]
Doing Archaeology Outside of the Trench: A Case Study from the Jōmon Period in Japan that Utilizes Museum “Diaspora”
Collections for Research
Archaeological research using old museum collections has continued to be an important topic to many. This paper presents a
research method that goes beyond the practical, laboratory research that centers around the materials and technologies of the
artifacts stored in museums. It offers an investigatory method of how to generate research questions that address broader
sociocultural aspects in ancient societies and how to carry out the archaeology research by utilizing the uniqueness and strength of
old museum collections. Such research necessitates the selection of artifacts that are informative on surface appearance and that
can be linked, as a “diaspora” collection, to an “original” dataset in their homeland. Once the diaspora collection is embedded within
its homeland dataset, it generates meaningful research questions and leads us to solid archaeological research. A case study is
drawn from an enigmatic but ubiquitous pottery type, called irregular-shaped footed pots, that emerged and flourished during the
Late Jōmon period (ca. 1700 BC~) in eastern Japan. The functional analysis of this particular pottery type is discussed.
[248]
Chair
Nissen, Zachary (Northwestern University)
[57]
“Vertical Roots”: Inequality, Belonging, and Narratives of Place in Northern Belize
For the people of contemporary Belize, issues of heritage and ancestry are often addressed in binary terms of long-term indigenous
continuity or sharp Spanish and British colonial discontinuities, which involves designating specific social groups to discrete
geographic locations. However, for ordinary people, these issues are deeply political and tied to complicated histories of forced
movement, social inequality, and violence. For example, much of northernmost Belize is populated by peoples that sought refuge
from the Caste War of Mexico’s Yucatán Peninsula in the mid 1800s. This paper explores how some residents of San Joaquin
Village, located near the archaeological site Aventura, Belize situate their coming to occupy the landscape through narrations of
their shared experiences and histories of the landscape. Specifically, it examines the ways locals theorize their “vertical roots” and
how it hones a sense of belonging to the landscape that is expressed through storytelling and everyday encounters with the
archaeological space. I argue that this perspective offers a means of conceptualizing ways of being and living in postcolonial
landscapes that can break down the harmful modes of thinking about heritage and history which situate people in linear histories of
Spanish or Maya ancestry.
Noack Myers, Kelsey
[95]
Moderator
Noack Myers, Kelsey
[217]
Discussant
Noe, Sarah, Randy Haas (University of California, Davis) and Mark Aldenderfer (University of California, Merced)
[233]
From Hunting to Herding: A Preliminary Investigation of Camelid Domestication in the Lake Titicaca Basin
As the sole large-bodied domesticated animal in South America, camelids constituted a primary component in Andean economies
and social life, and were pivotal for the expansion of early complex societies. The timing and method of domestication, as well as
the subsequent spread of husbandry practices, remains a fundamental question in Andean archaeology. This paper examines
faunal remains from the following three well-dated sites in the Peruvian side of Lake Titicaca Basin located in the Andean highlands
3800m in elevation: Wilamaya Patjxa (9.0–6.5 ka), Soro Mik’aya Patjxa (8.0–6.5 ka), and Jiskairumoko (5.0–3.5 ka). Although the
fragmentary assemblage is limited, a clear increase in camelid:deer remains is evident with camelids coming to dominate the late
assemblage. This zooarchaeological analysis supports a hypothesis of camelid domestication in the Titicaca Basin by at least 3.5
ka. Future work aims to more precisely assess the timing of camelid domestication and provide a long-term perspective on the
relationship between domestication, agricultural intensification, and the emergence of complexity
Noël, Stéphane [76] see Guiry, Eric
Nolan, Kevin (AAL, Ball State University)
[97]
Discussant
Nolan, Kevin (AAL, Ball State University)
[231]
Archaeology and the Information Age: Entropy, Noise, Channel Capacity, and Information Potential in Section 106 Archaeological
Significance Assessments
Most archaeological fieldwork is conducted under the guise of evaluating impacts of federal undertakings on cultural resources. This
public investment carries responsibility. CRM archaeologists determine which resources will be available for future study and which
are unworthy of investigation. In practice, significance determinations are idiosyncratic and biased toward only portions of the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    411
archaeological record. Where explicit justification is given in terms of the eligibility criteria, most sites are recommended under
criterion D, information potential. Information and information potential are neither defined, nor consistently used. By conceptualizing
the archaeological record as a noisy information channel, and archaeological observations as sampling a message from a source of
unknown statistical structure, we get a formal definition of “Information Potential” that can be quantitatively assessed. Such a
conception can guide strategies to understand the statistical structure of the archaeological record as observed. Employing Claude
E. Shannon’s (1948:395) concept of conditional entropy for a signal received through a noisy channel will result in a more
systematic and scientific use of criterion D. This more explicit interpretation of information potential ensures public money will yield a
more robust and more representative picture of the past. In this way, archaeology can finally join the information age.
Noldner, Lara (University of Iowa Office of the State Archaeologist) and Jennifer Mack (Univ. of Iowa Office of the State
Archaeologist)
[172]
Documentation of NAGPRA Items at the University of Iowa Office of the State Archaeologist
The Bioarchaeology Program at the University of Iowa Office of the State Archaeologist (OSA) is currently working under a
NAGPRA Consultation/Documentation Grant to determine whether there are additional NAGPRA items in the OSA’s general
collections. We have complete documentation of all human remains and associated funerary objects that are under the purview of
the Bioarchaeology Program, but the OSA also has a substantial number of accessioned material from sites listed as mounds,
prehistoric cemeteries, and villages. Artifacts from these contexts could potentially be considered unassociated funerary objects or
sacred items, so they require a closer look. Through archival research we are identifying potential NAGPRA items and will also host
a consultation event to get feedback from tribes on items we have identified, as well as their guidance in additional identifications
and completing any summaries necessary. This presentation will be summary of our results to date, initial feedback from tribes (as
our consultation event has not yet taken place), and challenging questions and issues we’ve encountered along the way.
Noldner, Lara [231] see Hawkins, Alan
Noll, Christopher (Archaeological and Historical Services, EWU) and Anna Coon (Archaeological and Historical Services,
EWU)
[177]
An Examination of Notched Stone Line and Net Weight Design
In the interior Pacific Northwest, fishing during precontact times frequently involved the use of weighted nets or lines. The weights
were produced from locally available cobbles, which were modified with chipped notches to aid in the attachment of the stones to
fiber components of the fishing system. The weights appear to be expedient, low-investment tools; however few studies have
investigated the design of notched net weights. The weights are critical to the success of the fishing system and may include design
elements that reflect considerations of the application of the tools through selection of specific materials, and tool size and shape.
This study provides an evaluation of the potential variables of stone net weights to identify attributes of the tools that may reflect
functional design considerations in net weight production and use.
Nores, Rodrigo (Instituto de Antropología de Córdoba, Argentina [CONICET/UNC]), Nathan Nakatsuka (Harvard Medical
School), Pierre Luisi (Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Argentina), Josefina Motti (NEIPHPA-CONICET, UNICEN,
Argentina) and David Reich (Harvard Medical School)
[173]
Genetic Change in South Patagonia over Seven Millennia
South Patagonia, the austral extreme of South America, has been inhabited for at least 12,500 years. Following European contact,
five ethnic groups of hunter-gatherers (Yámana, Kawéskar, Selk’nam, Haush, and Aónikenk) were documented. They based their
subsistence in two broad strategies optimized for maritime or terrestrial resources. After a century of fieldwork, archaeologists have
revealed a complex pattern of differentiation between groups. Many questions regarding peopling, admixture, and technological
changes remain to be answered. In order to provide some hints into those questions, we generated genome-wide data from 20
ancient individuals and compared it to previously reported data. We observed a shared genetic ancestry between maritime and
terrestrial Middle Holocene individuals (~7300–6000 BP) that persists in some Late Holocene groups. We also identified two
migration events that reached South Patagonia: a first wave by at least ~5000 BP that differentiated Late Holocene maritime groups
from terrestrial ones; and gene flow with Central Chile around ~2000–1400 BP with major impact in terrestrial groups. Finally, Late
Holocene groups fall on a genetic cline precisely correlated to geographic ordering following the coastal line, as a result of the
uneven impact of these two migration processes.
Noriega, Aldo [21] see Conlee, Christina
Norman, Garth (ARCON Inc.)
[164]
260-Day Sacred Calendar at the Izapa Temple Observatory, Southern Mexico
The ancient Olmec 260-day sacred almanac is the most important intellectual construct in Mesoamerican civilization that governed
nearly every aspect of life, believed to have originated at Izapa by at least 1600 BCE, seen on Monument 2, recorded through the
four-quarter seasonal monuments of Izapa’s astronomical observatory, and is most fully recorded on the twelfth month Stela 5 and
new year carving on Stela 12. This Sacred Round has been explored most extensively by this author’s Izapa and related projects
over the past seven decades—with updated discoveries published in three recent books: 1) “Parowan Gap: Nature’s Perfect
Observatory” (2007); 2) “Izapa Sacred Space: Sculpture Calendar Codex” (2015); 3) “Cubit Connection in Ancient World Migrations”
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   412
(2018) and reported in SAA papers since 2006. The 260-day cycle was recorded and preserved in Izapa sculpture and architecture
during Izapa’s Late Formative heyday (600 BCE–200 AC). Its influence spread far and wide across Mesoamerica and beyond. It
celebrates creation with the 9-month human gestation period and is coded in Izapa’s calendrics which extends to the 26,000 year
precession of the equinox. Wide range trade influence includes related calendar temple observatories at Teotihuacan, Mexico;
Nazca, Peru; and Parowan Gap, Utah.
Norman, Scotti (University of Pittsburgh)
[32]
Discussant
Norman Brown, Lauren
[113]
Discussant
Norris, Austin (University of New Mexico), Hannah Mattson (University of New Mexico) and Joseph Birkmann (University of
New Mexico)
[148]
An Experimental Examination of Lapidary Microdrill Use-Wear
Prehispanic archaeological sites in the Greater Southwest frequently contain objects of personal adornment, such as stone or shell
beads and pendants. While many of these items are trade pieces, it is likely that a significant portion are the product of local lapidary
production. Previous investigations of probable ornament workshop areas at sites across the Southwest indicate that lithic
microdrills were an important component of the traditional lapidarist’s tool kit. Microdrills were most often produced expediently from
debitage and appear to be the principal tool used to create small perforations in hard materials. While experimental studies related
to ornament manufacture have been conducted in the past, these primarily focus on labor/time expenditure or ornament microwear.
Few studies have centered on the traces of lapidary production preserved on the tools themselves. Here we present the results of a
comparative experimental study on microdrill use-wear associated with perforating a variety of materials, including those commonly
used for personal adornment in the Southwest. It is hoped that this study will aid other researchers in identifying evidence of
ornament production in flaked stone assemblages, including distinguishing between lapidary and other drilling activities.
Norton, Brandy
[233]
Snakes or Snacks? Prehistoric Diet and Possible Snake Consumption in the Lake Okeechobee Basin
This paper is a case study with a unique perspective on zooarchaeology. In recent years, it has become clear that it is necessary to
approach zooarchaeology while utilizing new methods of interpretation of the data outside of, but not excluding, strictly numeric
formulas. Standard zooarchaeological methods fail to take into account the preferences of people in the area being studied. Without
other supporting evidence, the interpretation of numerical data can be somewhat questionable. In order to not impose European
standards on past peoples, the field of zooarchaeology must create new methodologies, such as incorporation of oral histories, to
account for these biases. For example, dense middens in the Lake Okeechobee basin in Florida often contain a large amount of
snake bones. Understandably, many archaeologists have interpreted the presence of these bones as evidence of snake
consumption by prehistoric inhabitants of the area. However, the Seminole Tribe of Florida (STOF) are descendants of these
prehistoric inhabitants and snake consumption is taboo for the STOF. Oral histories suggest alternative possibilities for the presence
of snakes in these middens. Based on the oral histories, examination of burning patterns and cutmarks on venomous versus non-
venomous snakes could help determine if snakes were being eaten.
Nosie, Vanessa [184] see Castleberry, Cala
Novotny, Anna (Texas Tech University)
[99]
Souls in Flight: A Scioto Hopewell Ritual Drama about the Journey of Souls of the Deceased to an Afterlife
The association of the departing soul with birds in flight had considerable geographic and temporal range within the Eastern
Woodlands. A bioarchaeological study of 89 photographs of skeletons, cremations, and isolated artifact deposits in Midwestern
Hopewell and Adena charnel houses indicate that these were sometimes purposefully arranged into the forms of birds, bird-human
composites, and other composite forms. The plot, characters, and choreography of the death drama performed in Charnel House C
under Mound 25 in the Hopewell ceremonial center is detailed through an analysis of the layouts of skeletons and artifacts in tombs
there and by reference to historic Woodland Indian lore about death journeys. Steps of the Hopewell journey include the release of
the free soul from the deceased’s head with the aid of a shamanic psychopomp, the soul’s bird-like flight across the earth-disk,
arrival of the soul at the waters at the edge of the disk, travel on the Milky Way path to a land of the dead, a helping hand across a
barrier, a dangerous encounter with two raptors, and meeting a person in a fez-like headdress. Ritual dramas likely played a key
role in creating and maintaining local and regional Hopewellian communities.
Novotny, Claire (Kenyon College) and Brett A. Houk (Texas Tech University)
[53]
Patolli and Ancient Maya Ritual Expression at Gallon Jug, Belize
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                          413
Patolli game boards are found on plaster surfaces such as walls, benches, and floors and are associated with leisure games and
ritual divination. Frequent placement in religious structures and private spaces support the idea that patolli boards are connected to
ritual, while their quadripartite shapes evoke Maya cosmovision. In this paper we will present ongoing research on three lines of
evidence—architecture, ceramics, and several stylistically distinct patolli boards—to expand what we know about games and ritual
in the Maya lowlands. Recent excavations at the site of Gallon Jug, in northwestern Belize, revealed multiple, overlapping, and
stylistically distinct patolli boards incised into a well-preserved stucco floor. The patolli boards are located in the northern platform of
an elite residential group more than 100m away from the Gallon Jug site core. Analysis of a dense ceramic deposit from the same
floor will help us understand the function of the structure and the social interactions surrounding gaming and ritual during the Late
Classic (AD 600–900) period in the Maya lowlands. Though most patolli boards are discovered in religious structures or private
spaces, the context of these patolli suggest that ritual divination may have shaped the social interactions of a wider population.
Novotny, Claire [228] see Kilgore, Gertrude
Nowak, Jesse (University of Oklahoma)
[47]
Chair
Nowak, Jesse (University of Oklahoma)
[166]
Seeing Like an Iconographer: Can Perspectivism Inform our Interpretations of Mississippian Iconography?
This presentation examines the potentials, and possible pitfalls, of applying Viveiros de Castro’s theory of Perspectivism to studies
of precolumbian iconography in the North American Southeast. Early scholarship in Mississippian archaeology theorized that direct
cultural interaction best explained thematic similarities seen with the belief systems from ancient Mesoamerica. Though more recent
archaeological evidence suggests a lack of strong material interactions between Mesoamerica and the Southeast, linguistic and
folklore studies have contended for ancient and widespread connections throughout the Americas. Anthropological work utilizing
alternative ontologies that consider pervasive animacy and shamanistic practices constitutive of a pan-regional Amerindian
metaphysics has reignited debates about a deep interconnectedness throughout North America. This work explores theoretical
obstacles Southeastern iconographic research historically encounters and asks if a Perspectivist approach could yield innovative
models to reconstruct indigenous worldviews, or if it primarily revisits old and current problems seen in our field.
Nowak, Jesse [47] see Deere, Bobi
Nowak, Jesse [166] see Heep, Nathan
Nowell, April [11] see Collins, Benjamin
Nowlin, Jessica [35] see Smith, Alexander
Nuckols Wilde, Catherine (Tulane University)
[84]
A Return to Roots: The Maya—Teotihuacan Inscription at Copan’s Temple 26
In the mid-eighth century, Copan’s fifteenth ruler, K’ahk’ Yipyaj Chan K’awiil, oversaw the completion of Structure 10L-26 (or Temple
26), which was crowned with a stone inscription located within the superstructure. This inscription features a parallel display of Maya
full-figure glyphs alongside Teotihuacan-inspired graphics. The style of the inscription is unique in the corpus of Maya texts and is
distinct even from the script found on the hieroglyphic stairway leading down from it. Although not yet fully deciphered, initial analyses
suggest that the contents of each column mirror each other. In this paper, I analyze the Temple 26 inscription as a tool that draws a
parallel between Copan’s dynastic founder, K’inich Yax K’uk’ Mo’, and its twelfth ruler, K’ahk’ Uti’ Witz K’awiil. Using iconographic and
epigraphic approaches, I investigate potential classifications for this inscription (as a biscript, font, etc.) that could lead to a clearer
interpretation of its meaning. Finally, I propose that this text embodies an invocation of Copan’s dynastic roots in the face of political
turmoil, as well as a “hearkening back” to the city’s connection to the powerful city of Teotihuacan, at this point long abandoned.
[84]
Chair
Nyaradi, Zsolt [169] see Bews, Elizabeth
Ó Donnabháin, Barra [134] see Alonzi, Elise
Oas, Sarah (Arizona State University) and Matt Peeples (Arizona State University)
[120]
Portion Control: Estimating Vessel Volume and Storage Capacity in the Eastern Cibola Region, New Mexico
The functional analysis of ceramic vessel forms is frequently used to assess the range of activities taking place at an archaeological
site. One of the major goals of many such studies is to identify modes in the sizes of vessels used for various tasks. In the U.S.
Southwest, this is frequently done by estimating the orifice diameter of bowls and jars using rim diameter charts. For certain vessel
forms and wares, however, the volumes of vessels are not strongly correlated with orifice diameter (e.g., collared jars like Tularosa
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      414
B/W). In this study, we assess alternative methods for estimating the volume of vessels based on body sherds. We measured and
then broke a series of experimental jars into sherds of various size. We then used two methods to estimate the volume of these jars
and were able to successfully identify the size modes based on body sherds alone. Using this method, we then estimate the sizes of
storage and cooking vessels at a series of sites in the eastern Cibola region to assess changing strategies of food storage through
time (ca. AD 1100–1350).
Oas, Sarah [171] see Bocinsky, Kyle
Oberheim, Paul (University of Massachusetts, Amherst), Richard Boisvert (New Hampshire SCRAP) and Mark Doperalski
(State Archaeologist of New Hampshire)
[66]
Supporting Paleoindian Viewsheds with the Jefferson VII Site, Jefferson, New Hampshire
Viewsheds provide an integral part in understanding the first peoples inhabiting the early Northeastern landscape. Work conducted
by Dr. Richard Boisvert and others have established a way of analyzing the paleo landscape by looking at the vantage point of
different settlements excavated in New Hampshire. I intend to add to this list by examining the Jefferson VII site, a hunter’s lookout
close to the surrounding sites Boisvert has investigated. In addition to the Jefferson VII site I will be comparing other sites across the
landscapes to the recently proposed model and against Jefferson VII. In this way I hope to provide a clear sampling between the
different datasets of similar sites while providing a number of adequate control sites where the testing has already been done. With
this information I hope to increase the amount of data available on paleo overwatch points so that the same methods can be used
on other sites to better map the Pleistocene pathways that helped people the region.
O’Brien, Colleen (University of Cincinnati)
[150]
Investigating a Late Classic Maya Plaza through Artifact Distributions to Find Evidence of a Marketplace
Within the field of Mesoamerican archaeology, research on ancient marketplaces, where important economic transactions took
place often in large open plaza areas, is just beginning to expand. The Maya, who lived in Central America and Southern Mexico
from 250–900 AD in the Classic Period, used such spaces to purchase, barter, and trade every day and ceremonial items such as
food, tools, and pottery. However, little evidence of both archaeological and iconographic materials exist in the context of the Maya.
My research focuses on the Late Classic plaza at Group D at the site of Say Kah, located in the Three Rivers region of Belize,
Central America. My methodology is modeled after one of the “signatures” of a marketplace used by Bernadette Cap in her 2014
dissertation: distinct clusters of artifacts. These clusters, when compared to other lines of evidence, such as soil chemistry, can
suggest stall-like or linear patterning indicative of a marketplace. The analysis of artifacts, such as lithics and pottery, from the plaza
at Group D will shed light on the plaza’s use and may be suggestive of a marketplace, which could alter the way we think about Say
Kah’s role in the Three Rivers region.
O’Brien, Kaedan [133] see Freiwald, Carolyn
O’Brien, Michael (Texas A&M, San Antonio), Mark Collard (Simon Fraser University) and Briggs Buchanan (University of
Tulsa)
[236]
Geometric Morphometric Analyses Support Incorporating the Goshen Point Type into Plainview
Recent work has demonstrated that Goshen points overlap in time with another group of unfluted lanceolate points from the Plains,
Plainview points. This has raised the question of whether the two types should be kept separate or consolidated into a single type.
We sought to resolve this issue by applying geometric morphometric methods to a sample of points from well-documented Goshen
and Plainview assemblages. We found that their shapes were statistically indistinguishable, which indicates that Goshen and
Plainview points should be assigned to the same type. Because Plainview points were recognized before Goshen points, it is the
latter type-name that should be dropped. Sinking Goshen into Plainview allows us to move beyond taxonomic issues and toward
understanding the spatiotemporal variation that exists among Plainview assemblages and what it can tell us about the adaptations
and social dynamics of Plainview groups.
Oczipka, Martin [62] see Piezonka, Henny
Odegaard, Nancy [258] see Bisulca, Christina
Odegaard, Nancy [79] see Hanson, Kelsey
O’Donnell, Lexi (University of Mississippi), Ethan Hill (University of New Mexico), Amy Anderson (University of California,
Santa Barbara) and Heather Edgar (University of New Mexico)
[80]
Examining the Etiology of Cribra Orbitalia and Porotic Hyperostosis Using Computed Tomography (CT) Scans of a contemporary
Sample from the New Mexico Office of the Medical Investigator
Two skeletal indicators of systemic disturbance frequently reported in the bioarchaeological literature are porous lesions: cribra
orbitalia (CO) and porotic hyperostosis (PH). Most individuals reported to have active CO or PH at time of death are juveniles
between six months and five years old. These lesions have been attributed to nutritional deficiencies or stress incurred during
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    415
growth and development. When found together, they have been connected to anemia through comparison with clinical imaging data
from severe (typically genetic) anemias. Due to this, CO and PH are often reported together as a linked indicator of systemic stress.
However, little is agreed upon about the precise etiologies of either lesion. Further, few studies have examined the potential
etiologies of these lesions in contemporary people. Here, we examine the health conditions associated with these lesions in a
contemporary sample. We use high-resolution autopsy CT scans of 127 individuals ≤15 years of age in addition to associated
metadata on individual manner and cause of death, sex, age and race/ethnicity. We find that CO has a higher frequency (27/113)
than PH (8/121). Further, there appears to be a significant correlation (χ2=15.6, p=0.00) between presence of CO and lung
infections connected to cause of death.
Odsuren, Davahuu [62] see Janz, Lisa
Oechsner, Amy (Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen), Nicholas Conard (Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen) and
Simone Riehl (Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen)
[36]
Digging Deeper: A Preliminary Report on the Carpological Analysis of the Middle Stone Age Layers G through A of Sibudu Cave,
KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa
The evolution of modern humans has been linked to various cultural adaptations, our understanding of which has been augmented
by studies of the African Middle Stone Age (MSA). Sibudu Cave has a well-dated, continuous MSA sequence that spans from
Marine Isotope Stage 5 to the Final MSA as well as excellent organic preservation. As indicated by the plant bedding documented at
Sibudu, when analyzed together with other classes of material culture an understanding of the use of plant remains helps complete
the picture of early behavioral complexity. In addition, by defining the abiotic factors that influenced early humans we can better
understand the development of modern behavioral traits. The results of carpological analysis of the upper layers (BS through
LBMOD) of Sibudu was published by Sievers in 2006. However, as illustrated by the definition of a distinct “blade bearing tradition”
from the deeper D through A layers by Schmid et al. (2019), the lower part of the sequence offers exciting new insights into the
MSA. This new study picks up the thread of carpological analysis at Sibudu and digs deeper: offering preliminary data from the
analysis of the MSA layers G through A of Sibudu Cave.
Ogburn, Dennis (University of North Carolina, Charlotte), Bill Sillar (University College London) and Alexei Vranich
[127]
Sacred Quarries and Sacred Stones in Cusco: Bringing the Sacred Landscape into the Inka Capital
The Inka heartland was filled with huacas: sacred places/objects, many of which were considered persons or spirits. Many were
prominent, fixed features of the landscape, such as mountains, streams, and caves, where ceremonies were regularly conducted. In
order to increase the religious power and status of their settlements, the Inka developed practices to bring such places into their built
environments via channeling water or carving stones to mirror distant peaks. Given that the Inka considered some stone quarries to
be huacas, the act of bringing their stone to build in Cusco is essentially bringing the sacredness of those quarries to the Inca
capital. As a corollary, the sacred import of the buildings imparted more status on the quarries that provided the stones. Using data
from quarry locations, geochemistry, and ethnohistory, we explore the implications that the sacredness of quarries had for the
choosing to exploit different quarries over time to construct Cusco. Among the questions addressed: Were only some quarries
considered sacred? Why does one quarry provide almost all of the stone for the most important structures? Were individual building
stones considered sacred and/or animate? What are the implications of mixing stone from multiple quarries in construction?
Ogola, Christine [232] see Waweru, Veronica
O’Gorman, Jodie [233] see Painter, Autumn
Ogundiran, Akin (UNC Charlotte)
[192]
Archaeology of Royal Dependents and Palace Economy in the Oyo Empire: A View from Two Residential Spaces in Oyo-Ile and Bara
As in all complex societies, the Oyo Empire (West Africa, ca. 1570–1817) was a network and a hierarchy of co-dependencies. The
entire palace administration and palace economy of the empire relied on a disproportionately large number of individuals whose
personhood depended on serving the interest of the king. The everyday life of some of these dependents and the hierarchies that
existed among them is the subject of this paper. The excavation of two residential structures—one in the palace complex in the royal
capital (Oyo-Ile); and the other in the “eternal royal city” (Bara) where the deceased kings were buried—provide insights into how
the domestic spaces of the king’s dependents were organized. Focusing on the typology of architectural forms, organization of
domestic space, and micro-analysis of the spatial distribution and functional attributes of a vast array of artifacts, I make inferences
about the social, economic, and rank attributes of these dependents. I also examine what the living spaces may tell us about the
everyday lives of these dependents, the organization of the palace economy, and the strategies of labor-management in this West
African hegemonic state during the early modern period.
Ohman, Alexis (William & Mary)
[271]
Rations and Recreation: Comparative Analysis of Marine Resources from Betty’s Hope Plantation and Shirley Heights Fort in
Antigua, West Indies
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    416
Historical zooarchaeology has only recently been a focus for archaeological projects in Antigua, West Indies, and has now
developed enough to permit broader comparisons within the island as well as with other Caribbean contexts. Betty’s Hope plantation
and Shirley Heights Fort have yielded an abundance of faunal material that lends well to discussions pertaining to colonial
provisioning systems, local Caribbean resource use, and concepts of leisure, dining, and exoticism. Marine resources play a key
role in how these lines are drawn, and how such perceptions changed over time. Zooarchaeological evidence of both imported and
locally-acquired fish, mollusks, and sea turtle has demonstrated the variety of ways that these animals were acquired and distributed
within and between the fort and plantation contexts. This research has revealed distinct patterns based on the race- and class-
based divisions on the landscape, and has also highlighted invisibilities in the historical archives pertaining to how local fishing and
other marine resource acquisition practices were conducted.
Ojeda Rodriguez, Elizabeth and Derek Smith
[271]
Paleoecological Reconstruction of the Prehispanic Site of Vista Alegre, Quintana Roo, Mexico: An Approach from Zooarchaeology
The objective of this work is to reconstruct ecological conditions from the Late Preclassic to the Postclassic periods (400 BCE–1550
ACE) at Vista Alegre, located on the Yalahau Lake on the northern coast of Quintana Roo, Mexico. This study uses the analysis of
faunal bone remains and shell material collected throughout different field seasons at the site to explore the environment in which
ancient populations lived and utilized. Contrasting results of the analysis with other coastal sites on the Yucatán peninsula such as
Champotón, Cozumel, Xcambó, and Isla Cerritos, this comparative dataset allows for an approximation of past environments,
environmental change, and the relationship between prehispanic Maya and their coastal surroundings. This estimation of ecological
conditions and influence stands to strengthen past and future research endeavours at the site. Contributing such information adds to
general understandings of the ecological conditions that affected prehispanic Maya city development.
Okray, Jillian (Cardno Inc.)
[167]
A Look into the Vaults: An Analysis of Nineteenth- and Twentieth-Century Burial Vaults at Bethel Cemetery, Marion County, IN
The excavation of Bethel Cemetery provided a unique opportunity to examine the internal and external characteristics of historic
burial vaults used in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Bethel Cemetery encompassed 543 interments, but only twenty-six
individuals were interred in vaults. While the majority of these vaults were intact, some had sustained irreparable damage requiring
decedents to be trans-located to new containers prior to reburial. The exterior and, when preservation allowed, the interior of the
vaults were documented extensively. These vaults exhibited a range of construction styles and decorative features. Some even
displayed company manufacturer names, which provided the starting point for historical research. This research opens a dialogue
regarding these artifacts and discusses their effect on the social trends of death, mourning, and burial practices within the context of
Marion County, Indiana.
Okumura, Mercedes (University of São Paulo, Brazil), Astolfo Araujo (University of São Paulo) and João Carlos Moreno de
Sousa (University of São Paulo)
[73]
Bruce Bradley and His Contribution to Lithic Technological Studies and Experimental Archaeology in Brazil
Bruce Bradley first visited Southeastern Brazil in 2011, to offer a flintknapping workshop, as well as to teach a course about the
peopling of the Americas. Since then, he has become an important collaborator in our fieldwork and laboratory analyses, always
taking the opportunity to travel extensively throughout the country, to head workshops and teach courses that have influenced
hundreds of South American researchers and students. His inspiring presence was of upmost importance to a large number of
archaeologists, and it would be not exaggerating to say that he changed the landscape of lithic studies in Southeastern Brazil. In this
communication, we will present an example of this proficuous collaboration, addressing the combined use of geometric
morphometrics and technology to access diversity in projectile point assemblages from Southeastern Brazil. We will also present the
first systematic study of experimental replication made on the abovementioned assemblages. Prior to Bruce’s contribution,
technology and morphology were regarded in Brazil as mutually exclusive analytic strategies and very little was made in terms of
experimental archaeology applied to lithic materials. His open-minded attitude allowed us to work together and produce very
relevant data.
[73]
Chair
Ólafsson, Guðmundur [50] see Smith, Kevin
Olds, Julie [49] see Hawkins, Rebecca
Oliveira, Diogo
[250]
Excavations on the Northern Coast of Mozambique: Lingering Questions Surrounding Swahili Traders and the Sea
Swahili society has been described as cosmopolitan, and incorporated art, cultures, peoples, and beliefs of Africa, India, the Middle
East, and the Far East. Linked by, and dependent on, the seas and the winds, the ocean served as a conduit of fabulous objects,
massive wealth, and world altering ideologies. There are still many lingering questions about the peoples and cultures of the
Northern Mozambique coast and its role in the Swahili world. Although Portuguese sources described the cultures surrounding
Mozambique Island, there are gaps in our understanding especially regarding their origins. Excavations conducted at Cabaceira
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    417
Pequena at the end of 2018 has provided new evidence for transformations and continuations of Swahili society in Northern
Mozambique in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Specific maritime shifts have been noted in the archaeological record of the
Swahili coast, with the appearance of imported goods, development of specific sailing and fishing technologies, and new
architecture along the coast. This paper will show and discuss preliminary results and interpretations of these excavations, and
assess the nature of Swahili society at the time of Portuguese arrival in the late fifteenth century.
[250]
Chair
Oliver, Scott and Kevin Bradley (Veterans Curation Program)
[187]
That Sinking Feeling: The Effects of Human-Caused Climate Change at Fort Delaware
Fort Delaware was a Union prisoner-of-war camp during the Civil War located on Pea Patch Island, near Delaware City, Delaware.
Between 1993 and 1996, Delaware State Park officials conducted a survey of the eroding Pea Patch Island shoreline. In 2018, the
Veterans Curation Program’s Alexandria lab began cataloging the artifacts exposed by the erosion and found artifacts of
significance to Civil War era life on the island. Throughout its history, Pea Patch Island has been at risk of erosion and submersion
due to rising tides and increased storm activity. Human-caused climate change continues to threaten several unexcavated sites
associated with its occupation between the War of 1812 and WWII located on the island. NOAA’s models show a sea level rise of
only three feet would cover nearly the entire island. This poster argues that the significant archaeological sites on Pea Patch Island,
nearly all of which have not been studied through systematic archaeological investigation, should be considered high priority given
rising sea levels associated with human-caused climate change.
Oliver, Scott [187] see Bradley, Kevin
Olivier, Guilhem (Instituto de Investigaciones Históricas, UNAM) and Vera Tiesler (Laboratorio de Bioarqueología Facultad
de Ciencias)
[225]
Open Chests and Broken Hearts: Ritual Sequences and Meanings of Human Heart Sacrifice in Mesoamerica
Beyond the general idea of benefitting society and placating the divine, the polyvalent symbols and meanings of ancient religious
sacrifices can be interpreted properly only after combining different disciplinary lenses. In this talk, we scrutinize iconographic and
ethnohistorical testimonies of heart sacrifices together with new forensic evidence from across the Mesoamerican landscape. We
focus on three different heart extraction procedures, two of which are characterized for the first time. Each reconstructed method
(i.e., from below the chest cavity, between two left ribs, and through the sternal bone) provides novel cues regarding the array of
ceremonial devices and native concepts of the human body as a cosmic model. Its partitioning and the liberation of vitalizing matter
(namely the heart and blood) fed specific sacred forces during divine cult and mythic re-enactment. As for the Aztecs, we conclude
that different trunk opening procedures were practiced as part of ritual sequences that in each case enabled access to the Cosmic
Sacred Mountain with its vivifying essences. In this context, native conceptions surrounding the distinctive heart-extraction
techniques pose new proxies for analogous sacrificial practices in other parts of the world, still awaiting systematic scrutiny.
Olmo-Enciso, Lauro [257] see Castro-Priego, Manuel
Olsen, Bjørnar [159] see Witmore, Christopher
Olsen, Sandra
[60]
Reconstructing Neolithic Hunting Strategies and Prey Species from Arabian Rock Art
Arabian rock art offers an extremely rich supplement to data obtained through excavations and surveys. While interpretations of
Arabian petroglyphs are beginning to reveal new information about prehistoric rituals and belief systems, they also contribute
substantial evidence regarding more pragmatic aspects of daily life. Hunting scenes depict the weaponry used, including both
simple and recurved bows, spears, and at least three types of throwing sticks. Packs of hunting dogs resembling the modern
Canaan breed are shown using wolf tactics, surrounding the prey and even biting the muzzle of a gazelle in one case. A wide range
of large game species are depicted, including gazelles, ibexes, bezoar goats, Arabian and Scimitar-horned oryxes, onagers and
African wild asses. Small game and fowl are rarely depicted, but may be implied by the use of throwing sticks. Close encounters
with a lion and proximity to cheetahs, leopards, hyenas, and wolves portray hunters in dangerous situations.
Olson, Kaelyn [147] see Porter, Keri
Olson, Paige
[44]
Discussant
Olszewski, Deborah [36] see Abdolahzadeh, Aylar
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   418
O’Mansky, Matt (Youngstown State University), David Parker (Youngstown State University), Caleb Self (Youngstown State
University) and Samuel Witham (Youngstown State University)
[252]
Five Centuries of Post-occupation Formation Processes: Excavations at the Dim Bay Site, Bahamas
SS-5, the Dim Bay site, is a prehistoric Lucayan site on the east side of San Salvador Island, Bahamas. Ongoing research reveals
intricate stratigraphy in comparison to other sites on the island. While most sites on San Salvador are in protected locations on the
leeward sides of dunes, SS-5 is on a low transverse dune by the beach between the ocean and an inland lake. This setting has
exposed SS-5 to centuries of extreme storms, including hurricanes and surges, while erosion and changing sea levels have further
shaped the site. As a result, SS-5 is composed of at least three strata: A sterile light-colored sand stratum, a darker colored loamy
sand cultural horizon, and a lighter colored sand intermixed with plastic. The cultural horizon, buried under increasing amounts of
sediment, represents the top of the dune at the time of occupation. This stratigraphy represents the passage of four periods of time.
In this presentation, we describe research methods and findings at SS-5 with a focus on formation processes that gave the site its
present form—and continue to play havoc on the sedimentology of the island as a whole and threaten the continued existence of the
Dim Bay site.
Omori, Takayuki [182] see Kanezaki, Yuko
Omura, Sachihiro [27] see MacIntosh, Sarah
Oncebay Pizarro, Noemi [21] see Dalton, Jordan
Ono, Rintaro (National Museum of Ethnology), Jason Lebehn (Historic Preservation Office, Pohnpei State, FMS), Osamu
Kataoka (Sophia University, Japan), Takuya Nagaoka (Pasifika Renaissance, Japan) and Scott Fitzpatrick (University of
Oregon, USA)
[100]
When Did the Early Migrants Reach Pohnpei? Human Migration, Interisland Networks, and Resource Use in Eastern Micronesia
Previous studies on islands in eastern Micronesia show possible early human migration from Melanesia by the descendants of
Lapita groups, while the certain date for such early migration is yet unclear. To explore the initial population dispersals into Pohnpei
Island where can be one of the center for past human migrations in East Micronesia, we have conducted new archaeological
excavations on Lenger, a lagoon island located in northern Pohnpei. While research only began in 2019, a significant quantity of
CST pottery and a variety of shell artifacts in the form of tools and ornaments were found at a depth of 1 m in a white beach sand
layer that was below current sea level. The previous test excavation on the same site by the HPO and Nagaoka in 2008 found a
piece of obsidian. The XRF (X-ray Fluorescence) analysis by Shepard confirms it is possibly from Admiralty Islands in Melanesia. In
this paper, we discuss when the early migrants reached Pohnpei and their island(s) of origin based on our finds. We also discuss
the interisland networks and resource use by early migrants in Pohnpei and more broadly in eastern Micronesia.
Oosterbeek, Luiz [11] see Matos, Daniela
Ordoñez, Maria (Universidad San Francisco de Quito), Lourdes Torres (USFQ) and Tamara Landivar (Museo Pumapungo)
[257]
DNA and CT Analysis of the National Tsantsa Collection: A Scientific and Community Approach to Museum Archaeology
There are many collections of Tsantsas around the world. These shrunken heads were created by the Shuar and Achuar peoples of
the Ecuadorian and Peruvian amazon until the mid-twentieth century. Though most of these museum collections have a known
provenience, the individual histories and the authenticity of some of the heads has been contested. Similar questions have risen for
Tsantsas held at the Pumapungo Ethnographic museum in the city of Cuenca, Ecuador. Using the approach of museum
archaeologies, a multidisciplinary team including archaeologists, anthropologist and biologists has worked together with members of
the Ecuadorian Shuar community to address these questions. During this talk some of the initial finds of the project will be
presented, including medical digital images, and the information gathered from DNA sampling.
Ore, Gabriela [175] see Zimmer-Dauphinee, James
Orlando, Ludovic (CNRS, University Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France), Alan Outram (University of Exeter, UK) and ERC
PEGASUS Consortium (CNRS, University Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France)
[173]
Rewriting Early Horse Domestication with the Help of Both Archaeology and Ancient DNA
Today, except in developing countries where they remain essential to farming, horses are often limited to sport and leisure. Yet, not
so long ago, they were essential to human societies. They provided us with speed, which revolutionized the way our genes,
diseases, goods and languages circulated across the planet, and effectively globalized the world for the first time. They
fundamentally changed the way we made war and represented key military assets to past civilizations. Yet, the process of early
horse domestication is difficult to reconstruct from archaeological data alone as, in contrast to other domestic species, horses are
not common in Neolithic assemblages and their size did not massively shift during early domestication. Within the ERC PEGASUS
consortium, we leverage both archaeological and ancient DNA data to clarify the temporal and geographic loci underlying horse
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                419
domestication. DNA was essential to overcome the limitations of a too often fragmentary record, especially for sex and hybrid
identification. This, in turn, has helped us revise the timing of the first mule industry, and document the recruitment strategies
underpinning mule breeding in different cultures. Here, we present how the constant dialogue between archaeologists and
geneticists was fundamental to our recent discoveries.
O’Rourke, Dennis [244] see Potter, Bethany
O’Rourke, Dennis [100] see Stone, Jessica
O’Rourke, Makayla [77] see Cromwell, RP
Orsini, Stephanie [270] see Alsgaard, Asia
Orsini, Stephanie [241] see Jones, Ashley
Ort, Jennifer (SEARCH Inc.)
[190]
Diners, Drive-Ins, and Caribou Drives: Paleoindian Subsistence and Settlement Patterns in the Northeast: Perspectives from the
Bull Brook Site, Ipswich, MA
Paleoindians are considered one of the earliest people to enter the Americas, arriving in the northeastern U.S. approximately 13,000
years ago. Previous research at the Bull Brook I (BBI) site in Ipswich, MA demonstrated that it represented a single communal
gathering (or aggregation) by identifying concentric activity patterns that are difficult to explain outside of an organized event
(Robinson et al. 2009; Ort 2012). A smaller site, Bull Brook II (BBII) was also identified and is located approximately 300 m
southeast of the BBI site. While temporally associated with the Bull Brook Phase, BBII’s tool and lithic assemblage and lack of an
organized settlement pattern suggest they were not occupied contemporaneously. Caribou, one of the primary resources of
Paleoindians, has been identified within the BB I assemblage but the site was destroyed by an active gravel pit. However, portions
of BBII may be extant and new investigations may yield crucial new data to understanding the unique juxtaposition of the two sites.
This presentation will focus on new research being conducted at the BBII site, using both traditional archaeological techniques and
noninvasive survey methods as a part of Ort’s PhD research at the University of New Hampshire’s NRESS Program.
Ortega, Karla [137] see de Anda, Guillermo
Ortiz, Agustin [133] see Barba, Luis
Ortiz, Byron, Pedro Fiallos (Archeologist Staff member) and David Brown (Codirector Assistant Consultant)
[201]
La arqueología política y el nuevo asedio de Cochasquí ¿Quién es el dueño de la arqueología?
El sitio monumental del Cochasquí, ubicado en la Provincia de Pichincha dentro del Cantón Pedro Moncayo, a partir de ser uno de
los sitios arqueológicos más importantes del Ecuador, tiene gran importancia en la histórica y política nacional. Por eso el Proyecto
Arqueológico Cochasquí-Mojanda sin sorpresa se ha encontrado inmerso en disputas de índole político y personal lo cual nos puso
en la necesidad de pensar sobre el uso que se le da a la cultura, quién es el dueño de la arqueología, y más específicamente la
arqueología con que fines se la está realizando. Así pues, estando en medio de una disputa por el manejo del Parque Arqueológico
Cochasquí se ha puesto en duda nuestra ética, moral y profesionalidad, obligándonos navegar entre los muchos interesados: los
del parque provincial, la comunidad científica local e internacional, y ciudadanía en general del cantón y de los pueblos alrededor.
Ortiz, Soledad [20] see Alonso, Alejandra
Ortiz Brito, Alberto (University of Kentucky)
[191]
The Meanings and Uses of the Past in the Present: A Case Study of the San Martín Pajapan Monument
This presentation addresses the relation between archaeological patrimony and collective memory using the San Martín Pajapan
(SMP) monument as a case study. The SMP monument is an Olmec monument found on the top of the San Martín Pajapan volcano
of Los Tuxtlas region. According to ethnographic research done in the 1960s, the local communities settled in the vicinity of the
volcano regarded the SMP as the embodiment of a deity called Chane. In 1966 Alfonso Medellin Zenil conducted an archaeological
project aimed at moving the SMP monument from the volcano to the Museo de Antropología de Xalapa (MAX). Apparently, local
communities let Medellin Zenil move this monument to the museum; however, in the 2000s they requested the MAX to return it to
them. Instead of returning the monument, the MAX decided to donate a replica of it which local communities welcomed with a
solemn ceremony in 2006. These two events led to a process of oblivion and remembrance of the SMP monument. In this
presentation, I provide ethnographic data to indicate what beliefs related to this monument have been forgotten and what are still
remembered. I argue that despite the oblivion effects it is still used as a local identity element.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    420
Ortman, Scott (CU-Boulder), Claire Ebert (Northern Arizona University), Amy Thompson (University of New Mexico),
Michael Smith (Arizona State University) and Robert Rosenswig (University at Albany, SUNY)
[26]
Where Scaling Theory Breaks? The Case of Mesoamerican Low-Density Urbanism
Lowland Mesoamerican cities are often considered a paradigmatic case of low-density urbanism and a distinctive type of spatial
organization relative to contemporary cities. In this paper, we examine how settlement patterns in the Mesoamerican southern
lowlands were both similar to and different from those typically found in the settlement systems characterized by settlement scaling
theory. We find that the population-area relationship for these settlements overall differs greatly from that reported for other agrarian
systems, but that other scaling relations appear more typical when epicenters are considered as the relevant mixing areas for their
associated populations. Collectively, these results suggest people of the Mesoamerican southern lowlands congregated for social
mixing on a slower temporal rhythm than is typical in contemporary urban systems. In this way, increasing returns could be realized
in civic construction, and presumably other activities, even as most people arranged themselves in space with respect to primary
production resources. Our results suggest the primary difference between low-density urbanism and contemporary urban systems is
the frequency of social mixing.
[26]
Chair
Ortman, Scott (CU-Boulder)
[48]
Discussant
Ortman, Scott [26] see Robinson, Erick
Osborn, Jo (University of Michigan), Camille Weinberg (University of Texas, Austin), Kelita Pérez Cubas (Pontificia
Universidad Católica del Perú) and Richard Espino Huaman (Universidad Nacional San Luis Gonzaga de Ica)
[21]
The Development of Economic Specialization among Prehispanic Fishermen: The Case of Jahuay, Quebrada de Topará, Chincha
According to colonial documents, Peruvian coastal societies were divided into economically specialized communities, some
dedicated to agriculture, and others to fishing. Archaeological studies have demonstrated that this economic organization predated
the Inca Empire, but the origins of this system are still undefined. Since 2017, the Proyecto de Investigación Arqueológico de
Jahuay has led excavations at Jahuay, a littoral village that was occupied by Topará fishermen during the late Early Horizon, when
permanent hierarchical societies first appeared in the Ica region. We ask whether the shift in social and political organization may
have contributed to economic changes as well. Did the Topará people rely on incipient economic specialization? Our research helps
elucidate an understudied period in Peru’s prehispanic economic development.
[21]
Chair
Osborn, Jo [21] see Larios, Jennifer
Osborn, Jo [125] see Weinberg, Camille
Oseguera Sotomayor, Sandra [235] see Habu, Junko
O’Shea, Colleen [21] see Dalton, Jordan
O’Shea, John (University of Michigan)
[238]
Necessity, Not Novelty: Archaeology on Submerged Landscapes
Despite recent advances in method and approach, the underwater archaeological record continues to make a negligible contribution
of prehistoric research. This is due, in part, to a series of widespread but erroneous beliefs about the character of the submerged
record. These include the belief that underwater finds are chance encounters that are not susceptible to systematic investigation,
and that submerged sites and artifacts are only interpretable via reference to known terrestrial finds. This paper addresses these
misconceptions. It is argued that the underwater context can be systematically investigated and, far from simply supplementing or
amplifying what is already known from terrestrial research, can produce startling and unexpected results. These points are
illustrated by reference to recent underwater research in Lake Huron and its implication for the “Standard Model” of Paleoindian
archaeology in the Great Lakes region. It is concluded that terrestrial archaeologists ignore the underwater record at their peril.
Osores, Carlos
[242]
Animal Economy at Cerro La Guitarra, Zaña Valley, Peru
This poster examines the faunal remains retrieved from distinct refuse deposits from several sectors at Cerro la Guitarra, Zaña
Valley, North Coast of Peru. Cerro la Guitarra dates to the Late Intermediate Period –around 1200 to 1300 AD—during which Chimú
state expands into the Lambayeque/Sicán territory. The site is a fortified settlement that contains an important amount of domestic
enclosures and temples or “huacas”, and is surrounded by concentric walls. The site covers approximately 130 hectares containing
9 sectors. Differences on animal economy between sectors have been identified which it would correlate with the social diversity at
the site—for example, we found differences on the consumption of mammals and fishes (“machete”—Ethmidium maculatum—or
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     421
“lorna”—Sciaena deliciosa), and shells. These differences would indicate that the inhabitants of the different sectors may have
employed different modes of economy. Finally, daily life would have occurred in non-isolating conditions, due to they maintained
contact with people from other parts of the valley as fishermen located 12 km from the site.
Osorio León, José [102] see Stanton, Travis
Ospina, Catalina [258] see Katz, Monica
Ostahowski, Brian (Louisiana Archaeological Society), Jayur Mehta (Florida State University) and Theodore Marks (New
Orleans Center for the Creative Arts)
[222]
Investigations at the Adams Bay Site (16PL8), a Plaquemines Mound Complex Located in Plaquemines Parish, Louisiana
This paper provides an overview of fieldwork investigations conducted at the Adams Bay Mound site (16PL8) located in
Plaquemines Parish, Louisiana. This Plaquemines mound complex site (1200–1500 AD) is situated on a subsiding and eroding
marsh island, which is actively being destroyed. An interdisciplinary team including archaeologists, wetlands biologists, and high
school students from the New Orleans Center for the Creative Arts (NOCCA), collected multiple lines of information on the site and
the ecology of the marsh island to help develop management recommendations for coastal mound sites similarly threatened by land
loss.
Ostahowski, Brian [18] see Hollingshead, Analise
Osterholtz, Anna (Mississippi State University/Cobb Institute of Archaeology)
[131]
The Body Poetic: Violence, Body Processing, and Identity Formation in the Past
Deb Martin’s legacy is one of exposing her students and colleagues to new theoretical models, asking everyone to contextualize
bioarchaeological data within robust theoretical frameworks. Through Dr. Martin’s mentorship, I began to think of the body
differently. The human body can be viewed as an artifact of cultural expression, a mechanism for social communication, a malleable
substance that can be shaped to meet the needs of the living. The Poetics model developed by Whitehead has been adapted to the
study of the past through both the study of violence and the study of mortuary processing. In this paper, both applications of the
Poetics model will be examined through bioarchaeological case studies, combining social theory and bioarchaeology employing a
biocultural model. I will examine the role of both violence and processing at Sacred Ridge (~AD 800, southwestern Colorado) and
the reuse of burial space within the church at Đurđevac-Sošice (eleventh to sixteenth-century Medieval Croatia). These case studies
span time and space, showing the relationship of the living and the dead and how the dead can be manipulated and processed to
suit the needs of the living.
O’Sullivan, Rebecca [193] see Moates, Jeffrey
Oswald, Jessica [27] see LeFebvre, Michelle
Otárola-Castillo, Erik (Purdue University)
[55]
Why a Bayesian Archaeology? A Pain-Free Introduction
Bayesian inference and its underlying philosophy offer an alternative to null hypothesis significance testing (NHST), the conventional
statistical framework in archaeology. Due to new technological advances, Bayesian inference has become an essential component
of wider scientific efforts and progressively prevalent in anthropological and archaeological research. Here, without using
mathematical or statistical jargon, I provide a sensible explanation of Bayesian statistics in comparison to NHST. I follow by
clarifying why Bayesian inference 1) is a natural and powerful approach, 2) provides straightforward interpretations, and 3) is
applicable and desirable to archaeologists. To finish this talk, I briefly review of how Bayesian statistics are currently applied to solve
archaeological problems, highlighting potential areas where its creative application might produce informative solutions.
[55]
Chair
Otárola-Castillo, Erik (Purdue University)
[217]
Discussant
Otárola-Castillo, Erik [55] see Coon, Sarah
Otárola-Castillo, Erik [147] see Gozner, Amanda
Otárola-Castillo, Erik [176] see Torquato, Melissa
Ouellet, Jean-Christophe [12] see Gates St-Pierre, Christian
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     422
Outram, Alan (University of Exeter)
[73]
Understanding the Settlement Structure of Early Horse Herders in the Eneolithic of Kazakhstan: New Geophysical Surveys and
Ground-Truthing at Botai and Borly 4
Bruce Bradley carried out three seasons of survey and excavation at the Botai Culture sites of Krasnyi Yar and Vasilkovka. This
work produced the first extensive geophysical surveys showing Botai Culture settlement structure (Olsen, Bradley, Maki and Outram
2006). This paper presents the results of more recent surveys of the eponymous site of Botai as well as a newly discovered
Eneolithic site of a different culture in the Pavlodar region, called Borly 4. Both these survey have been subject to limited ground-
truthing excavations and dating. The settlement structures seen at all these sites are compared and discussed within the context of
the development of early horse husbandry. Lines of future enquiry are also outlined.
Outram, Alan [173] see Orlando, Ludovic
Overfield, Zachary and Ashley Eyeington (SWCA Environmental Consultants)
[165]
Iron and Convict Labor: The Archaeological Investigations of the Rusk State Penitentiary
In 1875, the Texas Legislature commissioned the construction of the Rusk State Penitentiary to alleviate overcrowding at the state
prison in Huntsville. Incarcerated and free laborers built the penitentiary and associated facilities between 1877 and 1878. The state
then put the incarcerated laborers to work in the newly constructed iron foundries producing iron used in the construction of the
State Capitol. The iron operations at the prison ultimately proved to be unprofitable, and the prison was converted to the Rusk State
Hospital in 1919. From June 12 to June 21, 2019 SWCA Environmental Consultants (SWCA) conducted archaeological field
investigations of the Rusk State Penitentiary archaeological site (41CE487) located in Cherokee County, Texas. The SWCA
intensive survey and excavation determined that the investigated portion of site 41CE487 contains multiple subsurface
archaeological features associated with the late-nineteenth to early twentieth-century Rusk State Penitentiary period of the Rusk
State Hospital complex. These features include the remains of a brick building, a mule cart track, iron foundry infrastructure, and the
Texas & New Orleans Railroad. The archaeological features identified during the investigation provide insight into the construction
and operation of the Rusk State Penitentiary and the lifeways of incarcerated persons within the Texas convict-labor system.
Owen, Ross (Dudek)
[30]
Scratching the Surface: A Pilot Study of the Lithic Sourcing Potential of South Mountain Rhyolite
The primary source for rhyolite in Pennsylvania, the prehistoric quarries of South Mountain are well-known for their importance as a
lithic resource—especially in association to the Susquehanna Broadspear industry. While they are widely known, neither the
quarries nor the source material have been studied intensively. This presentation will focus on the use of x-ray fluorescence (XRF)
and Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) to gain a better understanding of the lithic material and the potential to trace
artifacts to their origins through geochemical analysis. In addition to comparing the analytical techniques this paper addresses
potential pitfalls and best practices for pilot studies of heterogenous lithic sources in archaeological contexts. Highlighted is the need
for an inter-disciplinary team of researchers with the understanding that initial attempts at lithic sourcing require patience and
determination are crucial to apply proven lithic sourcing techniques to new types of stone. The findings have helped to establish
future research potential and management priorities and recommendations for rhyolite quarry sites located on Commonwealth
lands.
Owenby, Gary [197] see Powis, Terry
Owsley, Douglas (Smithsonian), Karin Bruwelheide (Smithsonian), Éadaoin Harney (Harvard University), William Kelso
(Jamestown Rediscovery) and David Reich (Harvard Medical School)
[173]
Identifying Seventeenth-Century Africans and High-Status Englishmen at Jamestown, Virginia
Emerging investigative techniques and access to reference skeletal series and comparative databases allow enhanced
interpretation and recognition of individuals in the seventeenth–century Chesapeake region for which few documentary sources or
identifying artifacts exist. As part of a pilot study of burials from Jamestown, genome-wide ancient DNA were obtained from four
poorly preserved skeletons: a male and female excavated from within the 1607 Fort palisade, originally identified as colonists from
the first years of the settlement, and two high-status males buried in the chancel of the 1608 church. Based on historical and
bioarchaeological evidence, the latter are suspected kinsmen of the colony’s first Governor, Thomas West, 3rd Lord De La Warr.
Archaeological, historical, genealogical, osteological, and genetic evidence are integrated in this approach. The male and female
excavated from the Fort possess African ancestry—most closely related to present-day Nigerian populations—with no European
ancestry. The men in the church have European ancestry and share a rare mitochondrial haplogroup which may be indicative of
unanticipated maternal relatedness. This interdisciplinary study demonstrates how remarkable methodological analyses can
transform interpretations often guided by preconceived notions of identity based on site context and the inherent limitations of the
historical and bioarchaeological record.
Oxenham, Marc [199] see Adams, Alisha
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  423
Oyuela-Caycedo, Augusto (University of Florida)
[174]
Discussant
Ozbun, Terry (AINW)
[198]
Reanalysis of Windust Phase Artifacts from the Rock Island Overlook Site, 45CH204, Chelan County, Washington
Archaeological salvage excavations conducted in 1974 at the Rock Island Overlook site revealed artifacts characteristic of the
Windust Phase on the Columbia Plateau. At the time of the original excavations the earliest occupation of the site was thought be
about 7,000 years old, but recent dating of Windust at other sites suggests these materials could be 11,000 to 13,500 years old.
This presentation summarizes a re-analyses of selected artifacts from the Rock Island Overlook site. Re-analyses show that one of
the stemmed Windust projectile points retains blood residues from a Pleistocene horse. This result and the findings of geochemical
obsidian sourcing, obsidian hydration dating, and technological analysis of debitage shed new light on Windust Phase dating and
Pleistocene lifeways on the Columbia Plateau.
Pacheco, Ellen (University of Calgary), Elizabeth Paris (University of Calgary) and Roberto López Bravo (UNICACH)
[150]
Rodents of Moxviquil, Chiapas, Mexico
Ellen Pacheco, University of Calgary Elizabeth Paris, University of Calgary Roberto López Bravo, UNICACH The site of Moxviquil,
located in the Jovel Valley in the highlands of Chiapas, Mexico, was an important local political center during the Late Classic (AD
600–900) and Early Postclassic (AD 900–1250) periods. This paper centers around the faunal remains found in a funerary cave at
Moxviquil, located on a steep hillslope below an outlying residential settlement. The cave was an important locus for ritual, while
also reflecting a wide range of dietary practices through food offerings and evidence for long-distance exchange of animal products.
The funerary cave’s faunal assemblage included a variety of rodent species, which appear to have been of particular dietary and
ritual importance. Key species identified include various rat species such as the hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus) and the
Mexican woodrat (Neotoma Mexicana), agouti species (Dasyprocta agouti), as well as a rabbit species, specifically the cottontail
rabbit (Sylvilagus sp.). Ethnographic data from highland Chiapas suggests that the trade and consumption of rodents continues to
be important, including use in traditional medicine, suggesting parallels between modern and ancient highland communities
Pacheco-Cobos, Luis [29] see Thompson, Amy
Pacheco-Forés, Sofía (Arizona State University)
[134]
This, That, and the Other: Alterity, Migration, and Violence in Epiclassic Central Mexico
Within Mesoamerica, ritual violence and human sacrifice have long been topics of anthropological inquiry. In this study, I investigate
how Mesoamerican conceptions of alterity relate to the expression of ritual violence in the past. I use prehispanic codices and
Contact era ethnohistoric accounts along with published archaeological data to reconstruct which aspects of individuals’ social
identities would have been understood as meaningful markers of social difference. I then scrutinize these Mesoamerican
conceptions of social difference through a bioarchaeological case study of a massive human sacrificial deposit from Epiclassic
central Mexico (600–900 CE). I examine specific notions of Mesoamerican alterity—such as geographic origins and ethnicity—with
bioarchaeological proxies, including biogeochemical and biodistance data, to test whether such conceptions of social difference
predisposed individuals to ritual violence.
Paden, Erin (Director of Historic Preservation)
[113]
Discussant
Padon, Beth (Partners for Archaeological Site Stewardship)
[186]
Designing Archaeological Mitigation Plans That Offer Greater Public Benefit
When ground-disturbing projects and cultural resources occupy the same space, the first choice is to change the project to avoid
impacts. If that is not possible, then archaeologists conduct mitigation to recover as much public benefit from the cultural resources
as possible. This difficult task is made worse when the mitigation is started after the impacts occur. In 2012, a once-in-a-lifetime
rainstorm event in the Colorado Desert of southern California resulted in major erosion which damaged an archaeological site on
public land. The erosion was amplified by the previous grading at an adjacent construction site. Native Americans, state and Federal
agencies, and the company that was building the adjacent facility responded by working together to develop a long-range plan to
field check the site with trained Native American monitors. Periodic and systematic monitoring maximizes public benefit in several
important ways — by increasing the understanding that the monitors and their tribes have with this ancestral site, by creating more
complete site recordation to save information that could be lost with future episodes of erosion, and by leveraging the time and skills
of the public agency archaeologists. This mitigation offers a model that may be successful at other sites.
Page, Sarah [148] see Portman, Katherine
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   424
Pailes, Matthew (University of Oklahoma) and Natalia Martínez-Tagüeña (CONACYT/IPICYT)
[15]
Future Discounting in Subsistence Decisions: The Case of Hohokam Agave Bajada Cultivation
This presentation will investigate the relevance of future discounting behavior to pre-colonial subsistence decisions by examining
Agave sp. bajada cultivation among the Hohokam of southern Arizona during the Classic period, AD 1150–1450. The Hohokam
Classic period was tumultuous and included a variety of social upheavals that resulted from and precipitated subsistence shortages.
During this period, several communities lessened their investment in agave cultivation or substantially shifted production strategies.
A program of experimental archaeology demonstrates agave’s higher kcal/hour return than most approaches to maize agriculture,
making these changes difficult to interpret based on return rates alone. This paper will argue this counterintuitive behavior is
explained by agave’s decade long maturation period, which made it unattractive relative to more immediate return resources in any
context that presented risks to land tenure. This case study illustrates that even slight discounting of future rewards can significantly
alter subsistence strategies and lead to higher risk investments.
Pailes, Matthew [79] see Krug, Andrew
Paine, Richard (University of Utah), Enrique Hernández (Universidad de San Carlos) and Richard Hansen (University of
Utah)
[163]
Invisible Structures at El Mirador: Challenges and Prospects
Invisible, or hidden, structures present serious, and difficult to solve challenge for Mayanists. Despite a generation of research into
Classic period invisible structures, we know little about their prevalence, history, or range of uses. We know even less about
Preclassic invisible structures. It is clear they are widespread at El Mirador, we encounter them repeatedly in other excavations, but
their true extent is unknown. This presentation will focus on our efforts during the 2018 and 2019 field seasons to develop a protocol
for assessing the role of invisible structures in the El Mirador settlement system. We will discuss our attempts to sample invisible
structures, based on remote sensing using GPR, and excavations of identified invisible structures to assess chronology and
function.
Painter, Autumn (Michigan State University), Jeffrey Painter (Michigan State University), Jodie O’Gorman (Michigan State
University) and Terrance Martin (Curator Emeritus of Anthropology, Illinois State M)
[233]
Surviving or Thriving? Reassessing Warfare Related Food Insecurity at Morton Village
Since initial excavations in the mid- to late-1980s, Morton Village and associated cemetery, Norris Farms #36, have been used as a
primary example of low-scale warfare and resulting stress and insecurity in prehistory. While evidence of violence is clear, the
evidence for subsistence insecurity is based on a small sample of contexts from a restricted section of the overall site. Recent
excavations have also found evidence of a complex and productive community, further complicating this representation of Morton
Village. In this paper, we re-examine the evidence of violence-related food insecurity through an analysis of faunal remains from a
random sample of contexts across the entire village area. Our results support new interpretations of life at Morton Village, and
indicate that we must continue to refine our models and methods for detecting food insecurity in the past. In particular, decoupling
food insecurity from warfare may be informative for understanding the relationship of these two conditions.
Painter, Jeffrey [233] see Painter, Autumn
Pajuelo Montes, Rosario Beatriz [57] see Brock, Amanda
Pal Chowdhury, Manasij (University of Manchester), Stuart Campbell (Department of Classics, Ancient History and Arch.),
Sharon Fraser (Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences), Bart van Dongen (Department of Earth and
Environmental Sciences) and Michael Buckley (Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences)
[120]
What’s Cooking? A Multipronged Approach to analyze Ceramic Residues from Tell Khaiber 1
Analysis of biomolecules absorbed in unglazed ceramics can provide valuable information about pottery use in antiquity, including
detailed information on ancient diet. Such investigation has mostly focused on the analysis of lipids, but recently the more labile
proteins have seen increased attention as they are capable of providing more specific information. In this study, we analyze
absorbed proteins and lipids extracted from a collection of ceramic shards obtained from Tell Khaiber 1, dating from the Sealand
Dynasty period (c.1500 cal BC), near the ancient city of Ur in present-day Iraq. ATR-FTIR and elemental analyses of the ceramics
will be presented, along with results of the analysis of lipids using GC-MS and of proteomic analysis using LC-MS (Orbitrap) and
MALDI based techniques, with the results from different techniques compared. Our results show that although the survival of
proteins is less widespread as compared to lipids, they provide a greater degree of information. This is exemplified by the
identification of evidence of soybean use from one of the sherds, the earliest such occurrence in Mesopotamia and one of the
earliest outside East Asia.
Palazzolo, Kyle (California State University, Chico)
[83]
When Mortars Speak Volumes: Assessing the Influence of Mortar Cavity Size on Processing Efficiency
Among the various categories of ground stone technology in pre-colonial California, the mortar has a celebrated role in the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  425
economic shift to acorn processing. The size and shape of mortars, both bedrock and portable, facilitated the pulverizing and
grinding of these and other bulk resources. It seems logical, therefore, to assume that the larger the mortar cavity, the more
productive the mortar would be. The experiment presented here was designed and conducted to test this hypothesis; it aims to
determine whether or not increasing the depth and width of a mortar cavity improves acorn meal production, and if so, to what
degree. While there are various constraints to making larger mortars (such as time, material, labor/exertion, mobility, etc.),
understanding the efficiency of mortars with greater volume is an essential first step to assessing the cost-benefit trade-off inherent
to the design choices that were made by Native Americans.
Paling, Jason (Plymouth State University), Rachel Horowitz (Appalachian State University) and Mary Clarke (Boston
University)
[20]
Tools of the Trade: A Review of the Lithic Technologies Associated with Ancient Maya Mines and Quarries
Archaeologists working in the Maya area have long collected evidence of the tools used for the production, transportation, and
processing of various kinds of mined and quarried stone resources. These studies focused on tools found within or near mine and
quarry contexts and their presumed functions. The integration of use-wear analyses and experimental approaches expanded our
ability to interpret what role particular artifacts played in ancient work, regardless of their collection location. By combining
information from mines and quarries with experimental, use-wear, and ethnohistoric information, we can provide further evidence of
the technologies utilized for resource extraction. This paper will synthesize previous research on mining and quarrying implements
to create a comparative framework through which similar technologies can be evaluated. These comparisons will aid in lithic
analyses, interpretation of household activities, and provide frameworks for future experimental work to better understand the
processes of ancient Maya resource extraction.
Palka, Joel (Arizona State University) and Alice Balsanelli (Universidad Autónoma de México)
[127]
Contemporary Lacandon Ritual Landscapes and Ancient Maya Shrine Archaeology in Chiapas, Mexico
Landscape features around Lake Mensabak, Chiapas, Mexico, attracted ritual attention from ancient Maya in various ways. For
instance, they artificially transformed Mirador Mountain into many shrines for communal ceremonies. Burials and offerings were left
at the Mensabak cliff shrine on the lake shore, but on a smaller scale. On the other hand, Bat Cave, an impressive cavern, had no
rituals at all. Perhaps contemporary Lacandon ontology and ritual landscapes shed light on the differences in these ancient ritual
places. For Lacandon, landscapes contain animistic forces, but the important ones are homes of non-human entities or deities
where people communicate with them. Hills and caves where Lacandon have key social relationships with resident forces, and other
Lacandon, are the places of many ceremonies and offerings to nourish them. These shrines do not represent deities, they are
deities. Other landscape nonhuman entities or ones with lesser animistic forces receive little ritual attention. Ancient Maya,
therefore, likely maintained relationships with nonhuman entities, and other Maya, at important shrines and left fewer offerings at
shrines of no consequence with reduced animistic powers. Thus, social interaction and shrine histories helped determine Maya ritual
landscape importance.
Palka, Joel [204] see Sanchez, Fabiola
Palonka, Radoslaw and Vincent MacMillan (Canyons of the Ancients National Monument, BLM)
[60]
Archaeoastronomy, Beliefs, and Warfare in Sand Canyon, Colorado: Documentation, Methodology, and Interpretation of Rock Art
This paper focuses on the presentation of selected examples of Ancestral Pueblo rock art panels from some cliff dwellings or other
sites dated roughly to the thirteenth century AD and located in the Sand Canyon area within the Canyons of the Ancients National
Monument, southwestern Colorado (USA). Some of the rock art panels depict fighting scenes while others might have been
connected with astronomical observations as seasonal, solar or lunar markers and the possible ceremonies and rituals associated
with them. At two of these sites, 5MT129 and 5MT261, direct observations were conducted during the winter solstice of 2018 and
spring equinox and summer solstice of 2019. These observations yielded some interesting results and were supplemented by
research in ethnographic literature as well as simulations and visualizations using different software and equipment. The
methodology for recording these rock art panels included on-site hand drawing, photography, photogrammetry, and laser scanning
documentation. The registered data has been used to generate accurate 2D documentation and 3D models as well as RTI
(Reflectance Transformation Imaging) analysis. Hopi representatives were also consulted in the field regarding some of these rock
art panels, offering invaluable help and interpretations based on Pueblo oral traditions.
Palus, Emily (U.S. Department of the Interior Museum Program)
[92]
Moderator
[92]
Discussant
Palus, Emily (U.S. Department of the Interior Museum Program)
[186]
Not Just for Bureaucrats: Digitizing the Antiquities Act Permit Administration Records and Exploring the History Federal Policy for
the Investigation of Archaeological Sites and Curation of the Collections
The Antiquities Act of 1906 is lauded as the foundation of American archaeology. It is, on many levels. Asserting public interest,
Section 3 established Federal policy to safeguard sites on Federal lands from haphazard digging and looting through a permitting
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  426
framework. Those deemed qualified were authorized to conduct excavations and the resulting collections preserved permanently in
public museums. Subsequent regulations required reports, which became a foundation of the discipline’s published literature. The
administrative record is also foundational; permit files at the National Archives, Smithsonian, and elsewhere document Department
of the Interior oversight of archaeology on Interior lands. From handwritten letters in 1906 to typed correspondence over decades,
communications among Federal officials and archaeologists offer administrative histories of projects, including with terms and
conditions prescribed in authorizations, as well as document trends in practices and engagement with Indian tribes. In 2019, the
Interior Museum Program initiated a digital archive project to establish a framework for scanning records and recording metadata to
make this information accessible and connect relevant materials in different locations. Not only can these records help track
collections from Interior lands and inform collections management and NAGPRA responsibilities, historic permit administration
explains the basis for many modern practices.
Palus, Matthew (The Ottery Group)
[193]
Cultural Resource Management and Heritage Struggle in Metropolitan Washington, DC
This presentation discusses two cases from Washington, DC and its suburbs that were both contested in different ways, where
public engagement and consultation were utilized to address conflicts. Archaeological mitigation carried out for redevelopment of an
African American church property exposed surviving portions of Fort Stevens, one of the Civil War Defenses of Washington which
came under attack during Jubal Early’s unsuccessful raid on Washington in 1864. Preservationists and the National Park Service
strongly opposed redevelopment of the church property but found common interest with archaeologists investigating the site,
extending the life of the project and reaching wider publics as a result. In a subsequent project, consultation surrounding a highly
contested plan to develop the site of an early twentieth-century African American cemetery in Bethesda, Maryland brought
archaeologists to the table with descendants and opponents of the project, who ultimately forestalled the project through protest and
civil disobedience.
Panich, Lee (Santa Clara University), Tsim Schneider (University of California, Santa Cruz) and GeorgeAnn DeAntoni
(University of California, Santa Cruz)
[214]
“By the Aid of His Indians”: Native Negotiations of Settler Colonialism in Marin County, California, 1840–1870
The mid-nineteenth century was a crucial time for Native Californians. The Franciscan missions were secularized in the 1830s, but
American annexation of California in the late 1840s ushered in the full brunt of settler colonialism. Within this milieu, many
Indigenous people created social and economic ties with newcomers in order to maintain connections to their ancestral homelands.
One such locale was Toms Point, a landform on Tomales Bay, where Coast Miwok people worked at a trading post run by an
American entrepreneur. This poster will explore the material evidence for their engagement with a broad array of social and
economic connections, including the California coastal trade, the salvage of local shipwrecks, and persistent Indigenous exchange
networks. Materials from Toms Point will be contextualized with data from contemporaneous Indigenous sites in the region,
including other Coast Miwok communities and sites occupied by neighboring Pomo people. Our results suggest that the residents of
Toms Point, like other Native Californian communities, coped with settler colonialism by simultaneously engaging in emerging global
markets and maintaining enduring Indigenous networks.
Pantel, Agamemnon and Chester Walker
[192]
Methodological Approaches to Search and Recovery of WWII MIA’s
Some 78,000 U.S. service personnel are still official considered “Missing in Action” (MIA). From WWII, they are located in both the
Pacific and European theaters. History Flight, a non-profit organization, has dedicated over 10 years to the search and recovery of
these U.S. servicemen who are still MIA’s through a transdisciplinary approach. Initial steps logically stem from archival data,
including battle narratives, medical records, personal letters, aerial photography (from U.S. and enemy files), witness interviews, and
local government authority records. These normally drive the parameters for the integrated application of systematic remote
sensing, including Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) surveys, magnetometer surveys, low level aerial surveys, and human remains
detection dog (HRDD) surveys. The correlations of these data serve to focus the archaeological excavations. Through this
transdisciplinary methodological approach, History Flight has successfully found and recovered over 200 U.S. servicemen in the
Pacific and Europe over the last few years. Methodological modifications are required for the location and recovery of missing
servicemen from aerial disasters, because they present different challenges and conditions than those for ground losses. Case
studies from projects realized in the Pacific and Europe will serve as examples to demonstrate successful applications of this
transdisciplinary approach.
Pape, W. Kevin (Gray & Pape Inc.)
[58]
The Art of Mid-Air Construction: Building and Sustaining the Business of CRM through the Lens of Gray & Pape Inc.
The business of cultural resources management was born out of entrepreneurial responses to passage of the National Historic
Preservation Act and its implementing rule-making. Early CRM firms were established across the country as opportunities and
markets quickly developed around the regulatory process. And without the benefit of a unifying business paradigm, each firm
navigated its own path to success; the American Cultural Resources Association, created in the mid-1990s, would begin to influence
the adoption of common professional and business practices. CRM was always conceived of as multidisciplinary, but that vision
remains less than fully formed. CRM has been deeply influenced by its early roots in Departments of Anthropology and priorities
driven by archaeological research. As the practice of CRM matures, signs point to the emergence of clearly divergent business
strategies: one path following a more commodity based, transactional approach, another adopting a cultural heritage approach
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       427
which strives to integrate community voices and international heritage standards. Future trends in CRM will be driven by the
creativity and perspective of new CRM leaders who will gain influence as CRM’s founder cohort retires.
Paradiso, Emma (Colorado College) and Scott Ingram (Colorado College)
[214]
Untold Stories from the American Frontier: A Case Study of Historic Settlement Patterns in the Manitou Experimental Forest,
Woodland Park, Colorado
This research seeks to understand the historic landscape of the Manitou Experimental Forest, near Woodland Park, Colorado,
based on the archaeological findings of Colorado College students from 2017 until present. The research incorporates
archaeological survey, dendrochronology, mapping, and documentation of historic cultural resources that date to the late 1800s.
The research questions are “What is the human history of the Manitou Experimental Forest, ca. 1850 to 1950? Who lived there,
when did they live there, and why were they there?” This research provides an opportunity to reconsider historic settlement patterns
in Colorado and has allowed for a rich culture history of the Manitou Experimental Forest to emerge and become accessible to local
residents and other researchers.
Parcero-Oubiña, César [224] see Murphy, Beau
Paredes Castro, Victor [268] see Silva Sifuentes, Jorge
Pargeter, Justin (NYU/University of Johannesburg) and Patrick Schmidt (Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen)
[216]
Simple Surface-Fire Heat Treatment Significantly Improves Silcrete Flake Quality and Flaking Efficiency
Intentional stone heat treatment is a key marker for prehistoric behavioral variability. Yet, the relationship between differences in
heat-treatment strategies and variations in stone tool-making processes remains heavily debated and poorly understood. We report
on two experiments testing wood fuels and heating strategies applied to silcrete nodules from ~60 km south of Diepkloof Rock
shelter in South Africa with early evidence for intentional silcrete heat treatment. We flaked the heated silcrete nodules to maximize
flake production. The resulting cores and flakes were compared in terms of their utility (flake cutting edge to mass) and cutting edge
quality (cutting edge angles) in addition to quantifying woody residues and heat induced fracture rates. Our results show that simpler
heat treatment strategies provide significant increases in small core utility and flake quality over larger unheated silcrete nodules.
Some of these effects were obtained without more specialized knowledge than is required to maintain fires for cooking and other
utilitarian purposes. Our results show that rapidly heating silcrete to modify rocks for stone tool production is efficient at relatively low
levels of technological investment.
Paris, Elizabeth (University of Calgary), Roberto López Bravo (Universidad de Ciencias y Artes de Chiapas) and Gabriel
Lalo Jacinto (INAH-Chiapas)
[54]
Economic Integration across Political Boundaries in Highland Chiapas
This paper examines the integration of small polity economies in highland Chiapas, and the ways in which polity size and proximity
were factors. This region formed part of the western frontier of the Maya linguistic and cultural area, and has been characterized as
a relatively autonomous economic and political periphery. Beginning in the Late Classic period, a network of small polities
proliferated throughout highland Chiapas. We draw on our excavations at the multiple sites political centers in the Jovel Valley in the
western Chiapas highlands, as well as our excavations at the larger center of Tenam Puente. We observe that economic integration
between highland polities manifested more highly with respect to geographic distance as opposed to polity size, with a higher
degree of economic integration between polities within the Jovel Valley; and a relatively low degree of economic integration between
the Jovel Valley and Tenam Puente. Furthermore, we consider whether the degree of economic integration between polities shifted
from the Late Classic to the Early Postclassic periods, as the sociopolitical turmoil of lowland Maya polities to the north and east
began to affect long-distance exchange and alliance networks
Paris, Elizabeth [150] see George, Miranda
Paris, Elizabeth [168] see López Bravo, Roberto
Paris, Elizabeth [196] see Meanwell, Jennifer
Paris, Elizabeth [150] see Pacheco, Ellen
Paris, Elizabeth [203] see Williams, Megan
Parish, Ryan (University of Memphis) and Brian Rowe (University of Memphis)
[30]
Sourcing the Sacred: Provenance of Chert Mortuary Discs at the Hopewell Site
In order to ascertain the level of community involvement in the construction of the ritual landscape at the Hopewell Mound Group in
Chillicothe, Ohio, the current study examines a sample of the mortuary chert disc cache recovered from Mound 2 via reflectance
spectroscopy and EM-GMM cluster analyses. The two methods of analysis potentially provide a clearer image of lithic sources for
the mortuary chert discs among the Ohio Hopewell people, and also highlight technological variability in the creation of the chert
disc cache. Using analytical provenance data, multivariate statistical, and metric analyses it is possible to identify three regional
groups or communities that were involved with the creation of the assemblage discovered at Mound 2. The provenance of the chert
discs indicates that deposits of Ste. Genevieve and Upper St. Louis chert from southern Indiana, Illinois, and along the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     428
Kentucky/Tennessee border were utilized by groups that contributed to the Mound 2 assemblage upon periodic trips to the site. The
discovery provides a new understanding of Ohio Hopewell creation and use of sacred space.
Parish, Ryan [194] see Sherman, Simon
Park, Gayoung (University of Washington) and Ben Marwick (University of Washington)
[55]
Approximate Bayesian Computing for Modeling Patterns of Cultural Transmission in the Late Paleolithic of Korea
During the Late Pleistocene, the appearance of new technologies such as blades and points occurred in many locations, and at
different times, raising questions about their origins and their diffusion processes. We consider the case of the Korean Upper
Paleolithic, where stemmed points appeared as the first of several new technologies during the Late Pleistocene. There are
competing theories about the origin of stemmed points and their dispersal as well as the role of social contexts in this process.
Previous work on social contexts of transmission has demonstrated the effectiveness of Approximate Bayesian Computing (ABC) to
infer patterns of cultural evolution based on artifact frequencies. ABC is essential here because it enables the evaluation of multiple
competing evolutionary models formulated as computer simulations. We simulated a large number of social transmission scenarios
by sampling from specified prior probability distributions and plugging them into a population dynamics model. We create a posterior
distribution of artifact estimates, by keeping only those parameter values for which artifact metrics closely match the empirical data.
We show that ABC is useful to infer parameters and choose between models in complicated scenarios such as cultural transmission
models.
Park Boush, Lisa [59] see Beamer, Dawn
Parker, Adam, Mason Miller, Christopher Ringstaff, Brittany McClain and Timothy Griffith
[194]
Preliminary Analysis and Interpretations from Excavations at Site 41SR459, Starr County, Texas, USA
Archaeologists from AmaTerra Environmental, Inc. worked with their counterparts at the Texas Department of Transportation to
conduct National Register of Historic Places-eligibility testing at Site 41SR459, a Late Archaic (2350–1350/1250 BP) and Late
Prehistoric (1350/1250–700 BP) campsite located within the proposed impact corridor of a new roadway in Starr County in South
Texas. The site investigations included documenting 18 distinct burned rock features, six of which were subject to manual test unit
excavation. In addition, one backhoe trench was excavated to identify non-surface features and assess site formation and
geomorphology. The artifact assemblage recovered through the excavations included 1,760 artifacts including lithic tools and
debitage, burned rock, mussel shell, and a potential shell bead fragment. Citing the abundance and variety of artifacts recovered as
well as the frequency of associated features, the site was determined eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) and will be subject to further investigation if avoidance is not possible. This paper will present a summary of the site and
discuss preliminary interpretations from the investigations.
Parker, Candace
[63]
A Comparison of Sites within the Fourche Maline Archaeological Culture
This poster presents a comparison of several sites that are part of the Fourche Maline archaeological culture (ca. 2300–1100 cal
BP). Fouche Maline sites tend to be located along or near the Fouche Maline Creek in the Wister Valley on eastern side of
Oklahoma. Many of these sites were originally excavated by the WPA in the 1930s and 1940s; most containing dark-earth midden-
mounds. Among other characteristics are thick, grog-tempered, flower pot-shaped pottery, variations of Gary projectile points,
ground-stone objects, and various bone tools and other artifacts. The artifacts and excavation reports from 34LF33 (Troy Adams)
were analyzed for this study and then compared to other previously analyzed collections of known Fourche Maline sites from
Oklahoma. Some of the analyses conducted on this collection include a technological analysis of lithic tools, lithic raw material
sourcing, as well as ceramic function, form, and various attributes relating to manufacture. This comparison was done to gain a
better understanding of how the Troy Adams site fits into the greater Fourche Maline archaeological culture.
Parker, David [252] see O’Mansky, Matt
Parkinson, Jennifer [27] see Pobiner, Briana
Parkinson, William (Field Museum of Natural History and University of Illinois at Chicago)
[255]
Anthropology, Archaeology, and the Myth of Epistemological Independence: Copper Age Village Dynamics on the Great Hungarian
Plain
For decades, Alan Sullivan has lobbied vigorously for the epistemological separation of archaeology from anthropology. Some see
this separation as desirable, but others question whether it is possible. In this paper, I will explore Sullivan’s plea for archaeological
independence against the backdrop of the Copper Age in the Carpathian Basin. Specifically, I will focus on the Körös region of the
Great Hungarian Plain to discuss diachronic models of settlement organization and relocation at multiple geographic and spatial
scales. Using the rich dataset from this region to frame the argument, I contend (contra Sullivan) that it is impossible to separate
archaeological models from anthropological ones. However, I agree with Sullivan that the models archaeologists historically have
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    429
created have been heavily influenced, and restrained, by a lack of congruence between ethnographic, ethnohistoric, and
archaeological scales and datasets.
Parkinson, William [199] see Gyucha, Attila
Parr, Christopher (Virginia Department of Military Affairs)
[52]
“Well, We Found a Site . . . Now What?” Monitoring Cultural Resources at Virginia Army National Guard Facilities
The Virginia Army National Guard (VAARNG) manages over 700 archaeological sites and burial locations, and its inventory of
cultural resources is always growing. The overwhelming majority of these resources are at the Fort Pickett Maneuver Training
Center in south-central Virginia. For the VAARNG, it is challenging to effectively manage these resources in a 41,000 acre
installation that has trained the equivalent of over 329,000 personnel in Fiscal Year 2019. Under the terms of a recent programmatic
agreement, the VAARNG has agreed to protect its archaeological sites from land disturbance by means of protective barriers
combined with periodic inspection every one, two, or five years. Systematic monitoring began in 2017, when the VAARNG
documented baseline conditions of its archaeological sites and established a monitoring strategy utilizing photographic monitoring
points. Consequentially, the VAARNG has used the monitoring program to prioritize sites for protective barriers or further
investigation. While overwhelming at first, the monitoring program has proven to be an essential management tool, and the
VAARNG has applied monitoring efforts to its archaeological collection by initiating its first “wall-to-wall” inspection and condition
assessment of its collection’s inventory. The VAARNG will prioritize items for conservation, research, and even exhibition.
Parra, Manuel Reynaldo [101] see Gallaga, Emiliano
Parrott, Nathan (University of Calgary) and Armando Anaya Hernández (Universidad Autónoma De Campeche)
[178]
The Sakjol Marketplace of Yaxnohcah, Campeche, Mexico
Ancient marketplaces serve as invaluable sources of information regarding the political-economic organization of archaeological
sites. Marketplaces were important locations within ancient cities serving as nexuses of social, economic, and political interaction.
There is a rich collection of ethnohistoric, linguistic, and pictorial evidence indicating the existence of precolumbian marketplaces
within the Maya region. Despite this, extensive research focusing on ancient Maya marketplaces has only just begun to develop
relatively recently over the past decade. This project focuses on an unusual double-plaza marketplace at the Maya site of
Yaxnohcah, Campeche, Mexico, the range of marketplace activities that took place and the construction history of the plazas.
Analysis of materials recovered and the results of geochemical testing have provided valuable insight into the activities of the
marketplace, in particular evidence of late-stage lithic production and cleaning practices.
Parsons, Jeffrey (University of Michigan)
[152]
Discussant
Parsons, Jeffrey (University of Michigan)
[181]
Discussant
Parsons, Ted (University of Alaska Anchorage)
[147]
Recent Developments in Small and Low-Cost 3D Scanning Systems
Small and inexpensive alternatives for capturing 3D data have continued to proliferate. Previous 3D capture systems included
specialized Google and Sony smartphones, the Scanse Sweep, and the moderately expensive DotProduct DPI-8X handheld
scanner. This poster examines developments in the low-cost scanner arena during the last two years with the introduction of smaller
and cheaper devices. The new scanners operate on variations of the structured light principal used by the Microsoft Kinect for Xbox
360 (V1). In January 2018 Intel Corporation began selling new RealSense compact depth cameras as stand-alone sensors and as
modules for incorporation into other devices. The RealSense D435 and D415 are evaluated, used in conjunction with DotProduct
Dot3D Scan software and a small tablet computer. Occipital recently released the Structure Core bundled with the same Skanect
software that allows the V1 to be used as a scanner. New also is Occipital’s iPad-based Structure Sensor Mk II. Lastly, 3D Systems
have incorporated a RealSense unit in their updated Sense 3D Scanner. The new scanners are USB powered, not needing a 110-
volt AC electrical power source. The output of each of these new devices is compared to an Agisoft Metashape Professional photo
model of a test object.
Partlow, Megan [59] see West, Catherine F.
Pascali, Pamela [270] see Peterson, Kateea
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  430
Pascual Soto, Arturo
[227]
El Tajín en tiempos de 13 Conejo: Expresiones de un nuevo estatuto simbólico (ca. 800–1100 dC)
Si bien el culto al soberano no podría expresar de mejor manera el carácter sagrado que se le confería de antiguo y el
extraordinario poder que se concentraba en su persona, es en El Tajín cuando evoluciona sobre las bases de una ideología de
reciente introducción hacia una liturgia ligada a una tradición cultural que en el Epiclásico se estará extendiendo por Mesoamérica
siguiendo el litoral del Golfo de México. Es justo a estos nuevos grupos políticos a quienes debemos de atribuir hacia el año 800 dC
la construcción del imponente Edificio de las Columnas como también el desarrollo de un estilo artístico estrechamente ligado con
la expresión de un nuevo estatuto simbólico. La ponencia explora desde la perspectiva de los monumentos promovidos por los
gobernantes de la ciudad los cambios que se generan en el arte de El Tajín, los temas que aborda y el contexto político y social al
que se vinculan dichas transformaciones.
Paspalas, Stavros [36] see Kardulias, Paul Nick
Passalacqua, Nicholas and Katharine Kolpan (University of Idaho)
[188]
Forensic Archaeological Fieldwork as a High-Impact Practice
This presentation will discuss search and recovery efforts concerning an isolated, WWII-era burial from the Federal Republic of
Germany. This was a partnership project between the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency (DPAA) and Western Carolina
University (WCU); coordinated between DPAA, WCU, and various local officials. This presentation will provide a model for
reimagining other, similar DPAA partnership projects as service learning and professionalization opportunities. The goal of this
presentation is not only to summarize the findings of these search and recovery efforts, but to discuss the power of such
collaborative projects as unique service learning, high impact practices (HIPs). HIPs are educational practices which emphasize
learning through practice and reflection, and have been demonstrated to have positive associations to student learning and
retention. Service learning projects are defined by their experiential learning emphasis, combined with collaboration between
community partners, and participant reflection. The very nature of this collaborative partnership project provided the basis for its
service learning structure. However, we argue this model also emphasized an atmosphere of professionalization not always
encountered in field school contexts. This was because it allowed for student participants to take greater ownership of their work
while being compensated as paid professionals.
Patch, Shawn (New South Associates Inc.)
[208]
Discussant
Patino-Contreras, Alejandro
[163]
The Ceramic Sequence of Tintal, Petén, Guatemala
A ceramic sequence for the archaeological site of Tintal, in Petén, Guatemala has been established. The results of classification
efforts undertaken between 2017 and 2019 make mention of ceramic types, varieties, and modes attested for a sample of
collections from a number of different contexts documented through scientific site excavations. A sequence of six ceramic
complexes spanning from the Middle Preclassic (from around the second half of the ninth century BCE) to the Terminal Classic. The
study also illustrates a number of cultural connections between Tintal and other sites in the Mirador Basin. Preclassic, Late Classic,
and Terminal Classic assemblages are relatively well represented in the study sample. In contrast, the Early Classic period has low
visibility, yet this pattern is due to sampling issues. Deposits with Terminal Preclassic and Terminal Classic ceramics are common,
strongly indicating an important occupation in Tintal during these periods. This paper addresses to present the ceramic sequence of
Tintal and its relationship with other sequences in the area such as El Mirador, Nakbe, and Naachtun.
Patrick, Shelby (Colorado College) and Scott Ingram (Colorado College)
[165]
An Investigation of Stone Huts in Crestone, Colorado
Outside of Crestone, Colorado, a group of stone huts have been the subject of local lore for many years. Despite the speculation
surrounding the structures, there has been no conclusive determination of their function or origin. Theories as to the huts’ purpose
have ranged from ovens to storage units to ceremonial structures. Thoughts on who constructed the stone huts are just as varied.
While some local community members believe the huts to be of Native American origin, others have suggested that they are
associated with the mining or railroad industry boom that occurred in the San Luis Valley. Examination of historical documents,
associated artifacts, analysis of the huts’ architecture, and interviews with local community members aid in evaluating the evidence
in support of these various theories. Ultimately, this project aims to gain a better understanding of the Crestone stone huts and their
place in the larger San Luis Valley landscape.
Patterson, Donald (Tonkawa Tribe)
[113]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    431
Patterson, John [203] see Kelly, Nigel
Patton, Katherine (University of Toronto), Dena Doroszenko (Ontario Heritage Trust) and Richard Gerrard (City of Toronto
Museum and Heritage Services)
[228]
Off-Campus Archaeology: Teaching about the Past through Community Partnerships
We present a case study on a community-engaged learning course offered at the University of Toronto. The course partners
students with government and community organizations to work on projects in heritage and archaeology, such as collections
management and public outreach. Importantly, the course gives students experiential learning opportunities in non-academic
settings. In this case study students worked with staff at the Ontario Heritage Trust and the City of Toronto’s Museum and Heritage
Services. In these contexts they could observe and begin to understand the real-world complexities that often surround heritage
legislation and its implementation, while participating in operational aspects of stewardship of collections, and historic sites and
monuments management. Through this, students also engage with how historical narratives are generated, presented, and
contested.
[228]
Chair
Patton, Natalie, Wyatt Benson (Northern Arizona University), Mitchell Cleveland (Northern Arizona University), Eric Gilmore
(Northern Arizona University) and Olivia Fry (Northern Arizona University)
[148]
Bone Pliability and Its Importance to Bone Awl Manufacture: An Experimental Archaeology Study
Zooarchaeological analysis of bone tools allows for the reconstruction of human and animal interactions in the past. One example of
animal use in the American Southwest was the modification of their skeletal elements into tools, such as awls and needles, personal
ornaments, or instruments. Bone artifacts recovered from Wupatki National Monument, previously analyzed by the authors, were
employed to investigate the steps necessary in the manufacture of bone awls. Several elements of the manufacture process are
unfortunately elusive to experimental archaeologists. To explore the gaps of manufacturing technique, our poster examines different
methods useful for improving the pliability of bone for modification, and different grains of dry or wet sandstone employed to shape
and sharpen the tips of the awls. Our research improves the power of our interpretations and allows archaeologists to further
explore the cultural contexts within which bone awls were created in the American Southwest.
Pauketat, Timothy (University of Illinois)
[46]
Looking to the Heavens to Rediscover the Human Element
A lifetime of archaeological research and travels into the culturally specific practices and ambiguously meaningful objects of past
peoples leads me to seek out the non-human elements of relations that, counterintuitively, make us all human. Archaeologists today
may feel uncomfortable with some general explanations since the human beings in our studies were, of course, culturally unique.
Yet we should not overlook the realities of our cases that enable us—as sentient beings ourselves—to understand broad historical
relationships between things, beings, and phenomena, and that allow us to transcend cultural barriers. Thus, for instance, the
properties of stone, earth, and water helped to produce the first cities. So did those of light, shadow, and celestial movement.
Indeed, in this talk I look to the heavens to rediscover the human element.
Pavel, Rosemarie (Logan Simpson)
[214]
The Women of the Adobe Castle: An Archaeological Investigation at Bent’s Old Fort National Historic Site, La Junta, Colorado
Between 1833 and 1849, Bent’s Old Fort in present-day southeastern Colorado was a significant location for cross-cultural trade on
the Santa Fe Trail amongst New Mexicans, Euro-Americans, and Southern Cheyenne and Arapaho tribes. Existing historical and
archaeological investigations of the fort have focused on the lives of male traders, trappers, and soldiers. Archaeology in the
American West has begun to identify gender in the archaeological record, and Bent’s Old Fort is an important venue for this
research. As archaeologists, we stress the importance of recording and curating artifacts for future study and analysis by later
scholars with different research interests. This study shines a light on the importance of this principle, and a critique of how this has
been applied in the past.
Pawlowicz, Leszek [230] see Hoggarth, Julie
Payne, Neal (Simon Fraser University)
[35]
Investigating Identity through the Regional Foodscapes of Roman Britain
For over a century theoretical approaches to Roman colonialism have been dominated by the notion of Romanization, a model
based on top-down homogeneous cultural change occurring in Britain during the immediate post-conquest period. However, the pre-
Roman population was not a homogeneous group. Exploring the plurality of these groups’ identities has been neglected due to the
lingering legacy of Romanization, resulting in limited the attempts to explore this diversity. My poster presents the application of a
new theoretical framework based on the concepts of foodscapes, material entanglement, and post-colonial theory (discrepant
identity) to analyze the wealth of previously published archaeological material concerning food consumption in Roman Britain. I draw
on the previously published archaeobotanical, ceramic, isotopic, related material culture, and zooarchaeological material, to situate
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   432
the extent of regional differences exhibited by the diverse groups living under Roman occupation. The goal of this research is
twofold. First, to identify regional differences in the local reaction to Roman colonialism. Second, to demonstrating the potential of
situating archaeological research within a holistic foodscape framework.
Payntar, Nicole (University of Texas at Austin), Wei-Lin Hsiao (University of Texas at Austin), R. Alan Covey (University of
Texas at Austin) and Kristen Grauman
[175]
Detecting Patterned Tourist Movement and Photography Using Geotagged Images of Archaeological Heritage Sites in Cuzco, Peru
The intersection of social media and heritage tourism in recent decades has created an abundance of open-source imagery that
remains underutilized by the archaeological heritage community. This data is largely driven by consumer (i.e., tourist) experiences
and the promotion of visually aesthetic heritage landscapes by various stakeholders. As images of heritage sites are catalogued and
shared across media platforms they provide archaeologists with new opportunities to understand how the intensification of tourism
intersects with archaeological heritage regulations and social media, aiding in the articulation of travel patterns across heritage
landscapes. Image analysis permits the assessment of how aesthetic preferences and visuality become entangled with the rapidly
evolving expectations of tourists, whose travel narratives are often grounded in historic site representations. Using Cuzco, Peru as a
case study, we collected 57,804 publicly geotagged images posted by 2,261 Flickr users between 2004 and 2019. These images
and their accompanied meta-data (timestamps, geotags, etc.) were then processed using machine learning and computer vision
algorithms to identify travel patterns across a known archaeological heritage circuit (Boleto Turístico del Cuzco) and quantify visual
culture and experiences in the Cuzco region. This paper presents the results of our research.
Payntar, Nicole [17] see Covey, R. Alan
Pazmiño, Estanislao
[201]
Cochasquí: Celebrando el agua de los ancestros
Durante la época prehispánica, los Andes septentrionales albergaron una intensa interacción cultural que conllevó al surgimiento de
centros monumentales cuya función ha sido poco discutida. Particularmente durante el Periodo Tardío comprendido
aproximadamente entre el 600 y 1525 dC se evidencia una transformación de los sistemas políticos y el surgimiento de centros
monumentales. La construcción de plataformas piramidales y monticulos funerarios al parecer están vinculadas a una fuerte
tradición de culto a los ancestros y su relación con el agua. Precisamente, Cochasquí se erige durante este periodo como uno de
los centros monumentales más importantes de la región. En el presente trabajo se discute la relación entre las edificación
monumentales de Cochasquí y una larga tradición de culto al agua y los ancestros.
Peacock, Claude [237] see Peacock, Evan
Peacock, Evan (Mississippi State University), Virginie Renson (Archaeometry Laboratory Research Reactor Center),
Brenda Kirkland (Mississippi State University), Simon Sherman (University of Memphis) and Claude Peacock
[237]
Elemental and Isotopic Geochemistry of Freshwater Shells to Source Shell-Tempered Ceramics
The aim of this research project is to evaluate the efficacy of elemental and strontium isotope analysis to contribute to our
knowledge of shell-tempered ceramic circulation and exchange. It builds on recent pilot studies showing that freshwater mussel
shells recovered at archaeological sites located in different drainages present different elemental compositions. Here, a combination
of elemental and strontium isotopic analyses is applied to whole freshwater shells and shell temper fragments extracted from shell-
tempered ceramics. The method is tested at the basin scale, with samples selected from twelve sites in or adjacent to the Yazoo
Basin (Mississippi). The sites are located along multiple drainages and date from the Late Woodland and/or the Mississippian
period. Both methodological approach and results are presented and the following aspects are discussed: the evaluation and the
impact of diagenesis, the identification of discriminant elements and the variability of elemental and isotopic geochemistry signature
within the basin, the comparison of geochemical signatures of shell temper and whole shells, and the possibility of chemical
exchanges between the clay and the shell temper.
Pearson, Charlotte (Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research)
[24]
What Does Annual Tee-Ring 14C Offer for Chronological Synchronization and Calibration?
Tree-rings offer the potential for accurate, annually dated time-lines against which to compare the events of the stratigraphic record.
They may also offer a regional climate record against which to evaluate cultural response. But tree-ring records are limited to certain
regions and time periods. Only in a few select locations do they extend back beyond 8,000 years. Recent research has
demonstrated that the annual measurements of radiocarbon captured in tree-rings from these few important chronologies could offer
significant new opportunities for anchoring multiregional timelines and making radiocarbon calibration more accurate. This talk will
provide some examples of the use of tree-rings to refine the dating of archaeological sites, review work in progress using annual 14C
and consider some of the potential limitations and opportunities to arise for chronological synchronization and calibration using
annual 14C records.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    433
Pearson, Kristen (Harvard University)
[62]
In Someone Else’s Shoes: Ethnoarchaeology at the Intersection of Life and Object Histories
In Mongolia, ethnoarchaeological methods have been applied productively to questions of mobility, spatial organization, site
formation, and animal husbandry practices, among others. An area that remains to be explored is the application of
ethnoarchaeological methods to the study of craft production, particularly as it relates to distinctive local resources, ecologies, and
mobile lifeways. In this paper, I present the results of ethnoarchaeological fieldwork focused on craft production in organic—
specifically animal-based—materials. By studying contemporary craft practices and their material manifestations, I aim to construct
an interpretive framework for the organic archaeological record that relates object histories to the life histories of individuals. By
placing objects in their social and environmental contexts, their relevance to key social and environmental questions becomes
apparent. This is demonstrated by a case study of archaeological hide and textile objects from the tenth-century cave burial of
Üzüür Gyalan.
Peck, Katherine (University of New Mexico), Noa Lincoln (University of Hawai’i) and Michael Graves (University of New
Mexico)
[252]
Soil Nutrient Variability in the South Kohala Field System, Hawai’i Island
The uplands of Kawaihae 1 ahupua’a, Hawai’i Island, contain a dense dryland field system built, utilized, and occupied by Hawaiians
from as early as the seventeenth century into the nineteenth—early twentieth century. This field system contains a diverse array of
agricultural practices including fixed-field agriculture, planting mounds, terracing, and water management features such as ‘auwai
(irrigation ditches) and check dams. In order to investigate this field system’s past and present agricultural potential—particularly in
light of the landscape’s aridity—we sampled soils along an elevational transect through a portion of the field system. These soils
were then described and analyzed for a suite of values including resin extractable phosphorous, cation exchange capacity, total
elements, base saturation, pH and soil moisture. These results and their implications for soil development, geomorphology, and
agricultural viability within this archaeological landscape are discussed. The latter is of particular interest to the Kailapa Community
Association, which includes members of the Kawaihae descendant community, who are interested in managing this upland area.
Pecora, Albert [188] see Burks, Jarrod
Pedro Black, Marielle and Sandra Arazi-Coambs (Cibola National Forest)
[148]
The Use of Stone Axes in North-Central New Mexico on the Cibola National Forest Sandia Ranger District
Stone axes found on the northern portion of the Sandia Ranger District are as numerous as those found during excavations of the
nearby site of Paa-ko. Paa-ko is a prehistoric/protohistoric village site located in a similar pinyon-juniper environment within 7 miles
of the study area. Like those found in Paa-ko, the majority of the axes found on the Sandia Ranger District are broken and could no
longer be used for the intended purpose. Previous studies of stone axe use in the Prehistoric Southwest have hypothesized the use
in resource procurement as axes or hoes based on environmental conditions. Hypothesized uses include digging, chopping, and
processing activities, specifically focused on agriculture and the use of trees. Less often stone axes are considered tools in
prehistoric mining. Geoenvironmental conditions specific to the study area must be considered, specifically the presence of copper
and turquoise in the region. In contrast to traditional axe uses posited in the past that emphasize agricultural, tree procurement,
processing, and ceremonial uses; we suggest that uses as mining tools must be considered.
Peeples, Matt (Arizona State University)
[29]
Networks, Community Detection, and Critical Scales of Interaction in the U.S. Southwest/Mexican Northwest
Archaeologists have long recognized that spatial relationships are an important influence on and driver of all manner of social
processes at scales from the local to the continental or even beyond. Recent research in the realm of complex networks focused on
community detection in human networks suggests that there may be certain critical scales at which human spatial interactions can
be partitioned, allowing researchers to draw boundaries that provide new insights into a variety of social phenomena. Thus far, this
research has been focused on short time scales and has not explored the legacies of historic relationships on the evolution of
network communities and boundaries over the long-term. In this paper, we examine networks based on material cultural similarity
drawing on a large settlement and material culture database from the U.S. Southwest/Mexican Northwest (ca. AD 800–1800;
encompassing over 1,000,000 km2) divided into a series of short temporal intervals. With these temporally sequenced networks we:
(1) explore the utility of several methods of network community detection, (2) evaluate whether there are key phase transitions in the
scales of network communities, and (3) explore the role of previous network configurations in the evolution of network communities
through time.
Peeples, Matt (Arizona State University)
[116]
Discussant
Peeples, Matt [120] see Oas, Sarah
Peeples, Matt [123] see Torvinen, Andrea
Pelletier, Maxime [36] see Holliday, Trenton
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    434
Pelton, Spencer (University of Wyoming)
[68]
Does Temperature Influence Folsom Stone Tool Variability?
Hunter-gatherer archaeologists argue that stone tool kit variability is influenced by a several common boundary conditions, including
raw material availability and package morphology, mobility and subsistence, and others. I argue that ambient temperature should be
included alongside other boundary conditions as a primary influence on stone tool kit variability by a) influencing stone tool types,
and b) structuring time budgets. Drawing data from the Folsom archaeological record of the Great Plains and Rocky Mountains, I
demonstrate significant relationships between mean annual temperature and several Folsom tool kit attributes. I ultimately argue
that temperature should be used as a means of understanding stone tool kit variability at large scales for hunter-gatherer records in
temperate and cold regions.
Peña, Jose [105] see Cuello del Pozo, Paloma
Peña, Jose [242] see Chavez, Mark
Peña, Jose [240] see Kaul, Urvi
Peña, Jose [242] see Ritter, Alexandra
Penfil, Rachael (University of Illinois at Chicago)
[260]
Integrated Neighborhoods: Architectural Perspectives on Community at Mauka Llacta de Nuñoa, Puno, Peru
To date, most archaeological research focusing on the Late Intermediate Period in the Lake Titicaca Basin has described this time
as bellicose and sociopolitically fractured. Surveys have thoroughly investigated regional alliances and life in fortified hilltop
settlements known as pukaras, but comparatively little work has explored non-defensive settlements or the processes of daily life
that integrated these villages, many of which housed hundreds or thousands of residents. In this paper, I examine the site of Mauka
Llacta de Nuñoa, an unfortified town located in the northern Lake Titicaca Basin containing over 400 domestic structures. Pilot
research suggests that the settlement was home to at least two contemporaneous populations, marked by the presence of two
types of residential architecture. These two types of architecture do not neatly cluster in separate areas, suggesting that different
populations living at the site were more sociopolitically integrated than might be expected. Using survey and surface data, I present
preliminary interpretations of neighborhood communities at Mauka Llacta and explore how socioeconomic ties—rather than just
defensive concerns—may have been crucial for the integration of a diverse settlement in a sociopolitical context widely considered
to be violent and divisive.
Peniche May, Nancy [197] see Volta, Beniamino
Pepe, James (Janus Research)
[193]
North Woodlawn Cemetery: CRM and the Legacy of Jim Crow
North Woodlawn Cemetery served Fort Lauderdale’s African American community during the period of legislated racial segregation. In
the 1960s, part of the cemetery was purchased by the State of Florida and incorporated into the Right-of-Way (ROW) for Interstate 95.
In 2012, Janus Research began working with the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) on possible improvements in the vicinity
of North Woodlawn. A major part of this research involved ascertaining if unmarked graves were present within the I-95 ROW. An
assumption of project archaeologists and planners was that local citizens would welcome the excavation of remains from the ROW for
reburial within extant cemetery boundaries. Public outreach soon made it obvious that this view was not shared by the local community.
Through continued consultation between FDOT, the Florida State Historic Preservation Officer, Janus Research and local stakeholders,
creative methods for investigation and preservation at North Woodlawn were reached. Field methodology was limited to remote sensing
techniques, including use of a cadaver dog, ground-penetrating radar (GPR), and radar tomography. Extensive interviews with local
informants were an important component of the investigation. In the end, project engineers, State planners, local politicians and
community activists were able to collaboratively achieve mutual project goals.
Perales, Manuel
[200]
Macahuisa in Hatun Xauxa: State Infrastructure, Mitmaqkuna, and Sacred Landscape in the Negotiation of the Inca Occupation in
Jauja
Different investigations have shown that during the process of expansion of Tawantinsuyu, the Incas promoted the cult of certain
wakakuna like Pachacamac, as a strategy to legitimize their power over conquered populations. In the case of Pariacaca, the
famous waka from the regions of Huarochirí and Yauyos, new readings of early written sources and current archaeological data
suggest that their prestige and fame would have been, also, as the result of a state sponsorship, possibly driven from the Inca
settlement of Hatun Xauxa in Jauja, through the promotion of the devotion to Pariacaca’s son, Macahuisa. This fact would have
been the result of a complex negotiation process between the rulers of Cusco and the local societies, which resulted in the design
and construction of new infrastructure, the resettlement of different human groups under the condition of mitmaqkuna, and the
resignification of landscapes in the framework of a new form of sacredness. All this led, ultimately, to the successful affirmation of
the Incas’ domain in one of the most economically important territories of their empire.
Peraza Lope, Carlos [20] see Glumac, Bosiljka
Peraza Lope, Carlos [138] see Masson, Marilyn
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     435
Perdikaris, Sophia (University of Nebraska, Lincoln), Rebecca Boger (Brooklyn College, CUNY), Sandrine Grouard (Natural
History Museum, Paris), Edith Gonzal (Graduate Center, CUNY) and Jennifer Adams (University of Calgary)
[252]
Disrupted Identities and Cultural Heritage in Barbuda, Lesser Antilles
The island geography of Barbuda, West Indies, is fundamental to Barbudan cultural heritage, identity, and modern culture. Because
of its thin soils and semi-arid climate, it was not developed for sugar cane production like its sister island, Antigua, and many other
islands in the Caribbean. Although enslaved, Barbudans were able to develop subsistence strategies that leveraged the natural
resources and ecology of the island. A network of wells was dug with troughs surrounded by walled-in areas and pens designed to
provide water and capture free-roaming cattle to kill, especially during the dry seasons. The island was divided into areas for
hunting, living, and agriculture, and the people managed the areas sustainably in the 1700s, 1800s, and into the 1900s. In this
presentation we will discuss identity through an in-depth analysis or landscape and material culture.
Peregrine, Peter (Lawrence University and the Human Relations Area Files)
[254]
Resilience to Nuclear Winter: An Example of Policy-Focused Archaeological Research
In June of AD 536, an atmospheric event occurred that blocked the sun in the Northern Hemisphere for 18 months. This disastrous
event was followed by another in AD 541. The combination of these events disrupted the climate for at least a decade. The AD
536/541 events created conditions eerily similar to the hypothesized climatic effects of a “nuclear winter.” Because of its similarity to
a “nuclear winter,” the atmospheric events of AD 536/541 provide the opportunity to explore empirically the potential social impacts
of a limited nuclear war. In addition, because some societies survived the AD 536/541 events, analysis of the AD 536/541 events
provides an opportunity to develop and evaluate models of resilience to “nuclear winter.” I pitched this idea to the Army Research
Office and explained that using archaeological data I could provide the Department of Defense with policy recommendations for
actions to enhance the United States’ resilience to a possible “nuclear winter.” In this paper I outline the history of this project and its
initial findings in order to illustrate how we can educate government agencies that knowledge of the past can inform contemporary
issues.
Pereira, Grégory [20] see Quezada, Osiris
Peres, Tanya (Florida State University)
[118]
Discussant
Peres, Tanya [76] see Schultz, Julian
Perez, Carlos [239] see Martinez Milantchi, Maria Mercedes
Perez, Daniel (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Karen Harry (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[142]
Virgin Branch Puebloan Adaptations on the Colorado Plateaus: Recent Excavations at Granary House (AZ A:14:46)
The upper reaches of the Virgin Branch Puebloan region—particularly, the western Colorado Plateaus—has largely remained
understudied, partly resulting from difficulties accessing many areas yielding cultural activity. While the majority of data collection
has been amassed through surveys, excavations on the western Colorado Plateaus have significantly broadened the archaeological
record within this zone of the Virgin region. In particular, recent excavations—undertaken by the Department of Anthropology,
University of Nevada, Las Vegas—have contributed to a greater understanding of adaptation strategies, subsistence, and
chronology within late prehistory. Framed by excavation data from Granary House (AZ A:14:46), this paper presents preliminary
findings regarding the Virgin Branch Puebloan occupation of a hamlet site on the southern portion of the Shivwits Plateau. On the
basis of collected flotation and various artifact data (lithics, ceramics, and ground stone)—and coupled with chronometric data—
inferences and implications are presented regarding occupational strategies and regional interactions within this remote portion of
the American Southwest.
[142]
Chair
Perez, Daniel [142] see Van Alstyne, Benjamin
Perez, Gary, Joe Tellez (Professional Geologist), Alfred Alaniz (San Antonio College) and Janet Stock
[16]
Pictograph Iconography and Geologic Realities at 41VV124, the White Shaman Mural
The White Shaman Mural, a Pecos River style (PRS) rock art site located in a Pecos River tributary canyon, is dated from 2420 ± 80
to 1460 ± 80 RCYBP (radiocarbon years before present). At that time, prehistoric indigenous hunter-gatherers inhabited this
semiarid environment and traveled seasonally to obtain resources. Research indicates the mural represents cumulative knowledge
and not solely artistic expression. Some icons may be spiritually significant or narrative. Others appear to represent survival
resources. One particular icon seems to represent four fountain springs of the South Texas Balcones Escarpment. These springs
issue from the Edwards Aquifer and exist where hydraulic pressure is sufficient to force water up through wells and faults. Research
indicates their importance prehistorically, historically and currently. We tested the hypothesis that these icons represent a resource
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     436
map of South Texas using Geographic Information Systems and research of historical records of indigenous/European contact. The
creators seem to have established relative distance between the four springs measuring elapsed travel time. They accurately
painted fountain spring icons on the mural spaced according to transit time. Results of the research have implications for current
and future PRS rock art interpretation.
Pérez, Ventura (University of Massachusetts, Amherst)
[131]
A Four-Field View in an Increasingly Myopic World
Our scientific perspectives of the world are bound to moments of clarity. Clarity comes from the realization that the questions worth
asking are the ones that illuminate the human experience while understanding positionality and privilege in the exploration of those
questions. As a M.A. student, Dr. Martin encouraged me to develop a methodology that combines microscopy of cutmarks with
detailed taphonomic reconstruction of each category of bone damage. She pushed me into asking questions that moved me far
beyond the “checklist” osteology of trauma pattern recognition. I developed a methodology that allowed me to contribute to our
understanding of the human arrival and occupation of Madagascar while at the same time exploring the concept of “evil” as an
ideological construction of a moral imperative as it relates to violence. This paper surveys human bone assemblages around the
world and throughout time to analyze the complexity, variability, and ambiguities surrounding the processing of human remains. The
emphasis is on problematizing and challenging prominent discourses on violence by using a trans-temporal analysis of performative
violence. It also explores consequences of the discourses in which we, as anthropologists, engage in both academia and media as
we celebrate Dr. Martin’s mentorship.
Pérez, Ventura [131] see Ralston, Claira
Pérez Cubas, Kelita [21] see Osborn, Jo
Pérez Cubas, Kelita [125] see Weinberg, Camille
Perez-Robles, Griselda (Universidad de San Carlos de Guatemala)
[209]
Discussant
Perrotti, Angelina (Arkansas Tech University), John Williams (University of Wisconsin), James Russell (Brown University),
Stephen Jackson (Southwest Climate Adaptation Science Center) and Christopher Kiahtipes (University of South Florida)
[235]
First Americans, Megaherbivores, and Climate: Dung Fungal Spore Data from 8 Eastern U.S. Sites
New proxy evidence such as dung fungal spores contribute to continued efforts to disentangle interactions among Late Quaternary
megaherbivores, vegetation, and people. Recently, the potential for dung fungal spores to reveal more precise timing of functional
and final extinction events has resulted in research focused on the effects of megaherbivore extinctions, rather than solely exploring
the causes. This paper uses new dung fungal spore data alongside existing pollen and geochemical records from eight sites ranging
from the Great Lakes to the Gulf Coastal Plain to explore questions regarding both causes and effects of these extinctions, as they
relate to the early migration of humans into North America. The results reveal the complex interactions of climate change,
megaherbivores and their extinction, humans, and Terminal Pleistocene landscape change in the Eastern U.S.
Perrotti, Angelina [8] see Dozier, Crystal
Perry, Jennifer [160] see Hoppa, Kristin
Perry, Megan [80] see Taylor, Corinne
Person, Dylan (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Barbara Roth (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[6]
Shattering the Silicate Ceiling: Engendered Perspectives on Women’s Production Management in the Mimbres Mogollon
Almost 30 years have passed since Gero challenged lithic researchers to reformulate technological arguments in a more
appropriate framework than the hyper-masculinized version available at the time. Adopting this engendered view of the
archaeological record has resulted in significant advances in how we view past divisions of labor, especially when highlighting the
importance of women’s work in the past. Building on this direction, we draw on Pueblo ethnographic analogy to conceptualize
Mimbres Mogollon women as producers of finished goods and managers of raw materials brought into their village. This division of
labor correlates well with logistical organization seen in Archaic forager models, which show a similar patterning of men and
women’s tasks and spheres of productive control. Our study uses data from the Harris Site in the Mimbres Valley, NM where
increasing agricultural reliance resulted in a flexible but discernible division of gendered space. We examine artifacts from roofs,
floors, and other behaviorally significant contexts to identify instances of gendered manufacture and use of lithic tools. These data
are interpreted to provide an engendered view of material production at the Harris Site that provides a fuller picture of daily life in the
Mimbres Mogollon Late Pithouse period.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     437
Pestle, William (University of Miami), Carmen Laguer-Díaz (Valencia College), M. Jesse Schneider (University of Miami),
Megan Carden (HistoryMiami Museum) and Daniel Koski-Karell (National Institute of Archaeology, Washington DC)
[271]
The First Man Gets the Oyster, the Second Man Gets the Shell: Assessing Models of Marine-Based Subsistence in Pre-Arawak
Southwestern Puerto Rico
The Subtropical Dry Forest of southwestern Puerto Rico is home to numerous pre-Arawak sites, in particular shell-middens that
evidence centuries, and even millennia, of marine-based subsistence activities of the island’s first human inhabitants. In this work,
we compare the malacological assemblages from two pre-Arawak sites in the municipio of Cabo Rojo with predictions generated by
optimal foraging models of nearby marine habitats. This work aims to characterize the ecological and economic dimensions of
ancient foraging behaviors and decision-making in the region. The Ortiz site, located in the barrio of Boquerón, dates to ca. 2300–
1600 cal BC, while the CRNWR_P13 site, located 7 km south in Llanos Costa, is roughly a millennium more recent, dating to
between 800 cal BC and cal AD 100 . Deposits from both sites yielded abundant malacological remains (tens to hundreds of
kilograms of marine shell) from largely intact midden deposits. Our taxonomic, edible weight, and habitat-based analyses reveals
intriguing intersite differences (attributable to differences in chronology and/or nearby littoral habitats) and unanticipated evidence of
intrasite diachronic change in subsistence practice/preference. Tantalizingly, at least some of these changes may be a consequence
of behavioral adaptations to changing sea levels of the middle to late Holocene.
Peter, Duane (DP Heritage Consulting)
[154]
Discussant
Peters, Ann (University of Pennsylvania Museum)
[21]
Tracing Relationships over Time: Models of Exchange in the Greater Ica Region during the Paracas-Nasca Transition
Research on the ‘Paracas Necropolis’ textile assemblage from the Necropolis of Wari Kayan and comparisons with contemporary
artifacts has led to the development of models of artifact production and uses (chaîne opératoire), with evident implications for
models of the social relations of production. The processes considered include the procurement of component materials, the
acquisition of production skills, a diverse array of crafting practices, the pragmatic, social, and ritual uses of the artifact and its
final—or not so final—deposition in a cache or mortuary context. Relationships of form, both within and across classes of artifacts,
imply social contact and the exchange of ideas, labor, artifacts, and people. I look at intersections between these two analytic
approaches to develop a model of social relations of production and exchange that structured—and were transformed by—the
Paracas-Nasca transition.
Peters, Kara (Pennsylvania State University) and Briana Pobiner (Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History)
[76]
Creating a Standardized Method for Accurate and Precise Measurement of Butchery Cut Marks: Digital Caliper, Scanning Electron
Microscope, or Dino-Lite Microscope?
The use of reliable methods for metric analysis of bone surface modification are important in identifying the agent responsible for
these modifications. Butchery cut mark analysis has traditionally employed the use of calipers and the scanning electron microscope
(SEM), but recent expansion of this tool kit to more easily accessible tools, such as the Dino-Lite microscope, highlights the lack of
method standardization and welcomes critical analysis. This study assesses precision and accuracy (i.e., closest to the overall
mean of all data points) of digital calipers, SEM, and Dino-Lite as tools for two-dimensional measurement of cut marks, while also
taking resource availability and efficiency into consideration. Length and width of twenty-four conspicuous cut marks on twenty-four
experimentally butchered deer limb bones were repeatedly measured, with measurements taken from three subjects: bone, silicone
molds, and silicone casts. Results suggest that the SEM is most precise, and that while digital calipers performed similarly
regardless of subject, the use of molds significantly increases precision and accuracy for the Dino-Lite. When availability and
efficiency are considered and certain protocols are followed, including use of angled lighting and a sturdy microscope stand, we
advocate for the combined use of the Dino-Lite and molds.
Peterson, Kateea (CAMAS), Pamela Pascali (CAMAS, Idaho State University), John Dudgeon (CAMAS, Idaho State
University), Samantha Blatt (Idaho State University) and Amy Michael (University of New Hampshire)
[270]
Evaluating the Theoretical and Methodological Bases for Taphonomic Alterations in Biominerals
Physical and chemical alteration of bone in archaeological depositional context is a well-studied but poorly integrated field. Empirical
generalizations derived from inhumation experiments and descriptive archaeological studies have made major strides in producing
test explanations for alterations that can and do occur in buried bone, but understanding the mechanistic processes acting on
biominerals in a model-based framework is lacking. Here, we present a model-based approach for taphonomic alteration which
explores the influence of precisely controlled experimental parameters as proxy mechanisms (temperature, humidity, pressure, pH
and matrix composition) to measure the mode and tempo of diagenetic change in histological context. We apply this experimental
approach to modern human teeth from dental extractions and analyze the alterations by means of SEM-EDX, ATR-FTIR and LA-
ICP-MS to compare predicted and observed changes in tooth enamel and dentin within a simulated burial context. We employ a
geographic information system to visualize elemental uptake, incorporation and replacement through these dental tissues to create
representative maps of elemental diffusion. We will present a classification of taphonomic alteration for evaluating biominerals
recovered from archaeological and forensic contexts and to reliably distinguish diagenetic from biogenic histological processes.
[270]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     438
Peterson, Kateea [120] see Rakowski, Rebekah
Peterson, Ryan and Amy Johnson (IDNR-DHPA)
[167]
Bethel Cemetery Reburial, Agency, and Stakeholder Coordination
The Bethel Cemetery excavation required extensive coordination with a number of agencies. Both the Division of Historic
Preservation and Archaeology (SHPO) and the State Revolving Fund provided regulatory oversight. The scientific investigation was
completed under Section 106 of the NHPA and Indiana Code (14–21–1), which allows for the archaeological relocation of human
remains that predate January 1, 1940. While not specifically required under the law, extensive efforts were made to engage
descendants, veteran’s groups, the preservation community, and other interested parties. Outreach culminated with a rededication
ceremony at Concordia Cemetery, the new resting place of those interred in the Bethel Cemetery. The cemetery was reconstructed
in a compressed space, but remained respectful of family groupings. When possible, burials with monuments that were damaged or
buried were re-associated with the proper grave. In some cases, the identities of individuals in unmarked graves could be
determined. Graves of the unidentified were provided markers with unique identifiers that correspond with the report, so that in the
future family members and researchers will have access to the extensive information that was compiled for each burial. The project
resulted in extensive documentation and research while maintaining the utmost respect for the deceased.
Peterson, Ryan
[202]
Archaeological Site Preservation and the Impact of Noninvasive Archaeological Methods on a Global Scale
During the middle of the twentieth century, cultural resource management (CRM) emerged as a major industry worldwide.
Internationally, different counties took their own approach as to what this management would entail. In many countries, the creation
of the CRM industry led to an increase in invasive archaeological methods aimed at not only the salvage of archaeological sites, but
also to drive the surveying and recording of new sites. In order to aid in the increase in scale and productivity of this increase in site
excavation, CRM specialists around the world have turned to incorporating noninvasive methods. Improvements in technologies
surrounding remote sensing and spatial mapping have created both alternatives to physical excavations and more precise
excavations, with smaller amounts of physical disturbance to the archaeological record. This has allowed CRM specialists to monitor
and record vast heritage sites with little disturbance. The extent and diversity of noninvasive methods employed has varied in CRM
around the world. This paper utilizes interviews with CRM professionals from around the world to explore how these noninvasive
archaeological methods and techniques are influencing how CRM is being practiced in different countries. The paper also seeks to
highlight common trends in CRM worldwide.
Petras, Elysia (Temple University) and Leslie Reeder-Myers (Temple University)
[172]
Ethical Considerations of Using Museum Collections to Teach in a University Setting
Like many universities, the Temple University Laboratory and Museum houses ethnographic and archaeological collections acquired
from faculty research, private donors and donations from other museums. Each collection brings a unique set of concerns. This
paper presents on the ethical considerations of some of the collections, and how these are negotiated while using the collections to
teach in a university setting from the authors’ perspectives as both a student and an instructor. We specifically address issues
related to teaching with poorly catalogued collections, collections of indigenous materials or materials from vulnerable populations,
and legacy collections. Working under the constraints of limited resources, this presentation highlights teaching approaches which
balance value of student learning with responsibility to source communities and other relevant ethical concerns.
Petrie, Cameron (University of Cambridge) and Adam Green (University of Cambridge)
[48]
Cities, Towns, and Villages in the Diverse Environments of the Indus Civilization
The urban phase of South Asia’s Indus Civilization (ca. 2600–1900 BC) does not offer simple parallels to other contemporary
complex societies. This paper will present new insights into Indus settlement networks and the diversity of Indus urbanism. There
were apparently only four large scale (80+ha) Indus settlements, which were polycentric, with walls and platforms demarcating
distinct zones, and characterized by large- and small-scale public and private buildings, heterarchical social structures, communal
activities and collective action. These cities were considerable distances apart and situated in different ecological zones within the
greater region occupied by Indus populations, and the majority of the population appears to have lived in medium- and small-sized
rural settlements in the intervening areas. Significantly, it appears that urban and rural dynamics took different forms in each region,
and Indus cities and the relationships with their rural hinterlands transformed over time. There is evidence for different interactive
dynamics in “upstream” and “downstream” locations in the Indus River Basin, and settlement instability and population mobility
between sites situated in marginal areas characterized by unpredictable access to ground water. Change, displacement and mobility
all thus appear to have played important roles in the dynamism, transformation and longevity of Indus settlement networks.
Petrie, Cameron [272] see Bates, Jennifer
Petrie, Jacob (Veterans Curation Program), Sarah Janesko (Veterans Curation Program), Jasmine Heckman (Veterans
Curation Program) and Jessica Mundt (Veterans Curation Program)
[187]
Filling Gaps: The Legacy of Archaeological Archives
In this poster we examine how the archiving of documents at the Veterans Curation Program (VCP) related to legacy archaeology
collections owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers can fill in gaps that may have been left by incomplete analysis and reporting
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   439
or outdated methodology. Often the use of older archaeology collections can be at best intimidating and at worst impossible due to a
lack of coherent organization of notes, forms, maps, and other materials. While the VCP approaches the rehabilitation of
archaeological material as an act of preservation, preventing further loss of information, the rehabilitation methods employed for the
associated documents help to also conserve the material. Not only are the documents preserved and digitized for future researchers
to access, they are organized and categorized in a way that allows those collections to fill out a larger picture of an excavation or
data recovery project. While methods and standards for conducting archaeology may change, if there is a well maintained archive
associated with each excavation, archaeologists and historians of the future will be able to reverse engineer much of what was done
and perhaps make new discoveries or reinterpret the materials to shed light on the past.
Pettigrew, Devin
[69]
Variation and Distribution in Basketmaker Atlatls: A Typological Analysis
In the North American Southwest, prehistoric atlatls have been recovered from dry conditions and are associated with pre-Puebloan
Basketmaker culture. Basketmaker atlatls are characterized by a suite of traits that distinguish them from atlatls found elsewhere in
the Americas. Yet notable variation also occurs in extant Basketmaker atlatls. Patterns of similarity are noticeable both between
specimens found at the same site, and in atlatls found on either side of the Southwest. Other sites contain multiple types. This paper
presents an analysis of thirty three Basketmaker atlatls to develop a typological scheme of eight distinguishable types. Variability in
Basketmaker atlatls supports ethnic diversity, temporal change, and mobility of populations within and outside of the prehistoric
Southwest during pre-Pueblo times.
[69]
Chair
Peuramaki-Brown, Meaghan [178] see Longstaffe, Matthew
Pevny, Charlotte [17] see Smallwood, Ashley
Pfeiffer, Susan (University of Toronto), Judith Sealy (University of Cape Town), Lesley Harrington (University of Alberta),
Tim Maggs (University of Cape Town) and Emma Loftus (University of Cambridge)
[240]
A Late Holocene Community Burial Area with Evidence of Violent Death: Table Bay, Western Cape, South Africa
Over several decades, human skeletal remains from at least twelve individuals were recovered from a small area (ca. 10 x 10 m) on
the eastern shore of Table Bay, Cape Town, near the mouth of the Diep River. These skeletons of males, females, children and
infants date to 2020–1580 calBP (nine radiocarbon dates). Dietary and behavioral evidence indicates a foraging lifeway. Unusually,
several skeletons were interred with large numbers of ostrich eggshell (OES) beads; in some cases, careful excavation enabled
recovery of segments of beadwork. Two groups were interred in shared graves. One collective burial held items including an ostrich
egg-shell flask, a tortoise carapace bowl, a fragmentary bone point or linkshaft and various lithic artifacts. This group appears to
have died together and been buried expediently. A mid-adult woman from this group sustained peri-mortem blunt-force trauma to
her skull. This case adds to a developing picture of interpersonal violence among late Holocene foragers. All dates overlap but span
several hundred years. The locale appears to have been used by a community as a burial ground, either regularly for several
generations, or on a single catastrophic occasion, or some combination thereof.
Pfeiffer, Susan [171] see Hildebrand, Elisabeth
Phanomvan, Phacharaphorn (University of Oxford)
[48]
The Missing Big Picture: Settlement Size and Patterns in Western Mainland Southeast Asia during the First Millennium CE
How are cities distributed in Mainland Southeast Asia in the past? What were the estimated populations of these cities? Answering
these questions leads to an understanding of the long-term urbanization trends and patterns, as well as the historical legacies
associated with geographical effects on development. However, to date, there is no comprehensive record of spatially explicit,
settlement-level population data at a regional scale. I develop a dataset of cities and settlements across Myanmar, Thailand, and
Peninsular Malaysia in the first millennium CE by digitizing, transcribing, and geocoding archaeological records on settlements. This
research refines Southeast Asian data presented in the global series on population estimates developed by Chandler and Modelski
and addresses the data weakness mentioned by recent works from Reba, Reitma and Seto (2016). The dataset is the first to identify
the macro-pattern of settlement distribution in Southeast Asia. It identifies three unique instances across time and multi-polar
centers of agglomeration during the first millennium CE. Using the constructed dataset on settlement scale, I provide the first macro-
population estimates for the region. This serves to help refine analysis on drivers of growth and constraints on regional
agglomeration.
Phanomvan, Phacharaphorn (University of Oxford)
[110]
Moderator
[110]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       440
Phelps, Danielle (University of Arizona)
[263]
“Out of Sight, Out of Mind”: The Atypical Inalienable Objects of Tutankhamun’s Burial Assemblage
Tutankhamun, one of the last kings of the Eighteenth Dynasty of ancient Egypt (circa 1330 BCE), was buried in one of the most
intact royal tombs ever discovered in the Valley of the Kings. His burial assemblage is filled with many of the typical artifacts found in
Egyptian mortuary practices. However, three groups are atypical: childhood mementos, heirloom, and artifacts with the names of
Tutankhamun’s immediate family members. The purpose behind in their inclusion in the tomb is unknown. This presentation will
examine the atypical artifacts through the utilization of statistical analyses, such as the Chi-Square, and the anthropological theories
of memory works and secrecy to suggest that they are inalienable objects. They are a part of Tutankhamun’s burial assemblage
because of their connections to the tumultuous Amarna period. They were not destroyed because of their connection to the Amarna
period but instead were deposited in Tutankhamun’s tomb as a means to intentionally forget any association with Amarna or its
religion.
Phelps, Danielle [252] see Mayfield, Tracie
Phillips, Bruce, Erik Steinbach (Logan Simpson Design Inc.), Travis Cureton (Logan Simpson Design Inc.) and Craig
Fertlemes (Logan Simpson Design Inc.)
[79]
Evolving Hohokam Irrigation Strategies at La Plaza: A Multidisciplinary Approach
 Hohokam irrigation canals were first excavated in the lower Salt River Valley in the early Pioneer Period (AD 1–700), possibly as
early as AD 200 at Las Acequias in east Tempe. Substantial expansion of irrigation facilities occurred in the Sedentary Period (AD
900–1150) and continued into the Classic Period (AD 1150–1450). During this time, Canal Tempe was a large main canal serving
the site of La Plaza. The canal primarily irrigated land on an ancient terrace overlooking the Holocene floodplain. In recent
excavations on the Arizona State University campus, the main canal was expected but not found. Rather, two relatively large
main/distribution canals were discovered on the lower floodplain. Multiple analyses were conducted and data synthesized, showing
that the larger canal (Feature 9, late Preclassic to Early Classic periods) appeared to carry large amounts of water mostly during the
springtime. In contrast, the final channel of the smaller canal (Feature 12, late Classic Period) may have carried water year-round.
This finding suggests a major change in water intake and distribution strategy, from intermittent to sustained flow, late in the
Hohokam occupation.
Phillips, Bruce [175] see Franklin, Jay
Phillips, Emily (Northern Kentucky University)
[255]
The Interpretation Neutral Approach in Lithic Analysis
Even though lithic artifacts are arguably the most common human-produced objects in the archaeological record, methods for
maximizing their interpretive potential, although hotly debated, remain dramatically underdetermined. One problem is the chronic
practice of using interpretation-laden (I-L) units of analysis to describe and interpret lithic assemblage variability. In this presentation,
I illustrate how the interpretation-neutral (I-N) approach, introduced by Sullivan and Rozen, enables the development of unbiased
inferences about the behavioral sources of lithic assemblage variability. In updating and refining the I-N approach, I focus on surface
archaeological data from three different site types in the Upper Basin region of northern Arizona—masonry structures, lithic scatters,
and fire-cracked rock piles. Using I-N measures of artifact density, debitage-to-non-debitage ratios, biface-to-core ratios, and
Maximum Flake Area, I show that lithic assemblages associated with these three site types are the byproducts of more diverse sets
of technological activities than I-L models predict. This research demonstrates the advisability and practicality of using established
systematic, interpretation-free methodologies to determine the extent to which patterns of lithic assemblage variability are
attributable to broader patterns of technological production and mobility.
Phillips, Erin (Coastal Environments Inc.)
[47]
Moundville’s Hemphill Style Phases
The Hemphill Style (AD 1325–1450) is Moundville’s representational art style. Three styles phases (Early, Middle, and Late
Hemphill) have been defined for this style. Though originally defined for engraved pottery, Hemphill-style objects in other genres can
also be categorized into the three defined style phases. Other genres in the Hemphill Style include incised and painted pottery, shell
and copper gorgets, stone pendants, and stone palettes. Shifts in the style through time may reflect changes in social identity at
Moundville.
Phillips, Keenan
[234]
Landscape Domination and Social Stratification at Vulci
Vulci was an Etrusco-Roman city on the eastern coast of Italy. As an epicenter of trade, the port played a significant role in the
establishment of the Etruscan League. Excavations on the plateau and surrounding areas began in the nineteenth century, and the
discoveries of some of the more famous tombs occurred as part of the Grand Tour during this period. Many of these excavations
focused on the necropolis. A number of the tombs surrounding the ancient plateau are cut chamber tombs. However, there are three
tumuli in the surrounding area. The Cucamella is the largest tumulus in all of Etruria and is situated to the east of the plateau across
the Fiora river. It has been excavated at various times starting with Lucien Bonaparte in the early nineteenth century. This paper
discusses how the use of landscape archaeology through viewshed analysis shows that the tumuli would have been visible from all
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        441
parts of the plateau of Vulci. The view of the tomb was a way of securing memory of the individual through domination of the
landscape and could have acted as part of the process for developing social stratification that began to appear during the
Orientalizing period at Vulci.
Phillips, Lori (Washington State University), Erin Thornton (Washington State University) and Eleanor Harrison-Buck
(University of New Hampshire)
[14]
Ancient Maya Use of Fauna from the Wetlands and Beyond
Understanding how the ancient Maya interacted with wetland environments has been a topic of research for roughly 50 years.
Previous studies suggest these resource rich environments provided a diverse assortment of flora and fauna for the ancient Maya to
utilize. Wetlands provide an ideal environment for evaluating long held claims about the overall ancient Maya diet, which often
emphasizes a reliance on large-bodied terrestrial mammals like white-tailed deer and peccary with less emphasis on smaller,
wetland fidelic species. From 2015–2019, we investigated human-wetland interactions, targeting midden deposits from Maya
archaeological sites within the lower Belize River watershed where some of the largest tracts of wetlands are found in Belize. We
present zooarchaeological results from sites located proximate to these wetlands. Results suggest small-bodied aquatic animals,
particularly turtles, were a key component of the overall diet compared to terrestrial mammals. These data are further corroborated
by the presence of ceramic net weights recovered from these sites, which date to the Classic-Postclassic transition (ca. AD 800–
1200). This study offers insight into site-specific climate histories through swamp-fidelic fauna, which was still widely available in the
wetlands of Belize despite long-term drought conditions that characterize the climate histories across much of the Maya Lowlands.
Phillips, Natasha (Center for Archaeological Science, University of Wollongong), Zenobia Jacobs (Center for
Archaeological Science & ARC Centre of), Brain Jones (School of Earth, Atmospheric and Life Sciences) and Alex Mackay
(Center for Archaeological Science, School of Earth)
[11]
Gaining Contextual Control: Incorporating a Geoarchaeological Approach into South African Late Pleistocene Landscape Research
South African open-air archaeology is growing in recognition as a valuable source of Late Pleistocene information on human-
environment interactions. More studies are pursuing a landscape-scaled approach that seeks to move beyond the rock shelter-
dependant perspective. However, few open-air studies are dedicated to investigating the depositional and erosional phenomena
involved in landscape formation, despite their known influence on the spatio-temporal distribution, visibility, and movement of
discarded surface artifacts. This study involved a geoarchaeological investigation of a high-visibility, high-density archaeological
surface in the semi-arid Doring River valley, an interior landscape located in the Eastern Cederberg of South Africa. The typo-
technological composition, spatial distribution, and temporal signal of surface artifacts were investigated in relation to the
sedimentological, geomorphological, and chronometric composition of underlying deposits. Results show that the spatio-temporal
distribution of exposed artifacts is primarily a function of a landscape’s depositional history, geomorphology, and sedimentological
composition. Moreover, Holocene aridification coupled with historic farming practices have exposed older deposits, increasing
artifact visibility and erosion. By employing a geoarchaeological approach this study demonstrates the coevolution of archaeological
and landscape formation, emphasising the need for the incorporation of both into Late Pleistocene open-air studies to improve
landscape-scale inferences made between open-air and rock shelter contexts.
Phipps, Raymond [259] see Bridgman Sweeney, Kara
Phon, Kaseka [28] see Hendrickson, Mitch
Pierce, Daniel [39] see Breault, Sarah
Pierce, Daniel [39] see Crawford, Dawn
Pierce, Daniel [150] see Crider, Destiny
Pierson, Arielle [254] see Kassabaum, Megan
Piezonka, Henny (Christian Albrechts University Kiel, Germany), Birte Ahrens (Deutsche Sporthochschule Köln, Germany),
Sampildonov Chuluun (Mongolian Academy of Sciences), Martin Oczipka (University of Appliied Sciences Dresden,
Germany) and Jonathan Ethier (Christian Albrechts University Kiel, Germany)
[62]
Abandoned Cities in the Steppe: Roles and Perception of Early Modern Religious and Military Centers in Nomadic Mongolia
Towns and cities have been an integral part of the Mongolian nomadic society for more than a millennium, and abandoned urban sites
from various periods dot the land, inscribing memories of lost empires and long-gone alliances into the cultural landscape. The relation
between sedentary urban and mobile pastoralist life ways has constituted a key cultural, economic and political factor in one of the
major pastoralist formations in Eurasia. The era in which most modern Mongolian cities are rooted is the period of Manchu rule in the
seventeenth to early twentieth centuries. Subsequent political developments led to the abandonment or forced destruction of many of
these urban focal points. Our project will study lost cities of this influential period of Mongolian history to solve the conundrum behind the
sociocultural, economic and political dynamism associated with these religious and military urban centers. In an innovative
interdisciplinary approach, the study combines archaeological, historical and ethnographic methods to trace the entanglement of former
significance, historical perception and current roles and interpretations of abandoned Manchu period urban settlements.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 442
Pike, Jean (ARC)
[197]
The Thingness of Networks: The Architecture of Integration in Classic Period Pueblos the Galisteo Basin
It has been argued that, prior to European contact, the eight large Classic period pueblos of the Galisteo Basin—which share a
watershed and could each be accessed by another in less than half a day’s walk—developed a political organization that resembled
a confederacy (Haas, 1997). Site layout has been identified as a means to access inferences about social organization (Cordell,
1996) and kinship practices (Ware, 2018) and recent research proposes integrative economies in the Northern Rio Grande,
neighboring the Galisteo Basin, that were afforded in part by architecture and settlement strategies (Ortman, 2019). The research
presented here asks whether architectural evidence supporting an integrative organizational model existed in the Galisteo Basin.
Analysis of room block orientation accessed from lidar data that was correlated with early twentieth century maps prepared by Nels
Nelson for the American Museum of Natural History form the basis of the research—direction being seen as key components of a
connective Puebloan world view. How evidence from this research corresponds with architectural strategies employed by builders at
Chaco Canyon is considered. Do these strategies represent an attempt to reinstate a not well understood Chaco-like system or,
alternatively, to innovate a new mechanism of social integration (Cordell, 1996)?
Pike, Sabrina (Hamilton College), Nathan Goodale (Hamilton College), Alissa Nauman (Hamilton College), Colin Quinn
(Hamilton College) and Anna Prentiss (University of Montana)
[5]
Procurement and Human Utilization of Fine-Grain Volcanic Rocks in the Interior Pacific Northwest: Case Studies of Arrowstone Hills
Source Material Use at the Slocan Narrows and Bridge River Sites
Sourcing lithic raw materials allows archaeologists to better understand the organization of stone tool procurement, human mobility,
and trade and exchange. This poster presents the results of analyses of the chemical composition of lithic artifacts from two villages
in interior British Columbia–Slocan Narrows and Bridge River. Communities at these sites used raw materials including fine-grain
volcanic rocks originating from the Arrowstone Hills Volcanic Complex. This high quality dacite material was optimal for use because
it is resistant, sharp, and durable. Using pXRF, we document the distribution of Arrowstone Hills raw material across the region from
Bridge River to Slocan Narrows. The results allow us to explore different procurement models and how people obtained and
distributed this raw material across the Interior Pacific Northwest.
Pilaar Birch, Suzanne [27] see Hadden, Carla
Pilles, Peter
[92]
Discussant
Pineda, Daniel [121] see Alvarado, Jazmin
Pineda de Carias, Maria-Cristina (National Autonomous University of Honduras), Vito Véliz (Instituto de Arqueoastronomia
y Patrimonio Cultura) and Ricardo Agurcia Fasquelle (Instituto de Arqueoastronomia y Patrimonio Cultura)
[130]
Estelas y calendarios de la Plaza del Sol de Copán, Honduras
Presentamos un estudio arqueoastronómico del patrón de distribución espaciotemporal de las Estelas C, F, 4, H, A y B que
Waxaklaju’n U B’aah K’awiil colocó en la Plaza del Sol de Copán, Honduras, entre 9.14.0.0.0 y 9.15.0.0.0. Para este trabajo
realizamos observaciones astronómicas en la Plaza del Sol entre 2000 y 2010; y un análisis cronológico, secuencial e integral de la
ubicación, orientación y distribución de cada estela interpretando posibles técnicas de observación astronómica que se utilizaron
para seleccionar su número, lugar y disposición del arreglo. Encontramos que, para celebrar las principales divisiones del catorce
k’atun e inicio del siguiente coincidente con un nuevo Tzolkin, se siguió un programa de celebraciones conjuntas de la Cuenta
Larga y la Rueda Calendárica. Encontramos también que, la localización y distribución de las estelas revela la existencia de dos
calendarios solares horizontales, uno de salidas y otro de puestas, en los que cada estela es un marcador direccional que señala
eventos importantes del año solar, lo que interpretamos pudo ser el propósito de la conformación del arreglo. La iconografía de las
Estelas H y A fortalece nuestra interpretación de que el arreglo responde a un patrón de señalamiento permanente del haab y el
Tzolkin.
Pink, Christine [169] see Kolb, Michael
Piño, Mariela [224] see Murphy, Beau
Pinta, Elie (Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne / UMR 8096)
[50]
Woodworking Strategies in Norse Greenland: Resources, Production, and Trade Patterns
Used in construction and boat building, for domestic productions or as a fuel resource, wood was a key material for medieval North
European societies. Several studies have been conducted on the topic of wood use in Scandinavia, the British Isles and the North
Atlantic islands, and all demonstrate the wide variety of objects that can be unearthed when preservation conditions are good. The
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       443
goal of this paper is to present recent research carried on wooden artifacts used by the Norse Greenland inhabitants in order to
better understand and retrace the origin and circulation of wood resources in the Norse Greenlandic society, located in an area of
climatic margins, at the border of the Scandinavian world. I will also focus on the social lives of the wooden artifacts, looking into the
“chaîne opératoire”—how were they made and what were they used for. What was the nature of the Norse Greenlandic society
woodworking strategies and management and should it be understood in terms of cultural dynamics or adaptive strategies when
compared to other case studies from the Norse world?
[50]
Chair
Pintar, Elizabeth (Austin Comm. College) and Maria Fernanda Rodriguez (CONICET-Instituto Nacional de Antropología y
Pensa)
[125]
Plant Dependency and Risk Management Strategies in the Andean Puna
The archaeology of the Puna, a high elevation desert in South America, gives us a long-term perspective on the role of plants during
the last 10,000 years. Through the study of macrobotanical remains we explore the impact of aridification on the use of edible plants
in the diet of desert people. Our goal is to ascertain the variation/change in plant dependency over time, in particular in the light of
drought conditions around 6000–3000 BP that characterized the Middle Holocene. Ethnographic projections appear to suggest a
higher dependency on gathering than on hunting for most of this period; however, the macrobotanical record of edible wild plants
seems to indicate the opposite. By contrast, the reliance on domesticated plants during the last 2,000 years, which was a period of
lesser aridity, suggests the introduction of edible plants from other ecological areas—such as corn—and other plants—like quinoa—
that may have been grown locally. This would have been accompanied by an increase in social interaction with areas lying beyond
the boundaries of the Puna as a means of providing food security to populations whose subsistence depended mainly on camelid
pastoralism.
Pinto Lima, Helena (Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi, Brazil)
[161]
OCA—Culture, Origins, and Environment: Archaeological Collaborative Research in the Lower Xingu
The project investigates the historical ecology of a poorly studied area: the confluence of the Xingu and Amazon Rivers, in the lower
amazon region. By investigating distinct lines of archaeological evidence on a regional scale, it addresses, as an underlying
research theme, the relationships among environmental factors, material culture, and human groups. From a diachronic perspective,
it highlights the forms of human-environment interaction with particular interest in understanding the processes of formation and use
of the anthropogenic soils; the creation of cultural forests; and the stylistic interactions of material culture. The project is based at the
Goeldi Museum in Belem/Para/Brazil and involves several archaeologists, anthropologists, historians, biologists, geographers and
several students. We will present results from field and labwork done since 2014, including the regional chronology, questions of
territoriality, use of space and landscaping, both in the precolumbian indigenous past, interactions resulting from the complex
colonial history of this region as well as some aspects of today’s ribeirinhos culture. It is developed in full collaboration with the
inhabitants of Gurupá, making the knowledge construction a shared experience.
[161]
Chair
Pinto Lima, Helena [161] see Wright, David
Pinto Lima, Helena [161] see Wyatt, Andrew
Pitblado, Bonnie (University of Oklahoma)
[31]
Discussant
Pitblado, Bonnie (University of Oklahoma)
[43]
Moderator
Pitblado, Bonnie (University of Oklahoma)
[88]
Discussant
Plank, Shannon (University of Kentucky), Scott Hutson (University of Kentucky), Barry Kidder (University of Kentucky) and
Iliana Ancona Aragón (Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán)
[128]
Protoclassic Household Growth and Community Transformation in Yucatán
Recent excavations in northwestern Yucatán, Mexico, have recovered settlement pattern, architectural, ceramic, and artifactual
evidence that documents Protoclassic political and economic transformations mirroring those noted in the southern lowlands during
the Preclassic to Classic transition. During this period, the city of Izamal became the capital of a polity that encompassed an area of
about 6,000 km2, which itself exhibited considerable local complexity. The present paper examines Protoclassic household
dynamics at Ucí and Ucanha, two key sites in the ambit of Izamal that constitute, at the same time, a sacbe-linked micro-polity of
their own. Our data show that the Late Preclassic was a time of remarkable demographic growth at both sites, and that household
inequality increased during this critical time period. Several lines of evidence also suggest competition between emerging factions,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     444
which transpired in domestic contexts and took a variety of forms, including feasts and innovative political pageantry. This
competition may have had the unintended consequence of partial settlement abandonment. The paper compares these findings to
patterns that are emerging from household archaeology in the Southern Maya Lowlands.
Plattner, Paige (University of Montana), Meradeth Snow (University of Montana), Aleksandar Kostic (Harvard University)
and Marsha Wibowo (Harvard University)
[173]
Diet-Breadth Analysis in the Southwest: Comparison of Metabarcoding and Shotgun Sequencing Methods with Coprolites
The ability to capture diet-breadth from the archaeological record can be potentially biased due to lack of preservation. Several new
techniques have been developed to study this further through genomic coprolite analysis. Samples from sites across the Southwest
have been analyzed with two different techniques in order to aid in establishing a better baseline for the pros and cons for
archaeologists looking to study past diets. This research quantifies and compares the results of the economical metabarcoding
(PCR-based NGS sequencing) and deep HiSeq shotgun sequencing methods for future collaborating archaeologists and molecular
anthropologists. Maize was a dietary staple in the Southwest, but the full breadth and extent to which the population was dependent
on crop yield is unclear across time and space. The sites selected for analysis on coprolites from dry caves allow for a cross-cut of
time and region in order to better estimate the timing and extent of the introduction of maize, and other components to the diet in the
Basketmaker/Pueblo periods. The use of aDNA techniques provides a pathway to study and potentially quantify the breadth of flora
and fauna consumed by the past inhabitants of the Southwest.
Platz, Lorelei [157] see Dennett, Carrie
Plekhov, Daniel (Brown University) and Parker VanValkenburgh (Brown University)
[242]
Defining Form and Function of Agricultural Terraces in the Middle Utcubamba River Basin, Chachapoyas, Peru
From as early as the Early Intermediate Period (~200 BCE) to the modern day, agricultural terraces have been constructed
throughout the Andes for the cultivation of a wide assortment of crops and have served distinct environmental and ecological
functions. Despite the longevity and variability of Andean terracing, the majority of archaeological research on these agricultural
systems has focused on southern Peru, particularly on stone-faced bench terraces dating to the Inca period (fifteenth–sixteenth
centuries CE). While these kinds of terraces are widespread throughout the Andes, they differ markedly from the agricultural
terraces found in Chachapoyas on the northeastern slopes of the Andes. There, many terrace systems are earthen, ridge-and-
furrow, and lack subdivisions or associated irrigation systems. This paper reports on three years of archaeological excavation,
survey, and remote sensing aimed at mapping and studying these terrace systems throughout the Middle Utcubamba River Basin.
We examine the placement of these terrace systems relative to factors such as solar insolation, soil temperature, wind patterns,
hydrology, slope, and altitude to investigate their agricultural and ecological functions and how these vary throughout the region. Our
results highlight the variability of terrace systems and call for a more comparative and diverse study of Andean terracing.
Plets, Gertjan (Utrecht University)
[221]
The Hidden Impact of Everyday Routines: How Do “Mundane” Digital Infrastructures Shape Archaeological Subjectivities and
National Identities
The politicization of the past is often associated with the operationalization of captivating myths rooting the nation to its ancestral
homelands. Although it is true that both authoritarian and democratic governments promote their agendas through strong
statements in the media, or by appropriating archaeological sites and artifacts as part of their nationalistic portfolio, at the same time
seemingly invisible bureaucratic procedures and practices are also entangling archaeologists with the identity policies of the nation
state. This paper will specifically study how digital e-governance platforms administering excavation permits, on-line archives, and
digital research infrastructures (national archaeological databases) can encourage archaeologists and historians to think in specific
national terms or accommodate specific understandings of archaeology. We will base our analysis into the sociality of digital
knowledge infrastructures on findings from Flanders (Belgium). Using a combination of methodologies from ethnography and digital
humanities we have studied how digital infrastructures maintained by the national Flemish cultural heritage institution has changed
the dispositions of practitioners on the ground and encouraged them to think in Flemish terms about the archaeological past. A
comparison with Europeana, a European digital heritage platform will be made to explore the the politics and ethics of digital
heritage.
Plevniak, Kelly (University of Minnesota)
[120]
Temperature and Temper: Analysis of Organic and Inorganic Tempered Clay through FTIR
Ceramics play an important role in pyrotechnological industries, such as metallurgy, and often they are the only evidence we find of
a production site. Given the complexity associated with smelting and casting metal, the tools used for this process i.e., furnaces and
crucibles, which are made of ceramics, have certain performance requirements in order to operate effectively. This experiment
focuses on one such performance requirement, thermal shock resistance, but more specifically in context of early Anglo-Saxon
metallurgy. This experiment does this by looking at the effect specific inclusions (chaff and sandy quartz) have on enhancing the
durability of ceramics that were fired at different temperatures and tempered in varying percentages. Clay tiles were created and
fired, the heated tiles were quenched in room temperature water, and visual changes, as well as the porosity of the tiles, were
recorded. Porosity appeared to be affected by temper and percentage in small amounts. Visual evidence such as cracks and
fractures were not as easily patterned. The tiles will be ground and prepared into small pellets for FTIR (Fourier-Transform Infrared)
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     445
spectroscopy. The results will be compared with special attention paid to the quartz peak across temperatures and tempers in order
to gauge vitrification.
Plog, Stephen (University of Virginia)
[98]
Discussant
Pluckhahn, Thomas (University South Florida)
[135]
Discussant
Pluckhahn, Thomas [29] see Wallis, Neill
Plumlee, R. Scott (Gila River Indian Community, Cultural Resource Management Program), Kyle Woodson (Gila River
Indian Community, Cultural Resource Ma), Craig Fertelmes (Gila River Indian Community), Chris Loendorf (Logan
Simpson) and Steven Forman (Baylor University)
[229]
Mind the Gap: Absolute Dating of Middle Gila River Canals provides Evidence for 1,500 Years of Continuous Irrigation Agriculture in
the Phoenix Basin
Evidence suggests that the first irrigation canals along the Middle Gila River were built by at least the Vahki phase ca. AD 450, and
the construction and use of canals continued throughout the remainder of prehistory. Canal systems are also a prominent part of the
historical lifeway of the Akimel O’Odham who live in the Hohokam core area today, with reported examples from at least the
eighteenth century through today. Until recently, most researchers have assumed a gap existed between the presumed end of canal
construction around AD 1450, and the canals that were historically documented in the early 1700s. However, recent Optically
Stimulated Luminescence dating of canal deposits within the Gila River Indian Community include dates that bridge the assumed
gap between the archaeologically documented prehistoric canals and the historically reported canal systems. The continuity of
dating suggests that the various iterations of these systems have been in continuous use for at least 1,500 years. This possibility is
supported by additional lines of evidence including O’Odham traditional knowledge and continuity in material culture along the
Middle Gila River.
Plunket Nagoda, Patricia [119] see Torres Porras, Alicia
Pobiner, Briana (NMNH, Smithsonian), Laurence Dumouchel (Indiana University) and Jennifer Parkinson (University of San
Diego)
[27]
A New Semi-Quantitative Method for Identifying Carnivore-Specific Bone Damage Patterns
Hypotheses of hominin scavenging from different felid species have been proposed, but the ability to distinguish between the
taphonomic patterns inflicted by different felid species in the fossil record is currently underdeveloped. Previous efforts to identify
taxon-specific taphonomic patterns inflicted by felids, which have largely focused on tooth marks, have not yielded promising results.
As a Dienje Kenyon Memorial Fellowship recipient in 2000, Briana Pobiner’s research project was focused on identifying carnivore
taxon-specific bone damage patterns. Here, Pobiner and two co-authors build on her earlier work by presenting a new low-cost, low-
tech, semi-quantitative method for coding carnivore-inflicted gross bone damage patterns, including a visual guide to different levels
of bone damage inflicted on different skeletal elements and portions. A blind test of this method by three experienced taphonomic
analysts indicates that this method is easy to use and results in consistent data across analysts. We also apply this method to
quantify the intensity of damage that free-ranging African lions inflicted on zebra bones as a first step in identifying felid-specific
taphonomic signatures.
Pobiner, Briana [76] see Peters, Kara
Poister, Nicholas (National Park Service) and Laura Baumann (National Park Service)
[137]
Bighorn Sheep (Ovis canadensis) Bone Caches in the Lava Tube Caves of El Malpais National Monument, New Mexico
The rugged volcanic landscapes of El Malpais National Monument contain over 400 lava tube caves, some of which harbor the most
southerly perennial ice in North America. Many of the caves also house the material record of precontact human use in the form of
internal architecture and ceramic and other artifacts. Caches of bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis) bones, a species now extirpated
from the area, are a reoccurring feature. Some of the caches are deposited in the deepest and most inaccessible chambers of the
caves. Early twentieth-century ethnographies note a Puebloan prohibition against damaging the bones of game animals during
butchery and cooking as these were designated to be placed on a special shrine. Among the Zuni, this shrine was located within a
cave. The El Malpais bone caches may represent evidence of this ritual practice in antiquity. This would link the remains with a
wider ceremonial pattern documented throughout Mesoamerica and still performed today as far south as the Guatemalan highlands.
Alternatively, recent Park Service consultation with neighboring Pueblos suggests that ice caves formerly had a pragmatic function:
the cold storage of meat. Zooarchaeological and spatial analyses shed light on the relative merits of these two explanations.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     446
Pollack, David (Kentucky Archaeological Survey) and A. Gwynn Henderson (Kentucky Archaeological Survey)
[190]
Win-Win: Volunteers and the Kentucky Archaeological Survey
Since the early 1970s, Kentucky archaeologists have actively engaged the general public, avocational archaeologists, and collectors
in archaeological research. Through this interaction, numerous unknown and undocumented sites have been recorded, and looting
activity has been reported at sites like Slack Farm in Union County. Avocational archaeologists have made significant contributions
to our understanding of Kentucky’s past by preparing site reports and by publishing journal articles and books, like Rock Art of
Kentucky, alone or with professionals. Since its founding more than 25 years ago, the Kentucky Archaeological Survey has
continued this tradition. The Survey counts volunteers and volunteerism as a significant element of its mission of research,
education, and service. Volunteers come in many forms and from many walks of life. They volunteer for a host a very personal
reasons. This paper considers the role volunteers have played and continue to play in the success the Kentucky Archaeological
Survey has had in meeting its mission. Archaeology for and by the public is perhaps American archaeology’s greatest contribution to
our nation’s cultural heritage.
Pollack, David [129] see Manzano, Bruce
Polo y La Borda, Martin [242] see Baitzel, Sarah
Pompeani, Katherine (University of Pittsburgh)
[35]
Using Multiscalar Patterning to Identify Social Relationships in a Large Bronze Age Cemetery
Geographic Information System (GIS) technology is an important tool for examining social relationships in large horizontally
stratified cemeteries. This study applies GIS-based cluster analysis to identify multiscalar patterning at the Early Bronze Age Maros
cemetery at Ostojićevo, Serbia. Three successive scalar clusters were identified: (1) primary clusters; (2) secondary clusters within
primary clusters; and (3) peripheral burials. Graves to the south exhibited a linear distribution along a south-north axis whereas
graves to the north followed a circular clustering pattern. The potential social significance of these statistically derived clusters was
assessed using demographic (e.g., age-at-death, sex) and mortuary (e.g., treatment, offerings) data. While there is limited evidence
of spatial patterning among mortuary variables, near analysis of mean grave distance shows differences among age-at-death and
sex cohorts. Notably, subadults (<15 years-at-death) were buried significantly closer to both subadults (F = 44.78, p < 0.001) and
adult females (F = 11.02, p < 0.001). These observations tentatively support a pattern of close-kin clustering, specifically sibling
groups or mother-child pairs. At the level of the cemetery, primary clusters likely reflect extended kin networks or lineages crosscut
by social factors (e.g., gender, status).
Pomstra, Diederik [199] see van Gijn, Annelou
Ponce, Jocelyne (Tulane University), David Chatelain (Tulane University) and Marcello Canuto (Tulane University)
[130]
Ancient Maya Rural Lifeways and Regional Integration at La Corona, Guatemala
Ancient Maya rurality has been typically defined on the basis of sparse settlement density in relation to adjacent denser urban
centers. This fails to define the characteristics of rurality as a lifeway and the means by which regional landscapes were articulated.
In this paper we discuss data from the rural settlement cluster of El Jobillo and the ceremonial center of La Cariba to define the
practices that characterized rurality in the region of La Corona in northwest Petén during the Early and Late Classic. We argue that
there were differences in practices and access to resources in ‘rural’ locations in comparison to denser ‘urban’ zones in the sparsely
populated region of La Corona. Additionally, we discuss the economic, ritual and social practices that articulated populations across
the landscape throughout the Classic period.
Pool, Christopher (University of Kentucky) and Michael Loughlin (Cardno)
[102]
Reconstructing Population Histories in the Gulf Lowlands: Review and Prospect
Over the past three decades the Gulf Lowlands of Mexico have witnessed an explosion of systematically collected archaeological
survey data. The Gulf Lowlands, however, present particular challenges for the collection of data, reconstruction of local population
histories, and comparison among datasets within and beyond the region. These include (1) a dynamic geomorphology of
meandering rivers with deep alluvial valleys interrupted by a historically active volcanic range with variable depths and distributions
of ashfall strongly affect the preservation and surface visibility of archaeological features; (2) variable groundcover, including large
areas of sugarcane production with low, dense, foliage that seasonally can frustrate lidar detection as well as surface visibility; (3)
varying pedestrian survey and collection strategies; (4) an archaeological record containing accretional residential platforms large
enough to have supported multiple residences and documented areas of non-mounded occupation; and (5) application of widely
divergent assumptions in estimating and comparing population sizes. In this paper we critically review approaches to collecting and
interpreting population history data in the southern and south-central Gulf lowlands, compare pedestrian and lidar-aided survey data
recently collected in the Eastern Lower Papaloapan Basin and suggest ways to reconcile and compare population histories derived
from diverse datasets.
Pool, Christopher (University of Kentucky)
[126]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     447
Pool, Kelly (Metcalf Archaeological Consultants Inc.)
[56]
Elizabeth Ann Morris: From Dishwasher to Digger to Professor
Liz Morris (1932–2012) grew up surrounded by artifacts and archaeologists as the daughter of Earl and Ann Axtell Morris, renowned
Southwestern and Mesoamerican archaeologists. She launched her own archaeological career in 1951 when she attended field
camp at Pine Lawn, NM, where dishwashing and cataloguing were her main duties. Following a University of Arizona MA (1957)
and four summers at Point of Pines field school, where she served as the only female dig foreman, she became U of A’s first female
anthropology PhD (1959). She discovered a love of teaching and, in 1970, became Colorado State University’s first female
archaeologist. Liz ran CSU’s field school for 15 years, conducted pioneering research, and trained now-influential archaeologists
until her retirement in 1988 as a full professor. Her career demonstrates women’s increased acceptance in the profession from the
mid-twentieth century onward. Liz’s “female firsts” mattered less to her, however, than her achievements as an archaeologist,
educator, and mentor.
[56]
Chair
Pool, Marilen [258] see Bisulca, Christina
Pope, Melody, April Sievert (Glenn A. Black Laboratory of Archaeology, Indiana) and Terry Harley-Wilson (Glenn A. Black
Laboratory of Archaeology, Indiana)
[172]
Broken Links in the Chain of Custody
Few things are more exasperating than not having a clear chain of custody for archaeological collections. Compliance with the
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) is not the only regulation or situation that requires establishing
ownership and recognizing that just because you may be in possession of something, does not necessarily mean you own it. Think
of the hours spent sorting out collections resulting from compliance archaeology, past and present, searching vainly in a field report
for the wording that tells you the clear owner, or that spells out transfers to a curation facility. Likewise, many donated collections
come without a deed of gift. We explore, from the perspective of curation and registration, the legal and ethical tangles faced by
museum and curation staff when they attempt to repatriate, coalesce separated collections, affect transfers, accession, or de-
accession materials.
Popovici, Catherine [109] see Granados, Rosario
Porcayo Michelini, Antonio [170] see Des Lauriers, Matthew
Porter, Keri (Mississippi State University), Kaelyn Olson (Mississippi State University) and Andrea Lopez (Mississippi State
University)
[147]
Free Photogrammetry: The Accuracy and Applicability of Open-Source Software
Photogrammetry is a technique that creates a 3D model from 2D images. Photogrammetry is currently being used in archaeology to
create models of artifacts, structures, excavation profiles, and burials with almost unlimited applications. Although the use of
proprietary software may be related to the general user-friendliness and accessibility, the cost can still be substantial and restrictive.
The use of open-source photogrammetry software can make 3D imaging more available to students and researchers who struggle
with funding. To examine the usefulness and accuracy of open-source software compared to proprietary software, models of a skull
cast were made using Meshroom (open-source) and Agisoft Metashape (proprietary). These models were then compared using the
open-source software, CloudCompare. Results indicate that although the proprietary software provides more customization,
optimization, and support during modeling, the open-source software still provides high quality models. For example, models can be
edited in Agisoft Metashape, but models made in Meshroom must be edited externally with an additional software. Application of this
research can increase access to affordable photogrammetry software and 3D modeling. However, more resources are available for
training in proprietary software. Future projects will focus on creating instructional texts and videos for open-source photogrammetry
software.
Porter, Mark
[150]
Caching Aggrandizers: An Analysis of Preclassic Maya Caches at Cahal Pech
The deposition of dedicatory and termination caches in architecture is of great antiquity in Mesoamerica, extending from Preclassic
times into the Colonial period. Many Preclassic caches were placed in a manner that reflects the orientation of the cosmos.
Researchers have argued that placing cosmologically arranged caches in relation to monumental architecture served to animate a
building’s’ life force, and also to bolster the power and prestige of aggrandizing individuals in early stratified communities. This
poster examines similarities and differences in Preclassic caching and the relationship of caching to the development of inequality.
Using recently excavated deposits from Cahal Pech, Belize, this research compares previously excavated dedicatory caches across
the Maya lowlands to determine any statistically significant results to support the interpretation of dedicatory caches as forms of
aggrandization.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   448
Portman, Katherine, Sherri Middleton (Tierra Right of Way Services), Galen McCloskey (Tierra Right of Way Services) and
Sarah Page (Bureau of Land Management)
[148]
Predicting Site Distribution on the Arizona Strip
The region known as the Arizona Strip lies between Utah’s southern border and the Grand Canyon. Although it was inhabited for
millennia, the pre-contact culture history of the Arizona Strip remains relatively enigmatic compared to other areas of the American
Southwest. During the 2019 field season, a team of cultural resources specialists from Tierra Right of Way Services performed two
Class III survey projects in the region on behalf of the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). The survey covered over 8,000 acres of
BLM land and included hundreds of previously unrecorded sites in two areas: one north of Grand Canyon-Parashant National
Monument and one west of the Kaibab Plateau. Based on these site data, we performed a qualitative assessment of land-use
patterns based on geology, soil type, slope, aspect, and proximity to potential water sources. We then created a predictive model to
calculate the probability of an Archaic, Ancestral Pueblo, or historic site occurring in a given area. Actual site locations were
compared to the model in both project areas to test its effectiveness. This model could drastically increase the efficiency of future
data collection in the Arizona Strip and aid in understanding the motivating factors behind pre-contact settlement.
Porubcan, Paula (Illinois State Archaeological Survey), Paula Bryant (Illinois State Archaeological Survey), James
Meierhoff (University of Illinois, Chicago) and Artur Stasiek (University of Glasgow)
[160]
Preservation on Public Lands: Chicago’s CCC and WWII German POW Camps
Metropolitan Chicago contains 70,000 acres of public green space owned and managed by the Forest Preserve of Cook County
(FPCC). This is the largest forest preserve district in the United States, with 40 million visits each year. Along with over 620 recorded
archaeological sites, the Preserves also contain the remains of three Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) camps, all of which were
later repurposed as WWII German Prisoner-Of-War branch camps of Fort Sheridan. Camp Skokie Valley, in particular, was one of
the largest CCC Camps in the United States, housing over 2,000 men. As publicly held resources, it is important that research and
preservation efforts are guided by community interest and support. Community partners include FPCC resource managers,
professional archaeologists, local residents, local historical societies, and graduate student researchers. This presentation will
highlight the archaeological and architectural components of Camp Skokie Valley; results of archival research, fieldwork, and public
engagement efforts accomplished thus far; and future plans for continuing research within the camps as well as collaboration with
researchers working on similar sites and issues across the United States.
Porubcan, Paula [213] see Meierhoff, James
Postemski, Megan (University of Pennsylvania)
[213]
Improving Their Lot: Frontier Settlement and Landscape Change in Maine
Frontiers have traditionally been portrayed either as ripe for settlement and replete with resources, or as rugged and dangerous
peripheries where pioneers struggled to adapt. Given factors ranging from harsh winters to warfare, the latter portrayal dominates
narratives of America’s Eastern Frontier during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. My work interrogates these notions of a
largely intractable frontier environment by examining how and to what extent Euroamericans modified the Downeast Maine region
through settlement and enclosure. Assessing enclosure—the continuous bounding and cultivation of the landscape—is especially
important because it structured frontier life and because it manifests in physical landscape features (e.g., stone walls, fields). While
today forests obscure traces of Maine’s agrarian past, archival evidence helps reveal how patterns of settlement and enclosure
became writ large on the landscape. Using historic tax valuation data from nine towns, I trace changes in the land by farmstead,
regionally, and over time. The data indicate that enclosure proceeded unevenly across frontier towns, complicating negative
portrayals of frontier life and highlighting how pioneer activities and decision-making became embedded in the landscape.
Posth, Cosimo [244] see Ferraz da Silva, Tiago
Pott, Laura (University of Oklahoma), Rita Austin (University of Oklahoma), Andrea Eller (Department of Biological
Anthropology, National Mu) and Sabrina Sholts (Department of Biological Anthropology, National Mu)
[242]
Population-Level Assessment of Cranial Modification and Atlanto-Occipital Fusion across Nine Regions of Peru (1300–1500 CE)
This study examines the distribution of atlanto-occipital fusion (AOF), a rare spinal anomaly, across nine regions of prehispanic Peru
in order to investigate the relationship between cranial modification and presence/completeness of AOF. Cranial modification
involves the use of wraps or pads to mold infants’ cranial bones into shapes that signal social identity. Cranial modification occurs
alongside AOF in a sample of 1407 Peruvian individuals held at the National Museum of Natural History, are dated to 1300–1500
CE. AOF, the partial or complete fusion of the first cervical vertebra (atlas) and occipital bone, arises from congenital or
environmental causes. For example, the restriction of movement associated with cranial modification may influence AOF by
changing the way the atlas bears the skull’s weight. AOF has been previously described in prehispanic Peru but has not been
directly linked to cranial modification. AOF was observed in four coastal regions, two of them previously unreported, and it occurred
at a significantly elevated rate in Ica. Chi-square analyses show there is not a significant correlation between cranial modification
and presence/completeness of AOF. Genetic or environmental conditions along the coast may be further explored as factors
shaping this geographical and population distribution of AOF across Peru.
Potter, Ben [82] see Gillispie, Thomas
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     449
Potter, Ben [82] see Reuther, Joshua
Potter, Bethany (University of Kansas), Caroline Kisielinski (University of Kansas), Justin Tackney (University of Kansas),
Dennis O’Rourke (University of Kansas) and Frederic Sellet (University of Kansas)
[244]
Bloody Sharp Rocks: Optimization of aDNA Extraction from Experimental Lithic Artifacts
Species detection using DNA recovered from lithic artifacts could indicate the manner in which tools were utilized and ultimately
enhance our understanding of the mobility strategies and subsistence patterns employed by past peoples. Geneticists and
archaeologists in the 1980s and 1990s managed to successfully extract DNA from lithics, using both modern experimental tools and
lithic artifacts from archaeological contexts. These methods have seen little revision, despite advancements in ancient DNA (aDNA)
technologies over the past decade. Researchers can now successfully sequence aDNA from bone, wood, and sediment, and these
same advancements might allow the recovery of aDNA from lithic artifacts. In this study we implement updated aDNA extraction
methods on a set of modern stone tools, which we previously used to process lamb remains and subsequently buried, to identify
methodological conditions for successful species detection.
Poulin, Mairead (University of Arizona)
[79]
Access, Visibility, and the Social Landscape: The Chevelon Steps Petroglyphs
Archaeological examinations of petroglyphs and pictographs primarily seek to interpret ancestral imagery using an iconographic
lens. Considered far less frequently is the influence of environmental context and landscape placement on the meaning of these
images. Given the strength of the ethnographically-documented relationships between the continent’s ancestral Native populations
and the landscapes they inhabited, this methodological gap is particularly noteworthy in the study of North American rock art. In an
analysis of the Chevelon Steps in northeastern Arizona, I examine the distribution of the site’s 3,000+ petroglyphs from an
iconographic and geospatial perspective. Drawing from previous work on petroglyph viewership, I operationalize the intended scales
of access and visibility for each petroglyph in terms of their placement within the site’s landscape. I then compare iconographic and
publicity trends across the site to determine which factors vary most significantly. Results of this analysis, in tandem with ancestral
ontologies surrounding the site’s environment, suggest the locational contexts of the petroglyphs may influence their roles in the
site’s social landscape more strongly than their iconographic designs. These findings articulate the need for an increased adoption
of landscape archaeology methods in the interpretive study of North American rock art.
Powell, Allie (Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis) and Jeremy Wilson (Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis)
[167]
Children of the Gilded Age: Juvenile Age Estimation and Fertility Approximation for the Bethel Cemetery
Bioarchaeological analyses of the Bethel Cemetery have provided a unique opportunity to understand population dynamics in
central Indiana during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. With over 40% of exhumed individuals classified as juveniles,
the cemetery can be characterized as being derived from a once-living population with high fertility rates. However, making
inferences about fertility and growth requires careful consideration of skeletal samples’ inherent biases and potential methodological
shortcomings. In particular, the methods selected to estimate age-at-death for juveniles can have significant impacts on subsequent
proportional measures of fertility and childhood survivorship, resulting in disparate reconstructions of demographic patterns. Our
study examines two widely utilized methods for estimating age-at-death via tooth crown and root development. We employ both
methods and then compare how each affects the proportional measures used by archaeologists to estimate fertility and childhood
survivorship. The dental age estimation methods resulted in two significantly different survivorship curves and had a variable impact
on the proportional measures of fertility. Our results indicate that researchers need to be cognizant of the structure of their skeletal
sample, make informed decisions regarding age estimation techniques, and consider the applicability of differing fertility estimation
techniques when attempting to reconstruct past population dynamics.
Powell, Evelyn (Harvard University), Zachariah General (Chiefs of Ontario), Stephen Tsuji (University of Waterloo),
Konstantin Latychev (Harvard University) and Leonard Tsuji (University of Toronto)
[252]
Akimiski Island, Nunavut, Canada: The Use of Cree Oral History and Sea-Level Retrodiction to Resolve Aboriginal Title
On April 1, 1999, Akimiski Island of the western James Bay region was included in the newly formed, Inuit-dominated territory of
Nunavut, Canada. Only the Omushkegowuk Cree, however, have ever asserted Aboriginal title to Akimiski Island. By their action −
or inaction − the Government of Canada has reversed the onus of responsibility for proof of Aboriginal title from the Inuit to the Cree.
In this work, we documented and employed oral history to demonstrate that Cree traditional use and occupancy of Akimiski Island
was “sufficient to be an established fact at the time of assertion of sovereignty by European nations” (INAC, 1993; p. 5; INAC, 2003;
p. 8). In particular, we used state-of-the-art historical sea-level modeling to retrodict the timing of the emergence of Akimiski island,
an emergence story prominent in Cree oral history. This work demonstrates that all criteria of the Canadian common law test for
proof of Aboriginal title with respect to Akimiski Island are met. Thus, the Cree have sufficient basis to initiate the process of a formal
land claim.
Powell, Evelyn [162] see Borreggine, Marisa
Powers, Michael [9] see Wholey, Heather
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     450
Powis, Terry (Kennesaw State University), Gary Owenby (Kennesaw State University) and Matthew Tarleton (Kennesaw
State University)
[197]
Middle Preclassic Maya Public and Domestic Architecture at Pacbitun, Belize
Investigations in Plazas A and B of the site core at Pacbitun indicate that initial occupation began in the early Middle Preclassic
period (900–600 BC). At this time, a small agricultural community was established in Plaza B beginning with a few domestic
structures built just above bedrock. These early domiciles would also function as workshops for the production of marine shell
beads. During the late Middle Preclassic (600–300 BC), the size of the community in Plaza B expanded five-fold, with rectangular-
shaped platforms replacing the early apsidal structures and the shell bead industry intensifying significantly. It is during this period
that two large ceremonial platforms were erected at the site. While these buildings represent the first two monumental constructions
at Pacbitun, their unique physical and spatial attributes say much about their distinct identities as they relate to each another and to
the domestic structures of Plaza B. The purpose of this presentation is to detail these distinct identities and discuss what each might
tell us about the residents living and working in Plaza B. Comparative data from other sites will be utilized to see how Pacbitun fits
within the broader Mamom sphere sweeping across the lowlands.
[197]
Chair
Powis, Terry [130] see Micheletti, George
Powis, Terry [197] see Skaggs, Sheldon
Pratt, Jordan (Texas A&M University)
[195]
Hasketts and Crescents: A First Look at the Lithic Tool Analysis from Weed Lake Ditch, Oregon
Several Paleoindian open-air sites with buried stemmed point technology have been discovered in the Harney Basin, southeastern
Oregon. These sites provide a unique way to expand on our current understanding of Western Stemmed lithic technology and
subsistence practices from the late Pleistocene and early Holocene. The research presented here focuses on new results from
Weed Lake Ditch, a site located on the relict margins of pluvial Lake Malheur. Previous excavations at Weed Lake Ditch recovered
seven Haskett-style stemmed points, six crescents, a bone needle, stone pendant, bone bead preform, and many non-diagnostic
stone tools and faunal remains. This assemblage corresponds favorably with Younger Dryas-aged occupations throughout the
northern Great Basin; unfortunately, no precise radiometric evidence has been obtained from the site and previously the association
between the stemmed points and crescents was not well understood. Over the course of the 2019 field season, additional Haskett
points were found in direct association with crescents, preforms, and another bone needle. This paper reviews the spatial
distribution and analysis of stone tools recovered during the 2018 and 2019 field seasons in order to explore lithic technological
organization at the site.
Pratt, Jordan [75] see Juptner, Derick
Pratt, Lauren and Anna Guengerich (Vanderbilt University)
[6]
Examining the Stone Tools of Late Prehistoric Chachapoyas, Peru, through Microscopic Use-Wear
Compared to other material types such as ceramic, metals, and textiles, the lithics of later Peruvian prehistory remain poorly
understood. This is in part because, outside of certain elite or ceremonial contexts, these assemblages tend to be relatively small
and technologically informal. Here, we employ low-power microscopy (8–80 x magnification) to search for use-wear on the lithics of
four ceramic period sites in the Amazonas Region of northern Peru. The relatively small size of the combined assemblages (n=354)
allowed for microscopic examination of all lithic artifacts, including debitage. Use-wear was found on 25 artifacts from the sites of La
Joya and Bóveda. The majority of these were debitage without macroscopic retouch, which otherwise would not have been
identified as used tools. These results provide an additional line of evidence for subsistence activities at these sites, suggest that
stone may have remained a useful material for everyday household tools throughout multiple period of later prehistory, and highlight
the need for additional attention to and analysis of stone artifacts throughout all periods of Peruvian prehistory.
Pratt, William (University of Texas, Austin)
[201]
The Quilotoa Hypothesis: Post-disaster Cultural Change and Resilience among the Cara
The Quilotoa eruption, with an estimated VEI of 6, was one of the most devastating eruptions in Ecuadorian prehistory, spreading
ash over most of the country and producing broader global impacts that are still poorly understood. Quilotoa was one of several
large eruptions that took place between about 1250 and 1300 AD ejecting vast quantities of aerosols into the atmosphere potentially
kickstarting a polar ice buildup that led to the Little Ice Age. In the northern highlands of Ecuador, climatological data indicates that
significant cooling and drying followed the eruption and the raised field system of agriculture practiced widely in the region was
largely abandoned. It is from this context of disaster and changing climate that Cara culture flourished, building some of the most
impressive architectural features in all of Ecuadorian prehistory and eventually developing a level of social complexity that allowed
them to unite in resistance against the most powerful precolumbian empire for at least a decade. The Cara peoples’ rapid transition
from devastation to dominance after Quilotoa represents both significant adaptation and resilience. This paper explores the possible
connections between the immediate and long-term effects of the Quilotoa eruption and the rise of the Cara.
Pratt, William [201] see Martal, Clementine
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     451
Prebble, Matthew [124] see Ladefoged, Thegn
Prendergast, Eric
[3]
Finding Fort Brooke’s Other Cemetery, Tampa, FL
Before Tampa became a town, it was the site of an important U.S. Army installation on the coast of the sub-tropical frontier, in early
nineteenth-century Florida. Founded in 1824, Fort Brooke played a central role in the settler-colonial conquest of American Florida,
during the Jacksonian Age. At its height in the 1830s, over 4,000 U.S. troops lived there. But all traces of the fort, including two
known cemeteries, were subsequently lost beneath the streets of growing Tampa, as the city expanded in the twentieth century.
One of the fort’s cemeteries was discovered in 1979, but the second cemetery remained lost for the next four decades, sealed
somewhere beneath the hardtop and skyscrapers. This paper presents the discovery of Fort Brooke’s second cemetery, the Estuary
Cemetery. The paper addresses the archival research and mapping methods that were used to develop a predictive model, and the
excavation techniques that were applied to test the model in the crowded urban environment. The paper describes drone
photogrammetric modeling of the entire site, and an ongoing program of research designed to address this important archaeological
resource.
Prendergast, Eric [193] see Moates, Jeffrey
Prentiss, Anna [5] see Pike, Sabrina
Preucel, Robert (Haffenreffer Museum, Brown University)
[112]
Discussant
Preucel, Robert [41] see Laluk, Nicholas
Prewitt, Elton
[16]
Painted Pebbles of Southwest Texas: Archaic Proto-Kachinas?
Painted pebbles found in the Lower Pecos River region of southwestern Texas and northern Mexico typically are viewed as objects
used in curing, healing and, especially, female rituals. In broader terms they are associated with increase rituals similar to the
functions of kachinas in the American Southwest. I explore the possibility that painted pebbles may represent an Archaic proto-
kachina tradition.
Price, Douglas [173] see Nakatsuka, Nathan
Price, Kyra [221] see Bush, Dominic
Price, Neil (University of Uppsala)
[50]
Women . . . and Weapons? Debating Viking Age Gender in 2020
From September 2017 until today, discussion has continued around the reinterpretation of a Viking-Age chamber grave from the
island settlement of Birka in Sweden, argued to be the burial of a female warrior (a project with which I am closely involved). For
decades now, academics have recognised the problems, and potentials, of using mortuary behavior and the excavated, material
evidence of funerary practice to reconstruct the living identities of the buried dead. In full awareness of this, archaeologists and other
scholars often claim to seek a pluralistic view of the early medieval past, one that acknowledges diversity and rejects prejudice; this
applies especially to the arena of gender, in its widest sense. But are they, are we, succeeding? This talk will briefly review the
interpretation of the Birka burial Bj.581, but primarily aims to reflect on the wider state of gender studies relating to the Viking Age,
as illuminated by the research team’s experiences during the ensuing controversies.
Price, Seth [35] see Smith, Alexander
Prieto, Gabriel (University of Florida)
[174]
At the Dusk of Chavin: Social, Economic, Political, and Ideological Implications as Viewed from a Fishing Settlement in the North
Coast of Peru
Recent progress in the refinement of absolute dates recovered at the ceremonial and pilgrimage center of Chavin de Huántar is
helping to reconsider the regional effects of the Chavin Sphere of Interaction in the North Coast of Peru. This new data suggests
that Chavin de Huántar was occupied for about 500/400 years. Although the nature of Chavin de Huántar is still elusive for the
Moche Valley, thanks to recent excavations in Huanchaco it is possible to evaluate the social, economic, political and ideological
post-effects left by the Chavin phenomenon in this north coast valley. Current excavations provided important domestic, ceremonial
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    452
and burial contexts associated with the post-Chavin occupation in the Huanchaco bay which is summarized here as: a) the size and
complexity of the residential settlement; b) emergence of local elites; c) local ritual practices; d) long-trade exchange networks and
e) subsistence patterns, as a proxy for the study of cultural change and as indicator of environmental challenges during that period.
Prieto, Gabriel [174] see Comeca Ramirez, Gianina
Prieto, Gabriel [174] see Rivera Prince, Jordi
Prignano, Luce [48] see Fulminante, Francesca
Primeau, Kristy (NYS DEC)
[25]
Current Trends in Archaeoacoustics
In recent years, archaeological research has trended toward the exploration of the experiences of past people, particularly through
engagement with the senses, seeking new methodologies and associated theories to develop this understanding. Sounds and
auditory experiences occurred ubiquitously throughout time and within all cultures. Current research approaches to
archaeoacoustics, psychoacoustics, soundscapes, and archaeomusicology are as variable as the sonic hypotheses that can be
explored. The importance of what was and wasn’t heard in the past is approached through a variety of methods including: subject-
centered-survey, on-site experimentation and recording, reproduction or playing of instruments, and computer aided modeling such
as Virtual Reality or Geographic Information Systems approaches. Theoretical approaches such as affordance theory, performance
theory and phenomenology situate our methods and task us to delve deeper, considering how auditory experiences conferred
connotations of power or contributed to the formation of individual and group identities. This paper serves as an introduction to the
papers being presented within the symposium “Archaeoacoustics: Sound, Hearing, and Experience in Archaeology,” and presents a
general overview of the field of archaeoacoustics by reviewing commonly employed methods and theories.
[25]
Chair
Primeau, Kristy [25] see Bement, Leland
Primeau, Kristy [25] see Richards-Rissetto, Heather
Prince-Buitenhuys, Julia (CA Dept of Water Resources)
[153]
Discussant
Priola, Victoria (University of Iowa), Margaret Beck (University of Iowa), Luis Benítez de Lugo (Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid) and Katina Lillios (University of Iowa)
[35]
Vessel Form and Paste Recipe: Ceramics from Castillejo del Bonete, Spain (2465–1565 cal BCE)
Castillejo del Bonete is a monumental ceremonial site dated between 2465–1565 cal BCE (Copper and Early Bronze Age) in the La
Mancha region of central Spain. Although sometimes associated with motillas, sites in the region with monumental wells built to
access underground aquifers, contemporary with Castillejo del Bonete’s Early Bronze Age use, this site is not a motilla as it does
not have a well. The architecture of Castillejo del Bonete is unique, and the full range of activities that took place is unclear. The
burials found at the site indicate that it served as a home for the dead, and the orientation of its monumental corridors aligned to the
solstices suggest important ritual practices. However, a wide array of ceramics found at the site suggests additional activities may
have also taken place. To better understand the nature of the site, characterizations of vessel forms and analyses of paste recipes
for a sample of ceramics collected by surface survey were undertaken. Paste recipes and inclusions were studied for variations both
within and between identified vessel forms. These variations will be used to explore functions, production methods, and possible
source areas for the raw materials.
Pritchard, Erin [193] see Malo, Erika
Pritchard, Erin [60] see Simek, Jan
Prociuk, Nadya (University of Texas, Austin)
[108]
Silver against Skin: Exploring the Materiality of the Cividade de Bagunte Torques
Among the most dazzling traces of behavior left behind by the Castro people of the Cividade de Bagunte in northwestern Iberia are
the five silver torques discovered together in a hoard in the mid-twentieth century. The items in the Bagunte hoard share stylistic
similarities with other Castro torques, but their material, silver rather than gold, marks them as unique in the corpus of Castro
ornaments. Torques manifested a complex network of behaviors and values for the Castro people, and in this paper I aim to
untangle the dense significance of these items of personal adornment. I will discuss the Bagunte torques as the particular material
manifestations of economic and social forces expressed with technological finesse. I will also explore the social and symbolic work
enacted by these objects, including their potential roles in social negotiations, ritual performances, and the formation, maintenance,
and negotiation of personal and corporate identity.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         453
Proenza, Joaquín [246] see Weber, Marion
Proulx, Benoit (University of Sheffield), Michalis Gazis (Hellenic Ministry of Culture & Sports) and Peter Day (University of
Sheffield)
[196]
Preservation and Adaptation: Potters and Pottery Traditions at Teichos Dymaion
The Late Bronze Age of the Central and Eastern Mediterranean shows rich evidence for contacts between different regions. A key
element in understanding these mobilities is the appearance of handmade burnished pottery (HBW) in Mainland Greece, Crete and
Cyprus in the late thirteenth century BCE, seemingly transplanted into areas using high quality wheelmade finewares. Debate has
centered on whether HBW represents a mode of production reflecting social and economic collapse, the influx of foreign workers, or
indeed a slave class. Here, HBW is approached by the concept of pottery traditions, to produce a localized understanding of pottery
production, rooted in both technology and style. This facilitates the study of parallel ways of doing and explores their interaction, as
potters engage in processes of adoption, adaptation, or rejection. This case study is based on the HBW from Teichos Dymaion,
Greece, a major harbour offering the first landfall for maritime traffic from Italy, often cited as the origin of this type of pottery. Using
thin section ceramic petrography to investigate diversity reveals how this seemingly foreign pottery evolved in the northwestern
Peloponnese, and how potters adapted to their new environment, with the context of neighboring local pottery traditions.
Prout, Michael (CSULA)
[137]
Maya Sacrificial Practices in Caves: It Isn’t Just Men Captured in Battle
There are two types of ancient Maya human sacrifice. The first is when people are sacrificed in association with important
communal events including changes in political power, victories in battle, and the deaths of important community members. The
victims of these types of sacrifice are most often viewed as men based on models developed in the late twentieth century. However,
recent investigations of Maya caves have found much more evidence supporting the other type of sacrifice—offerings to the gods
for favorable reciprocations, such as the end of a devastating drought or the improvement of the community’s health. Studies at both
the Osario Infantil and the Cenote Sagrado at Chichen Itza as well as Midnight Terror Cave in the Cayo District of Belize imply
children were sacrificed to propitiate the gods in petitions for rain and this ritual was a regular occurrence. This paper will discuss the
evidence found in caves for both models, particularly in regard to child sacrifice, and the implications of this evidence on the
understanding of Maya ritualistic practices.
Prouty, Michael [147] see Johnen, Connor
Prufer, Keith [270] see Alsgaard, Asia
Prufer, Keith [7] see Lemly, Marina
Prufer, Keith [233] see Ray, Erin
Prufer, Keith [29] see Thompson, Amy
Psoma, Aikaterini (University of Illinois, Chicago) and Zarko Tankosic (Norwegian Institute at Athens)
[199]
Craft Production and Exchange in Prehistoric Greece: New Results from the Chipped Stone Assemblages of Southern Euboea of
Southern Euboea
Recent archaeological projects provide new data on the prehistory of Southern Euboea in Greece, a key location that bridges the
Aegean islands and the Greek mainland. During the transition from the Neolithic to the Bronze Age (late fifth-fourth millennium BCE)
numerous transformations occurred across the region that altered settlement dynamics and resulted in a dramatic increase in the
complexity of exchange networks and in specialized craft production. We discuss preliminary results from the technological and
typological analyses of prehistoric lithics recovered by the Norwegian Archaeological Survey in Karystia (NASK) and the Gourimadi
Archaeological Project (GAP) in Southern Euboea. The study of these lithic assemblages shows differential dynamics and
centralization among prehistoric settlements, providing us with new clues regarding the use and procurement of lithics in the area.
We will use these clues to determine the different types of production that took place at specific sites; to infer exchange and
distribution mechanisms; and to understand the role of these prehistoric sites in the lithic exchange network of Southern Euboea
and the southern Aegean Sea.
Puckett, Neil (Texas A&M CSFA)
[238]
The Walker Lake Landscape: Combining Geophysical Studies to Clarify Regional Change and the Archaeological Record
The high desert basin surrounding Walker Lake, NV, has been subject to multiple landscape shifts since the lake reached its Late
Pleistocene highstand, 15,679 cal BP. Research has identified at least four lake transgression and regression events postdating
5000 BP, and after its nineteenth-century historic highstand, the lake has fallen roughly 50 m. These changes reveal a complex
fluvial and lacustrine system that past human populations would have adjusted to and exploited in a variety of ways. At times people
had the opportunity to make use of a large waterbody and swift river filled with cutthroat trout, while at others the local resources
would have been limited by a shallow, saline lake fed by an intermittent stream. To better understand the variability of this
landscape, this paper details new research identifying geophysical and geomorphic data found on the basin’s terrestrial landforms
as well as underneath the modern lake. This research helps reveal the basin’s past landscapes. Combined with the presence of
archaeological sites found across the Walker Lake basin, these data help to clarify past behavioral adaptions and suggest a strong
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     454
potential for site preservation below the lake’s waters in buried, datable contexts.
Puente, Nicholas (Loyola University Chicago) and Philip Arnold (Loyola University of Chicago)
[150]
An Analysis of Inequality at Late Formative Households in Southern Veracruz, Mexico
This research poster presents an analysis of archaeological information from La Joya and Bezuapan, two late Formative Period (ca.
400 BC-AD 100) sites in southern Veracruz, Mexico. The study focuses on the ways in which wealth inequality is manifested in the
archaeological record; wealth is defined here as the total of desirable factors including relational, embodied, and material that
provide value. An analysis of systematic coring data in addition to information derived from in-field excavations provides insight into
wealth inequality across households at the two sites. These data are interpreted using an economic measure known as the Gini
index. The Gini index assesses the cumulative distribution of percentile values in reference to an assumed constant. This measure
is increasingly applied to archaeological sites, and this poster seeks to provide another useful and comparable archaeology example
of the Gini index’s utility. This analysis will also provide additional information relevant to the study of Formative Period societies
along the Mexican Gulf lowlands.
Puértolas, Carlos (UNAM.), Maria Vázquez-de-Ágredos-Pascual (Departament d’Historia de l’Art, Universitat de Va) and
Linda Manzanilla (Instituto de Investigaciones Antropológicas)
[10]
La tecnología del color en Xalla: Instrumentos, materias primas y procesos de manufactura
El color es uno de los elementos característicos de Teotihuacan, tal y como refleja la rica policromía expresada en soportes como
la arquitectura y su pintura mural o la cerámica estucada y pintada. Sin embargo, poco se conoce sobre cómo se elaboraba color
en la ciudad Clásica del Centro de México (150/200 -650 dC) ¿Qué materias primas se utilizaban? ¿Cuáles eran las mezclas?
¿Cuáles eran las herramientas y pasos de su cadena operativa? Los diversos útiles de lítica pulida recuperados en Xalla han
permitido conocer un poco más sobre diversos aspectos de la tecnología del color en la urbe mesoamericana. A partir de la
combinación de arqueometría, arqueología e historia del arte, se ha logrado identificar los principales compuestos de la paleta
pictórica de Xalla y se ha propuesto una cadena operativa para elaborar pigmentos dividida en cuatro pasos, desde el desbastado y
limpieza de los minerales hasta el molido y mezcla de los diferentes compuestos que se utilizaron para embellecer las esculturas,
los pisos y los muros de este complejo palaciego teotihuacano.
Punzo Díaz, José Luis (Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia), Jakob Sedig (Harvard University), Alejandro Valdes
(Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia) and David Reich (Harvard University)
[173]
First Results of the “Proyecto de investigación de poblaciones antiguas en el norte y occidente de México”
Genomic analytical techniques have matured enough to be able to address long-standing archaeological questions about the
interaction and migration of ancient populations that inhabited the North and West borders of Mesoamerica, as well as the American
Southwest. With that in mind, we established a collaborative binational project between INAH and Harvard University. Our aim is to
understand the degree of the phylogenetic relationship between the populations of the West and North of Mexico and American
Southwest between the years 600–1500 CE. This paper provides initial results of the collaborative project between 20
archaeologists and Reich Laboratory geneticists. These results address how and when the populations of Western and Northern
Mexico moved across the northern border of Mesoamerica. We assess the impacts of these population movement on ancient
Mexican and the American Southwest groups. We also provide an overview of the project’s research design and collaborative
efforts between Mexican and American researchers.
Punzo Díaz, José Luis [198] see Martínez Vázquez, Dante Bernardo
Putnam, Shanda [240] see Blatt, Samantha
Pyburn, Karen Anne (Indiana University)
[226]
LARPing Archaeological Research Ethics
Real-world situations are too complex to debate as though there were only two opposing opinions on a research dilemma. To
expose students to the complexity of decision-making, I incorporate live action role play (LARP) into my classroom. My purchase of
a LARP online that concerned government infiltration of an activist group worked, but lacked direct applicability to archaeology.
Next, I assigned a class to produce their own LARP based on a dissertation with serious ethical problems. The results of this
experiment have implications for engaging a broader audience more deeply than assigning a typical suite of ethics-oriented texts.
Pye, Jeremy (Cultural Resource Analysts Inc.)
[240]
Modeling the State of Health: Building a Multidisciplinary Framework for Bioarchaeology
Scholars in various disciplines, including epidemiology, ecology, public health, anthropology, geography, and sociology, have
attempted to better understand the various influences on human health. Many of the studies coming out of epidemiological,
biological, and public health disciplines put forth explanatory models for disease outbreaks that focus largely on biological risk
factors to health and are hierarchical or directional. Medical geographers and other environmental scientists, interested in health
problems, typically focus more on climate and geographic patterns of disease. Similarly, sociologists and anthropologists tend to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    455
focus heavily on cultural or social factors on health patterns. Many of these approaches focus on only certain aspects of health or
risk factors, while ignoring or simplifying the complex interpretations between factors in the overall state of health. Bioarchaeology
allows for scholars to extend interpretations of the state of health to past populations, but in order to accomplish this effectively,
researchers must build and apply a multidisciplinary framework so as to present a holistic model of the state of health in the past.
Quackenbush, William (Ho-Chunk Nation)
[96]
Discussant
Quates, E. W. Duane (USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service) and Charlotte Cable (Michigan State University)
[185]
At the Intersection of Archaeology, Conservation, and Policy: What We Can Learn from W. C. Lowdermilk
W. C. Lowdermilk, PhD, the first Assistant Chief of the Soil Conservation Service (SCS; now the Natural Resource Conservation
Service [NRCS]) in 1938–1939 conducted an 18-month study through several countries culminating in the 1953 publication of
“Conquest of the Land through 7,000 Years,” which relies on archaeological evidence to argue that the lack of soil conservation was
the catalyst for the fall of many empires and civilizations. In so doing, Lowdermilk solidified the purpose of the SCS and the
justification of the Soil Conservation Act. Lowdermilk observes that agriculture is the foundation for civilization and since agriculture
requires healthy soil, it follows that soil conservation is required for civilizations to survive. Lowdermilk draws extensively on
interviews with archaeologists and on his own research to argue that civilizations rise or fall based on their (mis)management of
soils. He provides numerous examples of cities and states in the Near East, Asia, and Africa that collapsed or were indelibly marked
by the effects of soil erosion, salinization, siltation, and sedimentation, as well as provides ancient examples of successful soil
conservation. The authors evaluate Lowdermilk’s argument, his evidence, and his conclusions to ask, “What role does archaeology
play in natural resource conservation policy?”
Quave, Kylie [242] see Hoover, Corey
Quezada, Osiris (UNAM) and Grégory Pereira (ArchAm-CNRS)
[20]
Las fuentes prehispánicas de dacita de la región de Zacapu Michoacán: El análisis del complejo de “Las Minas”: Métodos y
técnicas de extracción
Durante las actividades más recientes de prospección en la zona de Zacapu Michoacán, en el Proyecto Uacúsecha, se tres
identificaron complejos prehispánicos de minas-taller al noreste de la cuenca, emplazados sobre dos antiguas coladas volcánicas
de dacita. El empleo de la dacita como materia prima para la manufactura de instrumentos líticos se ha registrado en sitios de la
región desde la fase Loma Alta (100 a C al 550 dC) hasta la fase Milpillas (1200 a 1450 dC), y los artefactos se han localizado en
contextos domésticos y funerarios. El desarrollo de un estudio específico y orientado en el análisis de estos complejos mineros, nos
ha permitido no sólo documentar las trazas físicas de la remoción sistemática de piedra, sino también caracterizar tales evidencias,
y con base en ello, determinar la existencia de diferentes métodos, las técnicas empleadas en la extracción y los indicios de las
fases iniciales de la cadena operativa. Nuestra exposición se enfoca en los métodos de extracción registrados y las evidencias y los
indicios relacionadas con la organización espacial, con énfasis en el complejo “Las Minas”, en el cual hemos hecho un estudio
profundo y sistemático de prospección, verificación LIDAR y excavación.
Quilca, James [268] see Silva Sifuentes, Jorge
Quilter, Jeffrey (Peabody Museum, Harvard University)
[106]
Discussant
Quinn, Allen [222] see Freund, Kyle
Quinn, Colin [253] see Goodale, Nathan
Quinn, Colin [35] see Hayes, Vivienne
Quinn, Colin [35] see Langston, Jada
Quinn, Colin [5] see Pike, Sabrina
Quintana Moranes, Eréndira [22] see Welker, Martin
Quintus, Seth (University of Hawaii at Manoa)
[226]
Deconstructing Ecological Narratives and Reconstructing the Relevance of Archaeology by Centering Ecological Inheritance in
Education
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  456
Ecological transformations are a hallmark of education in the life science. The narratives employed in these disciplines frequently
lack the historical perspectives archaeologists provide, using conceptual frameworks that discount or limit the impacts of human
land use across deep time. When archaeological data are employed in classrooms, too often the narratives built are used as
cautionary tales of what could happen to us in the future, creating separation between what people did in the past and our
understanding of the contemporary environment. Even though archaeology has sought to increase its relevance, undergraduate and
graduate students are rarely able to articulate how archaeological research can help solve or understand contemporary problems. I
argue that the relevance of archaeology is enhanced through the use of the ecological inheritance concept as a central theme in
archaeological education. The concept of ecological inheritance allows teachers and students to question or deconstruct ahistorical
themes of ecological education, such as forest succession and biological invasion, while at the same time linking the past and the
present in a tangible way. This is especially important in island environments where contemporary landscapes clearly illustrate the
importance of ecological inheritance.
Quiroz, Carlos (St. John’s College/Maya Research Program), Lara Sanchez Morales (UT Austin), Timothy Beach (UT
Austin), Samantha Krause (Texas State University) and David Lentz (University of Cincinnat)
[206]
Lidar and the Birds of Paradise North Platform: A Gateway to Understanding the Canal and Field Complexes of the Ancient Maya
The Birds of Paradise fields is a system of extensive wetland canal and field complexes at the eastern base of the Rio Bravo
escarpment in northwestern Belize. The Birds of Paradise (BOP) North platforms were discovered while ground verifying lidar
imagery of rectilinear features in the palmetto and tall grass savanna along the Rio Bravo. The imagery did not show these
platforms, but rather indicated a north-south linear feature, perhaps a causeway, spanning the savanna across the Rio Bravo to the
riparian forest along the eastern edge of the BOP wetland canal and field complexes. Small scale excavations and mapping of these
features began in 2017. This paper presents the geoarchaeological contexts, including the surrounding midden-mounds and canal
complexes, and macrobotanical, faunal, geochemical, stratigraphic, and wood findings. The focus of this discussion is one platform
in particular that lies near the northeast edge of the BOP wetland field network, 2.5 km east of the Postclassic site of Akab Muclil at
the north end of the possible causeway. This paper discusses the recovery of a wide range of artifacts, macrobotanicals of many
wetland species, and wooden posts in an excellent state of preservation.
Quiroz, Itzel (University of Oregon), Richard Rosencrance (University of Oregon), Katelyn McDonough (Texas A&M
University) and Justin Holcomb
[66]
Younger Dryas Eyed Bone Needles, Spurred Gravers, and Activity Areas at the Connley Caves (35LK50), Oregon
Eyed bone needles are found in association with spurred gravers at Paleoindian sites throughout North America. These artifacts
provide a unique insight into past forager technological activities and daily life during the Late Pleistocene. University of Oregon
excavations have recovered 10 bone needles with associated gravers and abraders from Younger Dryas-age (ca. 12,900–11,600
years ago) deposits containing Western Stemmed Tradition (WST) artifacts at the Connley Caves in the Fort Rock Basin, Oregon. In
this poster, we: (1) examine the morphology and manufacture of the Connley Caves bone needles, spurred gravers, and abraders
via morphometric data; (2) examine spatial relationships and possible activity areas at the Connley Caves; and (3) consider the
relationship to other bone needles found at WST sites across the Intermountain West. These data will clarify human activities at the
Connley Caves and contribute to the broader understanding of northern Great Basin Paleoindian lifeways during the Younger Dryas
period.
Rabinow, Sophie (Simon Fraser University)
[244]
Faunal aDNA Analysis to Determine Precolumbian Mobility Networks in the Caribbean
Due to its isolation from the continent, the Caribbean offers a unique opportunity to acquire an in-depth understanding of the
region’s extensive precolumbian mobility networks. However, the proximity of the islands with the continent and amongst each
other, as well as the extensive nature of such networks, confounds the extant of this mobility. The agouti (Dasyprocta sp.) and
opossum (Didelphis marsupialis) were introduced to the Caribbean from the South American continent in Pre-Columbian times and
possess a widespread archaeological presence in the Lesser Antilles islands. Analyzing the genetic variation of these commensal
species can provide insight to the mobility of precolumbian groups. Recent analyses of guinea pig (Cavia porcellus) mtDNA by
Kimura et al. (2016) and Lord et al. (2018) have established the value of applying the commensal model in the Caribbean,
demonstrating the need for studies involving a broader range of taxa. Until now guinea pig has been the only taxa used as a proxy
for the commensal model in the Caribbean. This study is the first to conduct the analysis of agouti and opossum aDNA from eleven
islands in the Lesser Antilles chain and provide novel genetic evidence toward understanding mobility networks in the precolumbian
Caribbean.
Rabinowitz, Adam (University of Texas, Austin), Ryan Shaw (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) and Patrick
Golden (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill)
[24]
Temporal Reasoning and Visualization across Periodized Archaeological Datasets: The Potential of the PeriodO Gazetteer
This paper explores the potential of the PeriodO period gazetteer to facilitate temporal reasoning in archaeological datasets, initially
within and between stratigraphic databases that refer to PeriodO definitions for their period terms, and eventually within and
between datasets using only natural-language labels. The application of temporal logic to the stratification of archaeological sites is
a longstanding practice, but it has generally been carried out on a narrative basis or through tools such as the Harris Matrix. The
widely varying temporal scales of the units of observation, from a coin dated to a specific year, to a radiocarbon date range, to a
general stylistic period, have, however, made it difficult to automate the capture and visualization of formal temporal-logical
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      457
relationships between deposits at a single site, let alone across multiple sites. In spatial operations, the use of Linked Data
gazetteers has facilitated such operations, and this paper proposes that the same could be true for temporal relationships. We
sketch out some paths toward the computational use of PeriodO identifiers in the validation of relative and absolute dates in
stratigraphic datasets, the establishment of chronological sequences on the basis of temporal logic, and the comparison of these
sequences across multiple datasets.
Rabinowitz, Adam [169] see Wright, Sterling
Radde, Hugh [72] see Herr, Sarah
Rademaker, Kurt (Michigan State University), Emily Milton (Michigan State University), Kendal Albrecht (Michigan State
University) and Sarah Meinekat (University of Tubingen)
[180]
Visualizing Cuncaicha, a Terminal Pleistocene Residential Base Camp in the High Peruvian Andes
Cuncaicha rockshelter is the highest-elevation Pleistocene archaeological site known in the Americas (4,480 m above sea level).
Excavations from 2010 to 2015 documented a stratified sequence of occupation components spanning from 12,500–12,000 years
ago to recent times. These components are represented by rich assemblages of faunal and botanical remains, lithic and other
artifacts, human burials, and anthropogenic sediments. The site’s location in the oasis-like Pucuncho Basin, structure of biotic and
other resources in the environment, richness of the material remains, and many behavioral signatures indicate that Cuncaicha
functioned as a residential base since the Terminal Pleistocene. As archaeologists working on specific sites for years or decades,
we become intimately familiar with a site’s setting in its landscape, its internal features, and spatial distributions of material remains.
It is sometimes challenging to convey this information, often detailed or impressionistic, to others who have never visited the region
or site. Here we present the site of Cuncaicha from the landscape to the microscopic scale, with information assembled over the
past 10 years of field and lab research. We invite feedback and suggestions from others on how this and other hunter-gatherer sites
might be displayed effectively through 2D visual media.
Rademaker, Kurt [67] see Gruver, Steph
Radican, Kelsey, Alejandra May (Purdue University), Jennifer Miller (Max Planck Institute), Jessica Thompson (Yale
University) and Elizabeth Gomani-Chindebvu (Department of Museums and Monuments, Lilongwe)
[38]
Bead Production of the Later Stone Age in Northern Malawi
Later Stone Age (LSA) bead production is typically reported with ostrich eggshell (OES) as the primary raw material. In south central
Africa land snail shell (LSS) was also used, but most sites have uncertain and poorly-dated associations. The Malawi Ancient
Lifeways and Peoples Project has now recovered both OES and LSS beads and preforms from securely-dated LSA contexts at the
Hora 1 and Mazinga 1 sites in the Mzimba District of northern Malawi. This shows that beads from both materials were made on
site, as part of LSA technological behavior. However, both OES beads and unmodified OES are restricted to Pleistocene deposits.
In the Holocene, LSS replaces OES as the sole raw material for bead production, and a directly-dated preform from each site shows
that this change took place at least by ~9500 cal BP. Bead production pathways also differ between the two time periods within the
LSA, with pathway 1 (where blanks are first drilled and then shaped) dominating OES production and pathway 2 (where shaping
precedes drilling) dominating LSS production. These results show how raw material availability and material properties influenced
technical decision-making at different times across the LSA.
Rae, Todd [159] see Briggs, Emily
Rafidi, Brianna (Arizona State University)
[99]
Soul Concepts of Postcolonial Woodland and Plains Indians II: A Systematic Survey of Concept Intercorrelations, Meta-themes, and
Regional Traditions
A survey of ethnographic literature on 49 historic Woodland and Plains Indian tribes from nine language families was conducted to
learn the variations in their ideas about human soul-like essences. A total of 632 cases documented nine selected variables, four of
which are described here: qualities and capabilities of souls while an individual is alive versus when an individual is dead and
functions and activities of souls when they are inside the body versus when they are outside of the body. These attributes of souls
are too numerous to describe individually, but are summarized here by the following 10 meta-themes: linkage to life, the nature of
souls’ existence after death compared to existence during life, soul movement in and out of the physical body, ghosts, agency,
communication, morality, power, materiality, and desires and emotions. Also presented are two area-wide intercorrelations: between
the number of souls an individual is thought to have and the souls’ fates at death, and between the bodily locations of souls and
their functions, activities, and qualities. Finally, concepts that were restricted geographically to the Northeast, Southeast, or Plains
and that define these areas as regional cultural traditions are enumerated.
Railey, Jim (SWCA, Albuquerque)
[194]
Raw Materials and Time: Lithic Assemblage Patterning in a High-Elevation Area of Western New Mexico
Lithic-artifact assemblages in the North American Southwest are shaped by at least three factors: raw material conditions in the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   458
surrounding landscape, temporal changes in projectile weaponry, and site function within varying settlement/mobility contexts. A
recent survey in a high-elevation volcanic landscape in western New Mexico found evidence of considerable Early and Middle
Archaic activity, focused on testing, reduction, and use of local basalt (or dacite), including numerous bifaces and projectile points.
By Late Archaic times, most projectile points are chert or other finer-grained materials, apparently from non-local sources. Analysis
of data recorded in the field revealed quantitative patterning reflecting the three factors of raw material conditions and temporal
variation—including a shift to use of high-elevation areas during the Altithermal.
Railey, Jim [177] see Larsen, Andrew
Rainville, Charles and Asa Randall (University of Oklahoma)
[63]
Geophysical and Spatial Investigations of a Woodland Period Post Mold Alignment at the Silver Glen Springs Archaeological
Complex, Florida
The landscape of the Silver Glen Springs Archaeological Complex has been extensively modified for at least 9000 years, including
the construction of shell mounds and wooden post structures. The focus of previous research at this complex on reconstructing the
massive Shell mounds and monuments along the spring run has left the non-mounded areas under investigated. During the summer
of 2018, a joint University of Oklahoma and University of Florida field school conducted a multi-sensor geophysical investigation of
the non-mounded areas, including ground-penetrating radar (GPR) and magnetic gradiometry. An oval alignment of anomalies was
revealed in the magnetic gradiometry data. Targeted test unit excavations identified post-molds and deep pits, corroborating the
geophysical data. The geophysical data were then post-processed and further investigated using spatial statistical methods in
ArcGIS.The results suggest that the post-mold alignments, as well as other archaeological signatures at this site, have a distinct
architectural logic in their relation with each other and the complex writ large. This poster will argue that the geophysical and
excavation data tie the post alignment into the collection of monuments at the Silver Glen Springs archaeological complex, and
these monuments are part of a larger interconnected landscape of memory.
Raja, Mussa [250] see Bicho, Nuno
Raja, Mussa [11] see Haws, Jonathan
Rakita, Gordon (University of North Florida)
[87]
Moderator
Rakotozafy, Lucien [76] see Hixon, Sean
Rakowski, Rebekah (Idaho State University), Kateea Peterson (Idaho State University) and John Dudgeon (Center for
Archaeology, Materials and Applied Spec)
[120]
Mapping Ceramics: A Multimodal Petrographic Analysis of Various Ceramics Utilizing ArcGIS
Ceramic petrography uses methods and techniques developed in the geological sciences to investigate material properties of
ceramics, including mineralogical and organic additives, clay matrix, and clues to the method of manufacture. Additional information
about the ceramic body, including major and minor elemental composition, grain orientation and distribution of clays, temper
additions, and surface treatments can also be visualized using scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive spectroscopy
(SEM-EDS). These macro- and micro-scale imaging and analysis methods can be further augmented by molecular and trace
elemental approaches, supplementing SEM-EDS and optical petrographic analysis. In this study, Geographical Information System
(GIS) mapping techniques in ArcGIS were used to present various classes of data on the ceramic body through the creation of
ceramic maps. Images captured with the SEM were digitized to show chemical compositional variation through and between
ceramics. Ceramic maps were also created to highlight areas of interest, including unique or changing ingredients in the clay,
temper, and decoration. In addition to comprehensive reports, ceramic maps also aid in public outreach by giving people an easy to
understand visual aid for the comparison of various ceramic types, leading to a better understanding of the importance of
petrographic analysis in archaeology.
Ralston, Claira, Debra Martin (University of Nevada, Las Vegas), Pamela Stone (Hampshire College) and Ventura Pérez
(University of Massachusetts, Amherst)
[131]
Recovering “Los Antepasados”: Bioarchaeology of a Historic Genízaro Community in Colonial New Mexico
The Nuestra Señora de Belén Archaeological Project explores a colonial mission church and plaza site dating to the late eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries in Belén, New Mexico. The colonial village of Belén was populated by a diverse community of Spanish and
mixed-heritage individuals, including a number of Native-American freed servants known as Genízaros. The bioarchaeological
component of this multi-year project focuses on the reconstruction of the lived experiences of this community of individuals who
were marginalized from both Native American and Spanish communities and whose stories have been obscured by colonial and
civic narratives. This project is a multidisciplinary cooperation that engages the local community by involving them in the research
process, expressly recognizing their voices and position as stakeholders in how these stories have been and will be told. My work
on this project was encouraged by Dr. Martin, who challenges those she mentors to be not only competent and productive
researchers, but impactful, diverse, and relevant scholars. She inspires me to identify research questions that tie into broader issues
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  459
relevant to contemporary populations, particularly those addressing the social meanings underlying disparities in experiences of
health, disease and violence. That ethos resonates strongly throughout all aspects of this project.
Ramirez, Estevan (University of California, Riverside) and Kenichiro Tsukamoto (University of California, Riverside)
[7]
Photogrammetric Documentation of Burials at the Archaeological Site of El Palmar, Mexico.
The application of photogrammetry has been a growing interest in archaeological research. Among different archaeological
contexts, burials highlight the effectiveness of photogrammetric for fieldwork. This poster aims to represent how the combination of
photogrammetry, total station, and GIS document mortuary contexts in the most efficient manner, not only creating three
dimensional models, but also georeferencing the entire context. We recovered two burials from the south room of the Guzmán
Group’s Structure GZ7, an outlying group of the El Palmar archaeological site, which is located in Campeche, Mexico. The results
created three dimensional models of different burial layers as well as georeferenced drawings in ArcGIS.
Ramírez Galicia, Alfonso [198] see Martínez Vázquez, Dante Bernardo
Ramon Celis, Pedro (Indiana University Bloomington)
[204]
Archaeology of Respect, Site Meanings, and Land-use Practices in Guiengola, Oaxaca: Foundations for a Collaborative Project
During two field seasons in 2018 and 2019, I have been documenting both archaeological and ethnographic data of Guiengola, a
mountain where the Zapotecs built a fortress during the fifteenth century, located near the town of Tehuantepec, Oaxaca. The
objective of this particular research is to understand the significance of the area for the local population, and with that in mind,
develop an archaeological project that is meaningful for the Tehuantepec people. Archaeologists have the social duty to document
the material record along with collaborating meaningfully with community members who may have a range of public interests and
concerns. The goal is to open a dialogue, especially with the descendant populations in the places we work. In this paper, I will
present my experiences working with the ‘Comuneros del barrio Lieza’ the landowners of the mountain, whom with I made
archaeological reconnaissances, but also join them on their own expeditions to the area in order to understand how they experience
the place. I expect that by understanding people’s knowledge and experiences working in Guiengola, I will be able to improve public
engagement and collaboration and open new ways to do meaningful archaeological projects.
Ramos Berrios, Alanis, Beatrice Lozano (University of Texas, Arlington) and Robert Lassen (AmaTerra Environmental Inc.)
[37]
A “Young” Ultrathin Biface: Comments on Paleoindian Lithic Technology
Way Ranch (41HY519) is a multicomponent site located in Hays County, Texas. This research focuses on stone tools found in the
rockshelter portion of the site, which is approximately 950 m northeast of the primary excavation blocks. The rockshelter is located
beside the Blanco River and is composed of a Cretaceous limestone overhang above a shallow alcove. A large hearth in the shelter
yielded charcoal corresponding to the Late Archaic (1880 ± 30 and 1930 ± 30 RCYBP), and a Late Prehistoric Perdiz point was
recovered among other tools. Among this material, excavations also uncovered a finely made bifacial knife. The biface is wide and
thin, reminiscent of ultrathin bifaces from Folsom contexts across the Great Plains. While the Way Ranch biface is Late Archaic to
Late Prehistoric in age, its apparent similarities to the far older tools raise a number of questions. Were Folsom and some later
lifeways similar enough to utilize similar technologies? Are such bifaces associated with bison hunting, and if so, do they occur in
other technologies? And just how “special” is Paleoindian technology? This research compares the Way Ranch biface to
Paleoindian and other examples to assess possible biases in our interpretations of lithic technology.
Ramsey, James
[101]
Bonfire Shelter: A Zooarchaeological Reevaluation of Bone Bed 2
Bonfire Shelter is a rockshelter in Eagle Nest Canyon, a short tributary of the Rio Grande in West Texas that contains three distinct
bonebeds of varying ages. The middle bonebed, Bone Bed 2, is a Paleoindian-aged deposit dating to ~12,000 years BP. Bone Bed
2 was originally interpreted as the remains of one or more bison mass kills; however, this interpretation has been heavily contested.
Current investigations focus on the zooarchaeological findings of the ASWT Project’s 2019 field season at Bonfire Shelter to
reassess accuracy of earlier interpretations. The bison assemblage was examined with respect to utility indices and butchering
patterns to determine trends in carcass transport and utilization. Data collected from both current and previous excavations were
combined in order to create an up-to-date age profile for the assemblage. These results will shed more light on the herd structure
present in the assemblage and provide information on Paleoindian carcass processing strategies. The implications for site
interpretation that arise when that data is integrated with the previous research are also discussed.
Ramsey, Monica (University of Cambridge)
[171]
Contrasting Inherited Ecologies: Wetland and Dryland Exploitation in the Transition to Plant-Food Production
This paper presents new phytolith evidence of Levantine Epipaleolithic (ca. 23–10.5 ka cal BP) plant-use to consider how ecological
inheritance may have facilitated the non-linear transition to plant-food production. Phytoliths provide direct botanical evidence of
plant-use and demonstrate that Epipaleolithic peoples employed a risk-reducing wetland-based adaptation, with shifting emphasis
through time on the surrounding dry-land grass resources depending on changing micro-environmental opportunities. This wetland-
based adaptation produced a positive feedback, increasing human impacts on the wetlands, which made them increasingly
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 460
productive compared to their dry-land surroundings for human exploitation. In this highly contrasted environment, wetland niche
construction resulted in an ecological inheritance, which likely initiated other socioeconomic developments, including increasing
sedentism, strengthening social ties to place, and the rise of recognizably modern “cuisine.” The persistence of these
socioeconomic advances, the long-term residual effect of this ecological inheritance, may explain how the nonlinear “fits-and-starts”
development of plant-food production continued through the Epipaleolithic.
Randall, Asa (University of Oklahoma)
[23]
“The past is never dead, it’s not even past”: The Archaic Southeast in a Post-Archaic world
Stadial thinking embedded in archaeological periodization promotes the rupture of lived experience from landscapes of past
practice. Whereas an earlier generation of scholarship viewed the Archaic period as the precondition for structural developments in
a post-Archaic world, recent work across southeastern North America demonstrates that Archaic forebears provided objects, places,
and landscapes rife with the potential for reflection and politicization. Evidence for ancient archaeologies in the form of object
gathering, pit digging, citations, and reproductions highlight the ways in which continued engagement with Archaic materials and
places were generative of new experiences and traditions.
Randall, Asa [63] see Rainville, Charles
Rankin, Caitlin (Washington University in St. Louis)
[59]
The Resilience of Floodplains to Sustained Regional Drought: Implications for the Vacant Quarter
The Vacant Quarter defines a period of pan-regional abandonment of the central Mississippi and lower Ohio River Valleys between
AD 1350–1500. The Vacant Quarter does not propose a complete depopulation of the region, but rather highlights the decline in
mound-building activities and the abandonment of ceremonial centers throughout the region. Cahokia Mounds, the largest
ceremonial center of the Mississippian Cultural Tradition, was one of the earliest large mound centers abandoned in the Vacant
Quarter region. Regional environmental proxies of pollen, tree rings, and stable isotopes indicate sustained, multidecadal periods of
drought in the Vacant Quarter region that temporally correlate with the onset of the Little Ice Age. These regional environmental
proxies have been used to argue for climatic influence as a potential contributing cause to the Vacant Quarter abandonment. In this
paper, I present new multi-proxy paleoenvironmental datasets collected from a wetland mound and plaza group in the central
precinct of Cahokia Mounds. These data indicate the local ecologic resilience of floodplains to broader regional patterns of
sustained drought. This new dataset complicates the middle-range theory of food surplus previously used to link patterns of climatic
change to decline in social complexity during the Vacant Quarter.
[59]
Chair
Ranum, Caleb [147] see Hatcher, Lawford
Rapes, John (Purdue University), Jack Hofman, Lawrence Todd, Daniel Dalmas and Barbara Crable
[236]
Selective Use of Local Silicified Stone in the Absaroka Mountains, Washakie Wilderness, Northwest Wyoming
Silicified sediments (SLS) occur in localized deposits throughout much of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem where veins of molten
volcanics came into contact with silica rich sediments forming a variety of metamorphic contact materials, which are here all
grouped into the SLS category. These materials commonly served as tool stone and provided alternatives to transporting non-local
materials into high elevation areas. The quality of SLS varies greatly, ranging from coarse grained and brittle with poor conchoidal
fracture to rarer high-quality materials comparable to fine cherts. Here we review the chronological patterns of SLS utilization as
revealed by diagnostic artifacts from both surface assemblages and excavated samples, summarize the variety of artifact types
represented by SLS, the overall frequency of SLS as compared to other materials, and document one workshop/quarry site in the
Washakie Wilderness that illustrates some of the variability and uses of this tool stone.
Rapes, John [55] see May, Alejandra
Rapes, John [176] see Torquato, Melissa
Rareshide, Elisabeth (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[254]
Chair
Rareshide, Elisabeth [254] see Minerbi, Joanne
Rashed, Tarek [248] see Arias, Veronica
Rasic, Jeffrey (National Park Service)
[253]
Lithic Source Types as Driving Factors in the Character of Regional Archaeological Records
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     461
Archaeologists often ponder the ways lithic production and procurement strategies are driven by the nature of lithic raw material
attributes such as quality, size, shape, and abundance. This paper explores three case studies, obsidian sources in Alaska, to
address ways that lithic raw material source attributes may, in fact, have driven technological and economic choices and, in turn,
shaped the fundamental character of regional scale archaeological records.
Rasic, Jeffrey [82] see Reuther, Joshua
Raskevitz, Thornton (Oklahoma State University) and Carlos Cordova (Oklahoma State University)
[75]
Reconstructing Paleoecology by Proxy: Phytolith Analysis and Its Utility When Examining Bison Diminution on the Great Plains
Bison have been the keystone herbivore in the Great Plains region since the disappearance of the mammoths during the terminal
Pleistocene extinction event. This extinction thrust them into a role as both the managers of a changing environmental landscape
and as the most important animal resource for the established human populations. Since the end of the Pleistocene, the genus
Bison underwent significant anatomical and behavioral changes. This study examines opal phytoliths embedded in dental calculus
of prehistoric bison specimens as proxy for reconstructing environmental context of anatomical and behavioral changes underwent
by the Great Plains bison since the terminal Pleistocene. The strategy includes comparing prehistoric phytolith assemblages with
those of modern bison in various types of grasslands. The paleo-bison examined were sourced from the Beaver River Bison Hunting
Complex, the Ravenscroft II Bison Kill Site, in Oklahoma, and the Folsom Site, in New Mexico. The spatial differences between the
kill sites in terms of paleoclimate and floral assemblage were also quantified.
Rautman, Alison (Michigan State University)
[88]
Moderator
Ravotto, Alessandro [159] see Turcanu-Carutiu, Daniela
Rawski, Zoe (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[158]
Situating Early Xunantunich, Belize, in the Preclassic Landscape: A Synthetic Perspective from Structure F1
Over the last five years, intensive investigations of Structure F1 at Early Xunantunich, Belize, have shed light on a dynamic and
important time in the site’s early history. The monumental platform structure played an important role in the early ceremonial center,
creating the site’s northern boundary, hosting large public rituals and, potentially, bearing associations with the emergence of a royal
dynasty at the site in the Late Preclassic period. In this paper, we present the results of recent analyses which situate the structure’s
history within a regional sociopolitical and economic context during the Middle and Late Preclassic periods. This context includes
ceramic affiliations as well as other exchange networks of non-local materials such as obsidian, greenstone, and marine shell.
Further, we synthesize the entire research program in light of these new findings, exploring the ways in which ritual performances in
this space laid the foundation for increasing sociopolitical inequality during the Middle and Late Preclassic periods. These findings
are further contextualized within the Early Xunantunich ceremonial center, as well as within the Preclassic Maya landscape more
broadly. Finally, future directions are explored in order to identify how we might better understand this important early structure.
Ray, Agnes (Ohio Valley Archaeology Inc.)
[176]
Red Ochre in the Midcontinent
A number of studies have indirectly addressed the occurrence of red ochre within mortuary contexts in the archaeological record,
but this work has predominantly focused on the concept of the Red Ochre cultural complex and the transition from Late Archaic to
Early Woodland culture periods in the Great Lakes Region. In their 2009 review of Archaic burial sites in the American Midcontinent,
George R. Milner, Jane E. Buikstra, and Michael D. Wiant describe the practice of marking human remains with red ochre as
having, “a considerable temporal and geographical distribution, although it was certainly used more in some times and places than
in others.” In order to better define these “times” and “places,” a cursory survey of the extant literature regarding Native American
mortuary practices across the American midcontinent has been undertaken and the preliminary data presented here. It is hoped that
by observing documented occurrences of this specific behavior on a larger temporal and geographical scale a better understanding
of the movement and persistence of ideas can be gained.
Ray, Erin [137] see Moyes, Holley
Ray, Erin (University of New Mexico), Paige Lynch (University of New Mexico), Emily Moes (University of New Mexico) and
Keith Prufer (University of New Mexico)
[233]
Changes in Weaning Age from Hunter-Gatherers to Agriculturalists: A Stable Isotope Study in Southern Belize
In Mesoamerica, the advent of agriculture brought unprecedented population expansion. However, a lack of archaeological remains
from this period has made it challenging to determine when population growth began. A transition in weaning practices from hunter-
gatherers to agriculturalists may have contributed to changes in life history strategies, potentially facilitating population growth. Two
rockshelter sites, Saki Tzul and Mayahak Cab Pek, located in Southern Belize, contain a continuous burial assemblage spanning
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   462
approximately 9,000 years. They provide a unique opportunity to examine demographic changes during the transition to agriculture.
Stable isotopes of carbon and oxygen from molars and premolars in adults spanning are used to examine changes in age of
weaning. By sampling enamel from different teeth with differing mineralization ages we can identify the addition of water to the diet
and introduction of adult diet. The addition of drinking water results in depleted oxygen isotopes whereas the adult diet results in an
enrichment of carbon isotopes. If the introduction of maize provided a stable food source for infants, then nursing cessation may
have occurred earlier in agricultural populations thus decreasing interbirth interval and increasing overall fertility and population
growth.
Rayfield, Kristen (University of Oklahoma), Lushuang Huang (University of Oklahoma), Hayley Lanier (University of
Oklahoma), Si Wu (University of Oklahoma) and Courtney Hofman (University of Oklahoma)
[244]
A Proteomic Approach to Determine Sex in Zooarchaeology
Sex determination from animal skeletal remains can be challenging as it relies on sex specific bones or osteometrics. Determining
sex is beneficial in understanding animal husbandry practices, as well as human-animal interactions. Building on previous work with
humans, here we present a proteomic approach for determining sex from tooth enamel in non-human mammals. The protein
amelogenin, which makes up 90% of the tooth enamel, is dimorphic and coded by the X and Y chromosomes. The protein products
of the X and Y gene have been recovered in human tooth enamel and used to determine sex with the absence of the Y protein. This
proteomic method has been shown to be less expensive and less destructive than genetic analysis from teeth, which has potential
for allelic dropout. To evaluate this approach in non-human mammals, four mammalian species (dogs, coyotes, beavers, and deer)
were tested in a blind study from research collections in the Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History. Mass Spectrometry
was applied to identify the amelogenin protein. We present here the findings of this experiment and further characterize species
specific amelogenin proteins. Our research demonstrates how proteomic characterization of the amelogenin can be broadly applied
to zooarchaeology.
Rayfield, Kristen [169] see Wright, Sterling
Raynal, Jean-Paul [30] see Fernandes, Paul
Read, Sara
[87]
Moderator
Ream, Randy (AUSA - WDKY)
[92]
Discussant
Reamer, Justin (University of Pennsylvania)
[269]
“A River Runs through It”: Reinterpreting Late Woodland Settlement Patterns in the Upper Delaware Valley
Rivers are important natural boundary markers that in modern contexts commonly form political boundaries. River drainages are
also important in archaeological practice as they are commonly used to delineate archaeological culture areas. In eastern North
America, river drainages are used for both purposes. In the history the discipline, many archaeologists have defined where they
work by both the local river drainage and the state. But commonly archaeologists have focused their research only in one state, and
thus, when working in a river drainage separating states, only on one side of the valley. In this paper, I will examine how this
practice of only working on one side of a river valley has influenced archaeological interpretations and fueled intra-regional debates.
Specifically, I will focus on how archaeologists working in the Upper Delaware Valley have reached different conclusions about
settlement patterns during the Late Woodland by drawing their data only from sites in either Pennsylvania or New Jersey. I will then
re-analyze feature data from excavated sites on both sides of the Upper Delaware River to examine how each side of the valley may
have been used differently during the Late Woodland and what this implies about settlement patterns during this period.
Reaux, Derek (University of Nevada, Reno)
[195]
An Application of a Lithic Gravity Model in the Catnip Creek Delta, Guano Valley, Oregon
Lithic source provenance analysis has featured prominently in Great Basin Paleoindian archaeology for the past few decades. This
research has primarily focused on reconstructing Paleoindian settlement/subsistence strategies, territoriality, and socioeconomic
interactions by sourcing obsidian artifacts from sites and mapping their geographic distributions. While these studies have
demonstrated which toolstone sources were used by early groups and how they may have been conveyed, few have explicitly
addressed why those particular materials were selected in the first place. In this paper, I present a gravity model that examines the
influence that geologic and geographic factors (e.g., toolstone quality, abundance) have on Paleoindian lithic procurement strategies
in the Catnip Creek Delta Locality, Guano Valley, Oregon. The gravity model approach offers a novel way to analyze source
provenance data and it may allow us to reassess the current debates about Paleoindian settlement/subsistence strategies in the
Great Basin.
[195]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     463
Reaux, Derek [195] see Sturtz, Sara
Rebbe, Claire [63] see Tolan, Grace
Redding, Richard (Kelsey Museum, University of Michigan)
[22]
Provisioning, Production, and Parallel Economies in Old Kingdom Egypt
Excavations at the Old Kingdom sites of Kom el-Hisn, the Nile Delta, and Heit el-Ghurab, at Giza, have yielded faunal data providing
insights into the Old Kingdom economy and infrastructure of pyramid construction. Kom el-Hisn was a production site that
predominately shipped, young male cattle, sheep and goats to the site of Heit el-Ghurab, which housed workers laboring on the
Pyramid Complex of Menkaure. The workers at Heit el-Ghurab were provisioned by the central authority and were not involved in
any food production activities. The residents of Kom el-Hisn had limited access to the animals they were rearing and engaged in pig
rearing to provide animal protein for local consumption. The central authority was not interested in the local system of pig production
as it could not be mobilized. Pig production in Egypt formed a parallel economy: a heterarchy as opposed to the hierarchy imposed
by the central authority.
Redman, Kimberly (Alpine Archaeology)
[253]
Experiments in CRM
Graduate programs focused on Cultural Resource Management (CRM) were relatively rare in the late 1990s. The Washington State
University Anthropology graduate program, of which Dr. Andrefsky was a part, provided a platform that prepared many students for
a career in CRM. Practical experience in field and laboratory techniques, coupled with a focus on analytical thinking and writing,
exemplify the preparations needed for CRM. In addition to experiments in a CRM-like environment, Dr. A provided training in lithic
analysis and interpretation and the use of experiment-based studies to further our understanding of lithic debitage assemblage
creation. Lessons learned continue to inform lithic experiments in a CRM context.
Reed, Paul (Archaeology Southwest)
[229]
Expanding our Approaches to American Archaeology: An Example from the Greater Chaco Landscape, New Mexico
American archaeology has been in the midst of a transition for more than a decade. Long-suppressed and ignored viewpoints are
finally seeing light and interpretations are broadening. In particular, archaeologists are working with Native peoples with new and
innovative approaches to understanding the past. As a result, archaeology is changing, although the pace of change is slow. In this
presentation, I offer an example from the Greater Chaco Landscape in New Mexico. By working with different Indigenous groups
over the last several years, we have increased our understanding of ancestral land use and the great time-depth of connections to
Chaco Canyon and the Greater San Juan Basin. This work has also revealed the severe limitation of a Western-based, colonial
approach to the past and illustrates the need for more comprehensive changes to our discipline.
[229]
Chair
Reeder-Myers, Leslie (Temple University)
[59]
Zooarchaeological Meta-analysis and Late Holocene Climate Change on Chesapeake Bay
In many parts of the world, individual archaeological sites rarely yield sufficient faunal data to provide a full picture of resource use
over hundreds or thousands of years. In the eastern United States, acidic soils and centuries of farming result in poor faunal
preservation, and archaeologists have tended to focus on better preserved ceramic and lithic artifacts to answer questions about
cultures in the past. However, zooarchaeological studies in cultural resource management or field school reports, when considered
in total, provide an impressive diachronic, regional view of resource use. A case study from the Chesapeake Bay explores the value
of these data, particularly when compared with a remarkably high-resolution climate record for the Late Holocene. After overcoming
challenges related to the comparability of data, results suggest a remarkable amount of variability among sites, with no clear
patterns related to major climate events such as the Medieval Climatic Anomaly or the Little Ice Age, even though those events had
a powerful impact on the climate of Chesapeake Bay. This type of analysis provides useful insights, even in the absence of large-
scale research focused on the impact of climate change on ecosystems and cultures.
Reeder-Myers, Leslie (Temple University)
[88]
Discussant
Reeder-Myers, Leslie [172] see Petras, Elysia
Reedy, Chelsea (Texas State University)
[241]
Food and Fortitude: A Story of Life within Presidio San Sabá as Told through Zooarchaeological Analysis
Presidio San Sabá was the largest military outpost in the Texas region during the mid-eighteenth century. This research project is a
continuation of Dr. Fradkin and Dr. Walters’ previous faunal analysis conducted on a portion of the site’s assemblage. This inquiry
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         464
will focus on comparing the areas within the interior plaza to provide insight into dietary practices and to see if socio-economic
status use of certain areas can be inferred. This study will incorporate the use of their hunted versus domestic resources, aquatic
versus terrestrial animals, element selection, butchery practices, size class, hunting practices and the potential consumption of
horses and bison.
Reents-Budet, Dorie (Museum of Fine Arts Boston)
[126]
Too Many Sherds, Not Enough Time: The Contributions of Ronald L. Bishop to Studies of Ancient Maya Ceramics
Ronald L. Bishop is among the earliest proponents and adopters of neutron activation analysis (NAA) to the study of archaeological
ceramics beginning in the late 1960s. He recognized the analytical technique’s potential for the study of exchange systems, ancient
economies, and socio-political process. With his unique background, Bishop coupled a geo-chemist’s understanding with an
archaeologist’s perspective of what constituted an important problem and a workable investigative direction toward a solution.
Bishop realized that understanding the data patterns of compositional similarity and their potential for addressing archaeological
questions required the additional perspectives of other disciplines including art history. Teaming with this paper’s author, with
ceramics studio and inorganic chemistry background, the collaboration has proven fruitful. This paper reviews the 30+ years’ of
results from the cross-disciplinary partnership united by neutron activation analysis and a desire to extract more information from the
millions of potsherds littering labs and warehouses throughout the Maya region.
Rees, James (Arkansas Archeological Society)
[266]
Searching for the Smoking Drum: The Evidence for the Presence and Ceremonial Importance of Ceramic Vessel Drums in the
Prehistoric Southeastern United States
Early historical accounts suggest that drums played an important role in the ceremonial life of the prehistoric Southeastern United
States. However because they were made in whole or in part of ephemeral materials, drums are virtually invisible in the
archeological record. Interestingly, historical records, ethnographic information, and iconographic imagery from Spiro and other
Southeastern sites all point to one particular form of ceramic vessel drum as being present in prehistoric times. This study focuses
on how these drums fit into the cosmic symbolism of the Mississippian period and how they might be identified and distinguished
from other similar vessel forms.
Rees, Mark [9] see Britt, Tad
Reese, Kelsey (University of Notre Dame)
[134]
Community Construction and Resilience on the Mesa Verde North Escarpment
Subsistence-based farming communities are communities of “people who depend on natural resources for their livelihood,” and who
typically rely on long-term, inter-generational sharing of cultural knowledge concerning ecological systems, and observations and
experiences of environmental processes. Recent research on the globalized impacts of climate change reveal “profound disruptive
effects at local levels” in subsistence-farming communities and their surrounding ecosystems. A community’s ability to respond to
climate volatility, or potential volatility, is dependent on: the physical and cultural context within which climate volatility is occurring;
the scale at which it is being experienced, and; the potential strategies available to each population that can be employed to mitigate
the adverse effects of a changing climate. This paper will present a case study on the ancestral Pueblo occupation of the Mesa
Verde North Escarpment in southwestern Colorado from AD 600–1300. This study will provide a longitudinal lens to examine the
short-term effects of climate volatility and the long-term effects of sustained climate change on subsistence-based farming
communities in a high-desert environment. The results will outline the role of climate in community formation practices, periods of
population resilience, and ultimately the complete depopulation of the region.
Reese, Kelsey [147] see Hill, Austin
Reese, Kelsey [149] see Jaskowski, Clay
Regnier, Amanda [107] see Hammerstedt, Scott
Regnier, Amanda [189] see Levine, Marc
Regnier, Amanda [222] see Livingood, Patrick
Reich, David [173] see Nores, Rodrigo
Reid, Amy (Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University), Jessica Mundt (New South and Associates),
Maximilian Hall (Texas State Univeristy) and John Fulbright (Texas State Univeristy)
[187]
Pest Treatment through Partnership
As part of the mission of the Veterans Curation Program (VCP) to rehabilitate archaeological collections owned by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE), the Satellite VCP lab at the Center for Archaeological Studies (CAS) at Texas State University
recently partnered with the Archives and Research Center (ARC) at the University to administer freeze treatment of USACE
collections to eradicate pests. Through these efforts CAS, ARC, and USACE staff were able to stop pest activity that was damaging
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      465
artifact labels and containers that likely would have led to loss of context throughout the collection, if allowed to persist. This serves
as an example of the damage that can “quietly” occur to archaeological collections and the partnerships that can be forged to
preserve the integrity of these materials. This poster provides photographs and descriptions of the pest damage, the freeze
treatment process, and the rehabilitated collection.
Reid, David (University of Illinois, Chicago)
[105]
Dating a Wari D-Shaped Temple: New Radiocarbon Evidence from Pakaytambo, Arequipa, Peru
The Middle Horizon (AD 600–1000) was a time of profound social transformation in the Andes, distinguished in part by the
expansion of Wari influence, peoples, and state institutions outside of the Ayacucho heartland. In this paper, I present findings of an
architectural complex composed of Wari patio-groups, a D-shaped structure, and monumental platform construction at the site
Pakaytambo in southern Peru (upper Majes Valley, Arequipa). Analysis of excavated material remains and AMS radiocarbon dates
indicate Wari occupation occurred sometime between the late eighth and tenth centuries AD. Here I report initial findings and draw
similarities to other D-shaped enclosures at Wari sites across Peru. Pakaytambo’s strategic location along the valley’s major
prehistoric road and its placement below a possible local shrine or apu would have framed interactions with nearby populations.
Consequently, Pakaytambo provides an ideal perspective on the use of ideology as state power in a frontier context.
Reid, James [156] see Whittlesey, Stephanie
Reid, LaMarise (William & Mary)
[43]
Discussant
Reid, Rachel [35] see Sun, Yufeng
Reilly, Frank (Texas State University)
[47]
From Cave Mouth to Temple Door
I suggest that at some point in the development of the Braden art style that the three dimensional flint-clay statuettes (AD 1100–
1175) take the place of the earlier Braden style paintings (AD 900–1000) found in caves and rock shelters while temples (BBB Motor
Site) that house the flint-clay statuettes, substitute for the caves that housed the earlier paintings. Thus the images carried by the
Braden style become renditions of preternatural anthropomorphic and animal figures as well as several categories of symbols while
the temples substitute for the caves that appear to be the natal point of the style.
[47]
Chair
Reilly, Frank (Texas State University)
[166]
Discussant
Reilly, Sophie (Northwestern University) and Andrew Roddick (McMaster University)
[105]
A Taste for Tubers: The Circulation of the Familiar through the Ancient Titicaca Basin
Archaeologists track the social, political, and economic dynamics of the ancient Lake Titicaca basin through the circulation of people
and things. Plant things, in particular, reveal food choices, quotidian diets and special meals, and broader trade relations before and
after the settling of the urban center of Tiwanaku. In this paper, we discuss paleoethnobotanical work at two settlements with Late
Formative and Tiwanaku occupations. We present new evidence for lowland tubers (yuca, sweet potato, arrowroot) from the
recently excavated site of Challapata in the eastern Titicaca basin and the well-known southern basin site Chiripa. We consider
these non-local food findings in the context of local tubers, such as potato, oca, and ulluco. Why would Titicaca tuber growers wish
to acquire lowland tubers as well? We suggest that these non-local plants were desirable because of a particular local taste for
tubers and extant knowledge of tuber cooking techniques. Titicaca Basin communities chose their food (and cultivated trade
relations) due to particular tastes and food familiarity, not simply for exotic flavours. We suggest the need for further attention to
such choices, particularly over periods where not just social and political orders were changing, but likely larger sensory worlds
associated with food choice.
Reilly, Sophie [54] see Emery, Kitty
Reinhard, Karl and Dong Hoon Shin (Seoul National University College of Medicine)
[247]
Discovery of Chinese Liver Flukes in Latrine Sediments
Parasitological analyses of five sediment samples from latrine deposits spanning the time period from about 1880 to the 1930s are
presented. Two sediment samples are from a latrine used by Euro-Americans. Three sediment samples are from latrines used by
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     466
Chinese-Americans. Two of the Chinese latrines were positive for human parasites. The human parasites encountered include the
human whipworm (Trichuris trichiura), the giant intestinal roundworm (Ascaris lubricoides, c.f.), and the Chinese liver fluke
(Clonorchis sinensis). The find of the liver fluke is especially important. This parasite cannot complete its life cycle outside of its
endemic range in Asia because suitable intermediate hosts are not present in the American continents. Its presence signals that at
least some of the Chinese-Americans who used the latrines were immigrants who were infected in Asia and then sustained
infections while in the Americas.
Reinhart, David [175] see Bandy, Matthew
Reis, Yevgenia [173] see Kim, Alexander
Reitze, William (University of Arizona)
[68]
Lucy: The Unknown New Mexico Folsom Site
The archaeological history of the Lucy Site (LA4974) has been riddled with questions since its original discovery and excavation in
the mid-1950s. The original excavations were conducted to recover materials attributed to the Sandia cultural complex and
corroborate the antiquity of the original work conducted at Sandia Cave. While significant questions of the legitimacy of the Sandia
concept exist, the Lucy site documents an extensive surface assemblage; including two discreet Folsom loci. This paper presents a
reinterpretation of the Folsom materials from Lucy focusing on the spatial distribution of artifacts, geoarchaeology, and lithic raw
materials. Better understanding of Lucy allows a broader perspective on Paleoindian occupation in Central New Mexico and more
broadly, occupation in the Southwest and Southern Plains.
Renaud, Jared (University of Arizona)
[186]
Utilizing Site Condition Assessment Data for Resource Management Planning at Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument
Due to limitations in funding, staff, and time, many public-sector land management agencies have difficulties upholding their
archaeological site management responsibilities. Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument (ORPI) in southwestern Arizona is one
such example. In many situations, the rate at which archaeological sites deteriorate, how often impacts occur, and the most frequent
site disturbances are not always observed on a scale enabling long-term land management planning for cultural resources. This
study utilizes data gathered from past ORPI site condition assessment work to analyze impacts from a non-random sampling of pre-
contact archaeological sites located throughout the Monument. The author will then use this data to determine the most historically
impactful documented sources of site impacts, more recent trends in site disturbances, and whether any correlations can be made
with impact types and recent environmental trends at ORPI. This study will incorporate approaches from past condition assessment
studies on both public and private lands in an effort to develop effective management recommendations fitting for the public agency
of this project’s focus.
Renson, Virginie (University of Missouri)
[237]
Applying Lead and Strontium Isotopes in Pottery Provenance
Isotopic geochemistry has been applied in archaeological sciences to identify circulation of objects as well as human mobility for
decades. With the development of multi collector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometers, this approach has become more
widespread with lead and strontium representing two of the most commonly applied isotopic systems. For the identification of source
and circulation of ceramics, however, the main analytical techniques continue to be elemental chemistry and petrography. Here, we
examine how isotopic geochemistry can contribute to our understanding of ancient ceramic provenance and exchange. Examples
are drawn from studies of Late Bronze Age and Late Roman-Late Hellenistic ceramics from Eastern Mediterranean contexts and
Early Formative ceramics from multiple sites in Mexico. These examples illustrate how lead and strontium isotopes allow
determining production centers of material unassigned by elemental chemistry, how isotopic analyses contribute to the identification
of local objects and imports, and how they allow relating ceramics to their raw materials and identifying mixing patterns.
Renson, Virginie [237] see Peacock, Evan
Reuther, Joshua, Sam Coffman (University of Alaska Museum of the North), Charles Holmes (University of Alaska), Ben
Potter (University of Alaska) and Jeffrey Rasic (National Park Service)
[82]
Prehistoric Obsidian and Rhyolite Acquisition and Movement across the Middle Tanana Basin in Interior Alaska
The middle Tanana valley has a prehistoric record dating over 14,000 years with several stratified, multi-component sites with lithic
artifact assemblages that contain obsidian and rhyolite. A multitude of studies have shown that obsidian and rhyolite artifact
chemistries in Alaska and western Canada are useful to track the human movement of these materials across landscapes, either by
direct raw material acquisition at a source to a site, or by exchange. We have analyzed over 5000 geological obsidian and rhyolite
source samples and artifacts from Alaska and neighboring regions of Canada (Yukon and British Columbia), with >1600 of these
artifacts from middle Tanana valley sites, using x-ray florescence, neutron activation analysis, and inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry. Middle Tanana Valley sites like Broken Mammoth, Swan Point, Upward Sun River, and others provide intersite and
intrasite comparisons and diachronic perspectives to differences in toolstone procurement and movement are apparent from the
earliest Paleoindian populations >13,000 years ago to recent Subarctic foragers.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  467
[82]
Chair
Reuther, Joshua [82] see Doering, Briana
Reuther, Joshua [202] see Sattler, Robert
Reyes, Omar (CEHA, Instituto de la Patagonia, UMAG), Carolina Belmar (Universidad de Chile), Augusto Tessone (INGEIS-
CONICET), Manuel San Román (CEHA, Instituto de la Patagonia, UMAG) and Flavia Morello Repetto (CEHA, Instituto de la
Patagonia, UMAG)
[61]
What Is Cooking in the Pots of the Chiloe Archipelago? A Multiproxy Approach to Determine the Presence of Horticultural Groups
Marine hunter-gatherers groups have occupied the northern-Patagonian channels since ~6000 yrs cal BP. Isotopic analyses of
human remains plus lithic and faunal studies show that they have a strong marine diet with small variations toward the late
Holocene. In the last 300 years, post-European contact, there is a significant change in diet related to contact with other groups that
carry pottery and domesticated species, that would have occurred ~ 1000 years cal BP, but with no direct archaeological evidence
that refers to this important change in the cultural trajectories. To evaluate possible changes in the consumption of wild and
domesticated species and marine resources due to acquisition of this new technology, we carried out residue analysis of the pottery
sherds, to see what old and new ingredients are being prepared in the ceramic vessels. The sample comes from sites of the Chiloe
archipelago, ascribed to the prehispanic traditions, some related to the late ceramic period and others to the historical period. We
shall compare these results with stable isotope studies and faunal, botanical and lithic assemblages of sites prior to this moment of
contact to understand changes and social interactions between different social and cultural systems. FONDECYT 1170726.
Reyes, Omar [177] see San Román, Manuel
Reyes Parroquin, Maria
[227]
Large Symbols in Small Places: Depictions of El Tajín’s South Ball Court in Non-Monumental Sculpture of the Gulf Coast
El Tajín’s South Ball Court has one of the most interesting reliefs in Mesoamerica, depicting the ball game ritual, and has been
widely studied in recent years. It would be expected, given the importance of the city, to find similar iconographic elements in other
parts of the Gulf Coast. It is rare, nevertheless, to come across such representations in non-monumental sculpture, especially
figurines. Monumental sculpture was associated with the elite, the small sculpture was associated with the people. So why is it that
we can find some of the iconographic elements depicted on the South Ball Court of El Tajín in non-monumental representations of
south-central Veracruz? In this paper, we will discuss the recurrences of some symbols found in the monumental relief of the South
Ball Court, their main iconographic interpretations and their presence in other small-scale traditions of Veracruz in order to shed
some light to the dynamics of the Gulf Coast at the end of the Classic Period.
Rezes, Emily [268] see Muros, Vanessa
Rhode, David [170] see Des Lauriers, Matthew
Rice, Sarah, D. Craig Young (Far Western Anthrpological Research Group Inc.) and Daron Duke (Far Western
Anthrpological Research Group Inc.)
[8]
A Model for Site Formation in Dune Settings: A Case from Knolls Dunes, Western Utah
Knolls Dunes is one of the largest coalesced dune fields in the Great Basin and a prominent landform in the Bonneville Basin of
western Utah. Changes in dune landscapes over time, as eolian processes deposit and erode landforms, contributed to
archaeological site formation within and around these dunes in ways fundamental to dune environments. To illustrate this, we
present a simplified time-series schematic representative of major dune-building episodes at Knolls Dunes. The model is a simplified
expression of cyclical and continuous depositional and erosional processes and how these processes yield sites of varying levels of
integrity. We present six temporal phases of site formation from Late Pleistocene to modern times, and we associate the intervals
with observed landforms and sedimentary units to illustrate that the sequence can operate at almost any timescale.
Rich, Michelle (Dallas Museum of Art, Art of the Americas)
[109]
Discussant
Rich, Michelle (Dallas Museum of Art, Art of the Americas), Matthew Robb (Fowler Museum, UCLA) and David Freidel
(Washington University, St. Louis)
[166]
Jade Faces: Heirlooms and Emulations in Olmec and Maya Art
From the colossal heads of the Olmec to the severed head of the Maya Maize God in the Popol Vuh, the head and face have been
body parts of singular importance in Mesoamerican art and thought. If the human body is an axis mundi, the head and face give that
axis a physical manifestation of individuality. A nexus of thought and emotion, the head and face provide the bodily armature for
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  468
personal identification and royal regalia such as headdresses and diadem jewels. In this presentation, we follow in the rich tradition
of Kent Reilly’s examinations of Olmec iconography that link site planning, objects from archaeological contexts, and his bold
conjectures connecting these into coherent models of royal power and performance. We draw on some of his myriad observations in
order to construct a new narrative weaving together cosmograms, metaphorical links between heads and seeds, and the use of
heirloom objects in ancient Mesoamerica.
Richards, John (University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee), Sean McConnel (University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee) and Ned Farley
(Wisconsin Lutheran College)
[78]
Geophysical Survey at the Aztalan Site: Lessons from Two Near-Surface Remote Sensing Surveys
In 2017, the Aztalan site (47JE0001) in southeast Wisconsin was surveyed using a fluxgate gradiometer. Aztalan is a Late
Woodland/Mississippian mound-and-village center related to the late Lohmann and Stirling phases of the American Bottom and was
occupied from the late tenth to the mid-thirteenth century. The geomagnetic survey collected subsurface data from 26.7 acres of the
site including most of the area inside the 22-acre, palisaded portion of the settlement. Results identified 367 anomalies that
represent both recent and pre-contact disturbances including pits, structures, hearths and palisade lines. In 2019, a less extensive
GPR survey collected data from approximately 2.8 acres coincident with portions of the geomagnetic coverage. The survey targeted
areas adjacent to the Southwest Mound and portions of the residential sector of the site. Coverage was obtained also of an area
centered around an asphalt parking lot that was magnetically noisy due to the presence of iron rebar. The UWM Archaeological
Field School assisted the GPR surveyors and chose two anomalies identified by both surveys to ground-truth. Results suggest that:
(1) the two methods can return complimentary information; and (2) a large-scale, systematic testing program will be necessary to
confidently interpret results of either geophysical dataset.
Richards, Nathan [221] see Bush, Dominic
Richards, Patricia (University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee)
[167]
Discussant
Richards-Rissetto, Heather (University of Nebraska, Lincoln), Kristy Primeau (SUNY Albany) and David (SUNY Buffalo)
[25]
Incorporating Vegetation Reconstruction in Computational Landscape Archaeoacoustics: An Ancient Maya Case Study
The Ancient Maya perceived settlements as kahkab, or “populated earth”; that is, urban agrarian places where residences
intermixed with gardens and orchards. In previous work, we simulated the late eighth and early ninth-century landscape of the
ancient Maya city of Copán to investigate multi-sensory experience. Building on this work, we now refine the landscape
reconstruction to explore the impacts of vegetation on what was seen and heard through the incorporation of paleoenvironmental
data, ethnobotanical data, and remote sensing. Using the Variable Cover Type Soundshed Analysis tool in the Archaeoacoustics
GIS toolbox, we perform computational analysis to generate soundsheds and a digital surface model to generate viewsheds for
several of Copán’s valley stelae, exploring how vegetation may have impacted the experience of rituals conducted at these
locations.
Richards-Rissetto, Heather (University of Nebraska-Lincoln)
[155]
Discussant
Richissin, Caleigh
[178]
Investigating a Classic Maya Market at Say Kah, Belize
The intended goal of research carried out in 2019 at Say Kah, Belize was to identify and calculate the statistical significance of
geochemical traces of particular elements including but not limited to: zinc, phosphorus, and iron at the sites 43 × 33 m plaza. This
research is the first phase in understanding the use of Say Kah’s paved plaza as a potential marketplace during the Classic Period
(ca. 250–900). Research on Classic Maya markets has been on the rise although difficult in the past, due to the level of perishability
and consumption of subsistence goods and the removal of goods from a physical market post-acquisition. More recently, new
developments in soil geochemistry have made material evidence of marketplaces more visible and accessible. Such methods were
employed during the 2019 season at Say Kah in order to identify specific activities which have occurred repeatedly and help to
indicate patterns of behavior in areas of food preparation, consumption, trade, and waste. In a larger sense, the analysis carried out
in Say Kah’s central plaza also aids in the identification of the types of relationships between Say Kah and other major sites in the
region that would have been necessary to sustain an active marketplace.
Richter, Jürgen [162] see Chu, Wei
Richter, Kim (Getty Research Institute)
[144]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                          469
Richter, Kim (Getty Research Institute)
[191]
The “Tamtoc Venus”: An Early Huastec Sculpture and Its Connections to Gulf Coast Sculptural Traditions
Although the Huasteca belongs to the Mesoamerican culture area and the Gulf Coast region, some scholars have asserted that its
culture, emblematized by its sculptural tradition, was isolated. The examination of Huastec stone sculptures from different periods
reveals not only its links to other artistic traditions in Mesoamerica but significantly also to other Gulf Coast sculptural traditions.
Another misconception is that the sculptural tradition flourished during the Postclassic period. The discovery of sculptures from
earlier periods at the site of Tamtoc in the heart of the Huasteca counters this misconception. This presentation will analyze the
earliest Huastec sculpture known to-date: the fragmented scarified female sculpture discovered in an offering below Monument 32
at Tamtoc, sometimes called “Tamtoc Venus” for its voluptuous, naturalistic body. I will propose an estimated period of manufacture
based on artistic criteria and place the sculpture in its art-historical context, relating it both to local traditions of clay figurines and
broader regional traditions of Gulf Coast sculpture.
Richter, Kim (Getty Research Institute)
[227]
Chair
Rick, Torben (Smithsonian Institution)
[100]
Discussant
Rick, Torben [129] see Wellman, Hannah
Ricker, Matthew [130] see Marken, Damien
Ricketts, Macy (University of Wyoming), Naomi Ward (University of Wyoming), Todd Surovell (University of Wyoming) and
Madeline Mackie (University of Wyoming)
[244]
Microbial Community Structure within Stratified Soils at the La Prele Mammoth Site
Microbiology has only recently been used as an emerging tool for analysis of archaeological sites. Predominantly, bacteria and fungi
within these sites have been used in medical applications. However, recent technological advancements have allowed researchers
to use both living and ancient microbes as tools to potentially understand past climate and human movement. These ecological
studies include an experimental approach known as the Trophic Group Method that assumes the physiological properties of
present-day bacteria buried in paleosols can serve as indicators of climate aridity. First systematically tested on soil samples from
the Hell Gap Paleoindian campsite (Grund et al., 2014; Viable paleosol microorganisms, paleoclimatic reconstruction, and relative
dating in archaeology: a test case from Hell Gap, Wyoming, USA: J. Archaeological Science 46: 217–228), this method’s validity is
being further examined by using a holistic approach investigating DNA from living and recently dead or ancient bacteria, and a
variety of soil properties within a test unit at the La Prele Mammoth kill site near Douglas, Wyoming. Using ecological theory as a
foundation, we analyzed soil samples taken from a sediment profile at La Prele in order to understand the driving factors behind
community formation at different stratigraphic positions.
Ridge, William (University of Illinois, Chicago)
[34]
Where Did You Go? Possible Depopulation during the Copper Age in Eastern Hungary
The Copper Age in eastern Hungary is characterized by small and ephemeral settlements and the movement of new peoples into
the region. By the Middle Copper Age (4000–3500 BCE) the number of sites on the landscape had plummeted and the available
data on settlements from this period is extremely limited. This may be due to a process of regional depopulation that began shortly
after the abandonment of tells and other large centralized settlements at the end of the Neolithic. Such a depopulation would be
especially interesting given the novel culture groups that appear in the region during the succeeding Late Copper Age (i.e., kurgan,
Boleráz/Baden). Using the robust regional dataset of the Magyarország Régészeti Topográfiája (Archaeological Topography of
Hungary) and the fieldwork I have conducted over the last two years, I examine to what extent the dramatic decrease in the number
of sites during the Middle Copper Age is attributable to a decrease in population. I also compare the results of the Körös River Basin
in Hungary with other regions throughout Eastern Europe to see if the processes experienced here are part of larger-scale trends
affecting the macro-region during the fourth millennium BCE.
Ridge, William [199] see Gyucha, Attila
Riebe, Danielle (Field Museum of Natural History)
[199]
The Complexities of Settlement Complexes: Reassessing Late Neolithic Settlement Organization on the Great Hungarian Plain
When it comes to studying settlement patterns, scale is essential for answering questions related to internal developments. In the
case of Late Neolithic (5000–4500 BCE) research on the Great Hungarian Plain, what we are learning is that bigger is better when it
comes to scale. The Prehistoric Interactions on the Plain Project (PIPP) has set out to better contextualize the dynamic processes
that resulted in cultural variation during the Late Neolithic by modeling multi-scalar interactions between two archaeological units:
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      470
Herpály and Tisza. As part of an NSF funded project, intensive investigations began at the Herpály site, Csökmő-Káposztás-domb
in the summer of 2019. Previously, it was assumed that Herpály sites consisted of a tell with a possible small external flat
settlement. However, little research has been conducted to support this conclusion. Large-scale geophysical prospection conducted
at Csökmő-Káposztás-domb suggests that tell-centered Herpály settlement complexes are much larger and more amalgamated
than previously suspected. This paper presents data from PIPP’s 2019 field season and compares the magnetometric results with
other Herpály and Tisza sites to draw new conclusions about Late Neolithic settlement patterns and socio-cultural variability on the
Great Hungarian Plain.
Riebe, Danielle [199] see Gyucha, Attila
Riehl, Simone [36] see Oechsner, Amy
Riehm, Grace (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill)
[78]
Vessel Forms in the Late Prehistoric and Early Historic Natchez Bluffs
While we have a general understanding of the pottery that Plaquemine and early Natchez peoples (approximately AD 1200–1730)
made in the Natchez Bluffs and surrounding region, our understandings are based on types and varieties defined between the
1950s and 1960s and refined through the 1980s. These types are primarily based on style, paste, and generalized shape
categories, with little consideration of functional classes and the variation within and between styles. Here I examine drawings and
photographs of whole and partial Plaquemine and early historic Natchez ceramic vessels from various sites in the Natchez Bluffs.
Using visual and quantitative analyses, this research develops a more standardized way of discussing Plaquemine and early historic
Natchez vessel shape and function for comparison between sites and across the broader Lower Mississippi River Valley through
time.
Riemersma, Gert [147] see Varien, Mark
Rieth, Timothy (IARII)
[24]
Discussant
Rieth, Timothy (IARII) and Ethan Cochrane (University of Auckland)
[100]
Explaining Initial Settlement of the Mariana Islands
Based on archaeological, biological, linguistic, and voyaging simulation data, ancestral Mariana Islanders likely set sail from
somewhere to the west or southwest, with the Philippines, Sulawesi, and the Malukus as the most likely candidates. How do we
explain the colonization of the Mariana archipelago? This requires developing theoretically informed models that offer predictions for
the archaeological record and descriptions of the data that are necessary for falsification. These should address proximate and
ultimate processes—events that caused or facilitated migration (proximate) and evolutionary explanations based on selection or
other sorting mechanisms (ultimate). Instead of models, narrative descriptions have been offered that rely on aspects of the
archaeological record, linguistics, common sense, and ethnographic analogy. The dominant narrative situates the settlement of the
Marianas as part of a Neolithic expansion that rolled across ISEA, into Near Oceania, and ultimately into Remote Oceania. An
opposing view states that the initial colonists were not permanent residents but rather were itinerant marine forager/traders
analogous to historical and present-day “sea nomads” that traverse parts of ISEA. Neither is satisfying as an explanatory model.
Here we consider each proposition and evolutionary explanations for human population movements in relation to the archaeological
record and archaeological expectations.
Rieth, Timothy [24] see DiNapoli, Robert
Rieth, Timothy [135] see Krus, Anthony
Rieth, Timothy [262] see Morrison, Alex
Riethmuller, Douglas (Binghamton University)
[203]
Cultural Intersections in the Late Woodland Northeast: pXRF Analysis of Ceramic Paste at the Thomas/Luckey Site, New York
The Late Woodland is a period that represents significant cultural changes in the northeastern U.S. The Thomas/Luckey site, in the
Chemung Valley of New York, has produced ceramics representing different regional groups. Ceramic types include Kelso Corded,
Oak Hill, and a non-local component of Shenks Ferry. Thomas/Luckey was occupied from the thirteenth to the fifteenth century, and
two longhouses represent windows into household level patterning during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Shenks Ferry
pottery represents a non-local group, and its presence indicates trade of objects, migration of people, or a permutation of the two.
Building from Rieth, Knapp, Miroff, and others, this paper assesses whether non-local ceramics represent migration, trade, or the
adoption of non-local decorations. Sherds were analyzed via pXRF. While typologies are based on visual attributes (iconography),
pXRF looks at the elemental composition of ceramics. Decoration can be copied, but paste cannot and this can more accurately
illustrate the origin of the vessels. As cultural groups are not static entities, changes are indicative of internal development or out-
group interaction. Results will add new depth to conceptions of group movement and how identity can be constructed within Late
Woodland villages.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    471
Rigaud, Jean-Philippe [36] see Franklin, Lauren
Riggs, Erin (SUNY Binghamton)
[204]
Refugees of the British Empire: Partition Migrant Homes in Delhi after the 1947 Partition
With Independence, India inherited Delhi; a capital city with built landscapes shaped by pasts incongruous with the ideals of an
Independent India. The legacies of colonial inequality where apparent everywhere in the city—-from its monumental spaces to its
residential neighborhoods. The government sought to transform these spaces in order to make room for a modernizing, upwardly
mobile, populous; many of whom were dispossessed Partition refugees without homes. In this paper, I focus on how refugee
resettlement impacted the homescapes of pre-Partition Delhi and gave rise new material forms. My findings are the result of a
survey of cityscapes and individual homes in Delhi and interviews with 98 Partition refugee families.
Riley, Tim (Prehistoric Museum @ USU Eastern)
[89]
Moderator
Riley, Tim (Prehistoric Museum @ USU Eastern) and Katharine Corneli (Utah State Univerisity Eastern Prehistoric
Museum)
[258]
Animal, Vegetable, Mineral? The Characterization of “Resins” Binding Composite Artifacts from the Northern Colorado Plateau
Like many museums across the American West, the Utah State University Eastern Prehistoric Museum houses a collection
containing well-preserved perishable objects. Many of these artifacts incorporate organic binders, such as hafted arrows and pitched
containers. Yet scant attention has been given in the literature to the use of resins as the glue that held life together. Studies across
the Southwest and beyond show a surprising diversity of binders, including insect lac and asphaltum as well as plant exudates, were
used on artifacts. This presentation highlights work done to characterize the sources of these binders and to recover data which
might reflect artifact use. Borne from an attempt to evaluate the presence of modern replicas or pastiches within private collections,
this study involved plant harvesting and artifact replication experiments, visual and microchemical tests, microscopic identification of
trapped components, and molecular identification. A secondary component of this study was the recovery of use-wear residue
accumulated in the resinous matrix. The microscopic materials trapped in the patch of a ceramic cooking pot or hafted scraper can
provide valuable insight into artifacts with limited provenience, shining new light on old collections.
Ringberg, Jennifer (California State University, Stanislaus)
[106]
Meeting in the Middle: Cultural Dynamics of Early Intermediate Period Highland Colonies in the Middle Moche Valley, Peru
Residents of the Early Intermediate period (EIP) settlement of Cerro León (ca. CE 1–300) in the middle Moche valley maintained a
highland identity through several cultural practices, including culinary traditions and feasting, crafting, and ancestor worship. They
lived in close proximity to, interacted economically, and likely formed marriage alliances with members of coastal (Gallinazo-Virú)
culture groups. Yet, at Cerro León, there is very little evidence that members of this multi-generational, highland-dominated colony
actively engaged in stylistic integration or the adoption of elements of the material culture styles of the other. Instead, the shared
focus of interacting EIP highland and coastal groups appears to have been the intensification of maize. In this presentation, I
address continuity and change regarding the mobility of people, goods, and ideas in the middle Moche valley in the period leading
up to Moche political consolidation and expansion. I also examine how this case study informs us about the shifting alliances and
sociopolitical interactions among highland and coastal groups during the Middle horizon. Although the occupation of Cerro León
precedes the time period that is the focus of this symposium (C.E. 500–950), it provides essential context for events that reshaped
northern Peru in the centuries to come.
Ringle, William (Davidson College), Tomás Gallareta Negrón (CY-INAH), Rossana May Ciau (CIESAS) and Ken Seligson
(California State University, Dominguez Hill)
[230]
The Highs and Lows of Working with Puuc Lidar Data
The broken topography of the uplifted cone karst landscape of the Puuc region presented several challenges to its inhabitants,
including water storage, procurement of construction material, efficient movement from place to place, and perhaps effective
protection from potential attack. This paper presents preliminary analyses of these factors within a 237.1 km2 lidar dataset collected
by NCALM in 2017 and then selectively surveyed by the Bolonchen Regional Archaeological Project (BRAP). We discuss methods
for identifying and quantifying landscape concavities, especially chultuns and quarry pits, and convexities, especially optimal places
for surveillance and intersite visual communication, such as fires or smoke signals, or for monitoring movement between centers.
These are presented in relation to our ongoing study of prehispanic settlement in the region, at sites such as Kom, Xcanbul, and
Muluchtzekel.
Ringstaff, Christopher (Texas Department of Transportation)
[194]
Prehistoric Punch Technology in Texas: Experimentation, Observations, and Analytical Implications
A recent review of collections and literature from Texas prehistoric sites reveals antler artifacts variously referred to as punches,
drifts, and antler cylinders. These artifacts are often interpreted as tools for indirect percussion knapping. This paper reports the
results of flintkapping experiments conducted with replicas of these artifacts for biface manufacture using the indirect percussion
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   472
technique. The results are compared to direct percussion biface experiments examining both bifaces and debitage. This study
reviews the spatial and temporal context of these antler artifacts across Texas as well as their form and function. A summary of the
experimental results proposes possible use techniques, presents use-wear comparisons of the archeological specimens and
replicas, and provides initial qualitative and quantitative analyses. The conclusion presents preliminary interpretations of these antler
artifacts and provides a basis for future research.
Ringstaff, Christopher [194] see Parker, Adam
Rios Allier, Jorge (Indiana University)
[231]
Current Perspectives on the Mexican Archaeological Heritage Management: Some Considerations of the Present Models
The present work shows the different perspectives of management that have accompanied the administration of the Mexican
archaeological heritage. Mexico has many UNESCO World Heritage sites, archaeological sites and museums, where various
financial mechanisms have been chosen for the operation, management, research and dissemination of cultural property. Also, this
study aims to show the findings in the literature about the use of financial mechanisms for the implementation of cultural heritage
management in Mexico, their definition according to their legal framework, the possible dependence on changes in terms of political
alignment or their socioeconomic context.
Risner, Lacy [227] see Venter, Marcie
Rissolo, Dominique (University of California, San Diego)
[238]
An Overview and Synthesis of Paleocoastal Research on the Yucatán Peninsula
The broad carbonate platform and shallow continental shelf of the Yucatán Peninsula supported the rise of the northern lowland
Maya and the dispersal of Paleoamerican peoples thousands of years earlier. Exploration—particularly in the region’s now-
submerged cave systems—has revealed the remains of the Yucatán’s earliest human inhabitants as well as diverse and relatively
well preserved faunal and botanical assemblages. Additionally, growing interest in Maya maritime trade and interaction has
necessitated a more holistic understanding of the interrelationships between humans and coastal processes, particularly in zones of
low topographic relief. Over the past two decades, interdisciplinary research programs have more intensively focused on Late
Pleistocene through Late Holocene sea-level rise—and its implications—via a range of methodologies and proxies. Efforts have
involved the recovery and analysis of cave and shallow marine sediment cores, speleothems, and sub-bottom sonar data in addition
to detailed mapping and in situ geological and paleontological sampling. The resulting reconstructions of paleoclimate,
paleoecology, and overall paleocoastal geomorphology have proven integral to ongoing archaeological investigations on the
Yucatán Peninsula.
Rissolo, Dominique [33] see Glover, Jeffrey
Ritchison, Brandon (University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign) and Brandon Ritchison
[63]
Constructing Communities: Continuity and Change in Community Organization on the Georgia Coast, 2250 BC–AD 1650.
The Georgia Coast, along with much of the South Atlantic and Gulf Coasts of the modern United States, was home to some of the
earliest sedentary villages in North America (ca. 2250–1000 BC), materialized in monumental-scale rings of refuse. This region was
also the location of some of the first sustained contact between American Indians and Europeans in what is now the mainland of the
modern United States (beginning ca. AD 1527). However, the focus on these two periods has led to a poor understanding of
community organization in the intervening millennia. Recognizing the incomplete understanding of long-term patterns of community
organization resulting from the field methods and research foci most commonly employed on the Georgia Coast, many recent
archaeological projects on the Georgia Bight have adopted explicitly holistic and systematic approaches to data collection. On this
poster, I present the findings from one of these projects, the systematic survey of Kenan Field (9MC67), a multicomponent site. I
highlight the results relating to the demography and community organization of relatively understudied periods in the region,
including the Terminal Archaic, Woodland, and Mississippian.
Ritchison, Brandon [63] see Ritchison, Brandon
Ritter, Alexandra (Western Washington University), Paloma Cuello del Pozo (Texas A&M University) and Jose Peña
(University of South Florida)
[242]
Preliminary Study of Dental Health among Coastal Population at the Site of the Santo Domingo Cemetery in Huarmey, Peru
Recent archaeological excavations at the prehispanic cemetery of Santo Domingo in Huarmey, Peru revealed a looted assemblage
associated with a prehispanic settlement connected to the presence of the Casma culture. The cemetery was likely utilized during
the Late Intermediate Period (1000–1400 CE). In a preliminary attempt, the juvenile and adult mandibles and maxillae of 13
individuals were examined to hypothesize dietary and cultural practices exercised by this population. Common pathologies observed
were alveolar resorption, severe crown wear, root caries on the buccal side, and pit caries on the occlusal side, as well as alveolar
abscesses. Anomalies such as agenesis of the second premolar and the third molar were also recorded. Given the small sample
size, statistically significant claims regarding lifestyle and dietary habits cannot be made without further research. However, it is
hypothesized that some of the dental markers observed are related to the practice of coca chewing, along with the effects of specific
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     473
dietary habits generated from the population’s coastal and agricultural resources. For future examination, the protocol outlined by
Indriati and Buikstra (2001) will be applied as a well-established method to detect coca-chewers of coastal Peru.
Rivas, Alexander (Washington University, St. Louis)
[151]
Community Archaeology at Nueve Cerros
The Salinas de los Nueve Cerros archaeology project, located in Alta Verapaz, Guatemala, has had the challenge and opportunity
for combining the goals of scientific archaeological research while promoting community development. This includes diversifying the
local economy and improving access to health care and clean water. While community development is often relegated to an
afterthought for most international field research projects, the Nueve Cerros project makes it a key component of the project. In fact,
much of the scientific research would not have been carried out without focusing on the development goals first. In this paper, I
share my experiences conducting community archaeology, in which the local Q’eqchi’ communities play a crucial role in selecting
excavation locations, methodologies conducted, and timeline of fieldwork. Many of these Q’eqchi’ communities have a violent and
hostile history, in which the investigations of their land for cultural heritage is not trusted, nor seen as an invaluable endeavor. This
dissent can be seen in many Latin American communities. I argue that when conducting international field research, a program for
community development is essential for decolonizing science, making the research a long-term benefit for the communities outside
of just their cultural heritage.
Rivera, Antonieta (Simon Fraser University)
[269]
Finding the Common Thread: The Slightly Different Archaeoastronomical Orientations of Tenochtitlan, Tlatelolco, and Tenayuca
The slightly different orientations of three Aztec sites—Tenochtitlan, Tlatelolco, and Tenayuca—have been noted in multiple
archaeoastronomical analyses. Multiple theories have been offered to explain these orientations. Through the utilization of an
interdisciplinary approach—that utilized ethnohistoric and archaeological sources and examined these sites through a methodology
integrated a wide range of digital applications including Google Earth, Google Maps, solar charting, topographic analysis, open-
content collaborative, geo-location-oriented photo-sharing applications as well as a custom-built geometric application—this
research demonstrated that these orientations were intended to re-create on the sacred landscape the same mythical event: the
birth of Huitzilopochtli.
Rivera, Jordi [174] see Sutter, Richard
Rivera, Michael [37] see Nash, Brendan
Rivera Infante, Arturo
[242]
Lithic Artifact Diversity in the Lomas of the Middle Sama Valley, Tacna, Peru, during the Prehispanic Period
Andean lithic studies consider coastal and highlands assemblages as discrete and not sharing many characteristics. The lomas of
the south Andean Peruvian piedmont form a seasonal transitory environment that reflects the mobility of hunters, pastoralists, and
animals between coast and highlands over the course of the prehispanic period. The research presented here is a longitudinal study
conducted in the middle Sama Valley, Tacna, Peru (400–650 masl) that highlights the variability of the local lithic assemblage from
the Archaic Period (8000–3000 BC) to the Late Horizon (AD 1400–1532). The most frequent tool types include projectile points,
scrapers, knives, and drills, among others. Most of these artifacts, many of which match the coastal and highland typologies, are
made from local raw materials.
Rivera Infante, Arturo [242] see Baitzel, Sarah
Rivera Prince, Jordi (University of Florida) and Gabriel Prieto (University of Florida)
[174]
A “Salinar Period” Cemetery at the José Olaya Site: Preliminary Demography of a Post-Chavín Maritime Community in the Moche
Valley
Systematic bioarchaeological studies of skeletal remains in conjunction with mortuary analyses provide a unique space in which
archaeologists can begin to reconstruct past populations, social dynamics, and cosmologies. Following the influence of late Initial
Period Cupisnique (1200/1100–500 BC) and early Horizon Chavin (800–400 BC), north coast populations entered a period of
transition. The beginning of this period, the “Salinar Period” (ca. 400 BC–100/50 BC) is poorly understood in the context of the
Moche Valley in northern Peru more broadly. Three years of excavations by the Programa Arqueológico Huanchaco (PAHUAN) at
the José Olaya site in Huanchaco (approximately 10 km north of modern-day Trujillo) identified three Salinar Period occupations.
While human remains are associated with all occupations, the identification of a cemetery means the José Olaya site has become
the largest systematically-excavated Salinar period cemetery since rescue excavations at Cerro Oreja (Moche Valley) and the
Puemape site (Jequetepeque Valley). To date, many burials have been recovered from José Olaya and some preliminarily
analyzed. Preliminary demographic information will be presented, with particular focus on elite burials identified thus far.
Considering data derived mortuary patterns, bioprofiles, and cemetery-wide trends, this paper discusses potential theoretical
implications in a post-Chavín coastal Moche Valley.
[174]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 474
Rizzo, Adriana [258] see Edelstein, Beth
Rizzo, Florencia [143] see Scheinsohn, Vivian
Rizzolo, Alexis (University of Montana) and Meradeth Snow (University of Montana)
[244]
Nondestructive and Destructive DNA Sampling Methods for Obtaining Success Rates on Genetic Sexing of Remains
This research aims to investigate the success rates of non-destructive and destructive DNA sampling methods for the genetic
sexing of remains. Methods for obtaining DNA have varied, with the most fundamental level being whether samples were partially
destroyed or left intact through the DNA extraction process. While testing has been completed to look at whether or not non-
destructive analyses can be successful, and generally they have worked well, the rate of success for sexing individuals genetically
in a direct comparison of extraction techniques has not been completed. Samples from individuals who were sexed based on
skeletal markers were blindly sampled and DNA extracted in the two methods, followed by PCR and electrophoretic comparison of
the results to ID the amelogenin sexual dimorphism. Due to the known issues with this type of testing (drop-out of larger alleles,
contamination, etc.), this was completed in multiple steps. The resulting findings demonstrate the comparability of both extraction
methods, with neither significantly outperforming the other. Through this investigation, we can achieve a better understanding of
DNA sampling methods for obtaining genetic sexing on remains.
Roa, Ian [178] see Ellis, Olivia
Robb, Matthew (Fowler Museum @ UCLA)
[84]
Discussant
Robb, Matthew [166] see Rich, Michelle
Robbins, Andrew [147] see Newell, Zachary
Robbins, Brady [148] see Bryce, Joseph
Robbins, Helen
[218]
Moderator
Robbins, Karinne [77] see Kotis, India
Roberts, James [59] see Cable, Charlotte
Roberts, Jerod (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center), Victoria Roberts (Shumla Archaeological Research
& Education Center) and Richard McAuliffe (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center)
[16]
Alexandria Project Baseline Documentation of Cedar Springs Shelter
In 2019, Shumla Archaeological Research Center conducted baseline documentation of Cedar Springs Shelter as part of the
Alexandria Project, a multiyear project designed to gather an extensive and research driven dataset from over 350 known rock art
sites in Val Verde County. The Cedar Springs mural represents one of the most well preserved and compositionally intricate Pecos
River Style rock art murals in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands. The panel spans 62 m and contains over 480 identifiable figures.
While a typical rock art site may take one day to gather baseline data, Cedar Springs required seven. Data collected includes
detailed site and figure descriptions, iconographic data entry into Shumla’s database, 15 high-resolution Gigapanoramas, context
and feature photography, and a georeferenced 3D model derived from SfM photogrammetry, GPS, and total station data. The vast
and multifaceted datasets from this and other sites recorded from the project will open areas for future research including rock art
distribution and directionality patterns, motif attribute studies, landscape archaeology, and conservation assessments. Importantly,
we have preserved the rock art at Cedar Springs into perpetuity. This paper discusses the preliminary results from Cedar Springs as
well as the methods and problems in documenting large sites.
[16]
Chair
Roberts, Jerod [16] see Roberts, Victoria
Roberts, Madison [37] see Anderson, Jennifer
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   475
Roberts, Tim (Texas Parks and Wildlife Department)
[16]
The Meeting of Two Worlds: A 10-Year Review of the “Big Bend Bold” Pictograph Style of West Texas
Defined 10 years ago, the Big Bend Bold pictograph style of west Texas has benefited from recent site discoveries and research.
While the Big Bend Bold pictograph site assemblage originally included five sites in the Big Bend region, as many as three
additional sites may be attributable to the style. Though attributing pictographs to a particular style can be a subjective process,
portable X-ray fluorescence may be able to identify Big Bend Bold figures based on the type of pigment used; preliminary studies by
Texas A&M researchers at 41PS191, the Big Bend Bold type site, indicated that all Big Bend Bold figures were painted with
manganese pigment while black pictographs attributable to other styles were all produced from carbon (charcoal) pigment. The
proximity of Big Bend Bold pictograph sites to La Junta de los Rios prompted the author in 2010 to suggest Patarabueye authorship
for these figures. Recent petrographic and neutron activation analyses of pottery sherds from pueblo sites in La Junta, conducted at
the direction of the Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State University, and of sherds recovered from 41PS191, may tell us
more specifically which pueblo was responsible for the creation of this imagery.
Roberts, Victoria (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center), Jerod Roberts (Shumla Archaeological Research
& Education Center) and Richard McAuliffe (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center)
[16]
Public Outreach of the Alexandria Project
Over 95% of Texas is private property, a situation that makes large scale archaeological surveys difficult. With a goal of recording
over 300 rock art sites in a 3,150 square mile area, the Alexandria project has had to secure permission from over 60 landowners.
Shumla has adopted a variety of methods for the purposes of public outreach with clear goals to build strong relationships with local
landowners and site stewards while increasing general public awareness in the importance of preserving and protecting rock art
sites. We utilize social media platforms like e-newsletters, blogs, Facebook, and Instagram, each filling a different niche for sharing
information. E-newsletters and blogs allow for more detailed reporting on various aspects of our organization while Facebook and
Instagram have become our day-to-day platforms to share quick project updates, along with a recurring post tagged #MotifMonday.
All these present data collected or generated as part of our ongoing research. Additionally, we produce short reports containing
photos, maps, and hyperlinks to 3D models and Gigapans that summarize and illustrate our observations, providing site stewards
with tangible documents to view and share. Public access to project data builds trust in our existing relationships and fosters new
relationships with landowners.
[16]
Chair
Roberts, Victoria [16] see Roberts, Jerod
Robertson, Ian [102] see Nichols, Deborah
Robins, Morgan
[65]
A Broken History Made Whole: The Use of 3D Modeling Techniques to Piece Rock Art Back Together
Archaeological remains are often found in pieces. While curators can reconstruct smaller items like ceramics, rock art panels
present a contextual dilemma. Namely, how can we reconstruct the context of the rock art panel (its original location along with the
curated fragments)? The purpose of this study is to use 3D methods to create an interactive, virtual model that repositions
fragmented pieces of panels with their original rockface. My project uses fragments of panels rediscovered in 2017 that where once
part of a collection of rock art panels from the northeastern part of Wyoming. The panels are located in collections at the University
of Wyoming (Laramie) and at The Buffalo Bill Center of the West (Cody). I used standard photogrammetry collections methods to
capture panel data. AgiSoft Metashape was used to create accurate models for visualization.
Robinson, Erick (Utah State University), Scott Ortman (University of Colorado, Boulder), Grant Coffey (Crow Canyon
Archaeological Center), Jacob Freeman (Utah State University) and Robert Kelly (University of Wyoming)
[26]
Energy Consumption and Population Size in the Archaeological Record: Evaluating the Relationship between Radiocarbon Date
Frequencies and Prehistoric Populations
Aggregated radiocarbon date frequencies are increasingly used as a paleodemographic proxy. However, much still needs to be
understood about how directly proportional radiocarbon date frequencies are to prehistoric populations. A recent paper by Freeman
et al. (2018) used contemporary data for energy consumption and population size to identify sub-linear scaling, which suggests the
lack of a direct one-to-one correlation between radiocarbon dates and prehistoric population size. This paper builds on that study by
comparing charcoal output in the archaeological record to other paleodemographic proxies such as pottery and settlement size. We
analyze data from the Crow Canyon Archaeological Center, as these data have been obtained through similar field collection
strategies over multiple decades, which serves as a control for collection bias. We test whether a sub-linear scaling relationship
exists between energy consumption and population size in the archaeological record. This study has implications for the validation
of scaling theory in archaeology and the use of radiocarbon time series as a paleodemographic proxy.
Robinson, Erick (Utah State University)
[217]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 476
Robinson, Erick [26] see Freeman, Jacob
Robinson, Erick [177] see Tucker, Kaley
Robinson, Erick [183] see Wells, Joshua
Robinson, Eugenia and Ronald Bishop (Smithsonian Institution)
[237]
Provenance Studies of Ceramics from the K’iche Capital Q’umarkaj, Guatemalan Highlands
Chemistry-based provenance studies of ceramics in the Southern Maya area by Hector Neff have laid a foundation for further
research on ceramics from this area of Mesoamerica. Research on a collection of ceramics from the K’iche Q’umarkaj capital
housed at the Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University, provides new data for assessing the origins of ceramics from
the elite center in the Guatemalan highlands. Neutron activation by Ronald Bishop of painted and slipped pottery and censers has
revealed that the ceramics are locally made. Other INAA studies of domestic pottery from Late Postclassic centers in Soconusco
and the Antigua Valley area find similar results. The study of some of the vessels of an elite bench cache (John W. Fox et al. 1992)
shows that the rulers of the site participated in macro-regional interaction networks in Postclassic times.The INAA analysis of the
remains of a “shiny” Tohil-like jar with a complex incised serpent design proves that the vessel is from the Gulf Coast. According to
John Pohl, a Mixteca-Puebla human effigy vessel, is certainly from the Oaxaca area and reported Tohil Plumbates jars of the rain
god Tlaloc, based on Neff’s studies, derive from the Soconusco area.
Robinson, Eugenia [60] see Garnica, Marlen
Robinson, Francis (Vermont State Archaeologist) and Scott Dillon (Vermont Division for Historic Preservation)
[190]
Public Archaeology as Public Data: Sharing Data and Research in a Regulatory Environment
Most of the archaeological excavations and research in New England are done within the parameters of Cultural Resource
Management (CRM) projects. These studies are critically important, and the reports and other data generated from them often
represent incredible methodological and analytical achievements. Their restricted dissemination (by statute or habit) however, has
limited their impact on current scholarship. The authors will present initiatives undertaken by the Vermont Division for Historic
Preservation to share some of these data while still maintaining protections for archaeological sites and landowner concerns. We
will also suggest avenues that other consulting and regulatory entities can undertake to share their data more widely.
Robinson, Mark (University of Exeter), José Iriarte (University of Exeter), Gaspar Morcote Ríos (National University of
Colombia) and Javier Aceituno (University of Antioquia)
[198]
The Younger Dryas and the Colonization of the Amazon
New archaeological data from Serrania de la Lindosa, Colombia, suggest climatic impacts on resources drove early human
colonization of the Amazon forest during the Younger Dryas. At the end of the Pleistocene, humans entered South America and
colonized the Bogota plateau as temperatures rose and precipitation increased. The return to glacial conditions during the Younger
Dryas stressed high-altitude resources and drove the tree line down 300–600 m. This period coincides with the first evidence of
human colonization of the lowland forest-savanna ecotone, as revealed by multiple new contexts dating to ca. 12.5 kya in the rock
shelters of Serrania de la Lindosa. The rock shelters show evidence of sustained and continued occupation and are accompanied
by extensive rock art, which includes depictions of plants, animals, hand prints, geometric designs and now extinct megafauna.
Archaeobotanical data reveal an increasing reliance on plant resources, many of which later become Amazonian hyperdominants.
Integrated archaeological, archaeobotanical, climatic, and paleoecological data indicate that climatic change during the Pleistocene-
Holocene transition impacted resources, causing a “push” from the Andean Plateau, and a “pull” to lowland forests, establishing the
early human colonization of the Amazon.
Robles García, Nelly (Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia)
[145]
Avances en las investigaciones del sitio Patrimonio Mundial de Monte Albán-Atzompa
Los desastres naturales y antrópicos como los sismos, lluvias e incendios que se presentan constantemente en la zona
arqueológica de Monte Albán-Atzompa nos permiten aventajar en el estudio de las estructuras y su distribución espacial. Un
resultado de los recientes sismos de 2017 sobre este sitio han sido los estudios arqueológicos de diferentes áreas que colapsaron
durante el siniestro. Los constantes incendios en el polígono protegido nos dan la oportunidad de realizar análisis de las áreas
dañadas, mientras que las excesivas lluvias nos permiten visualizar el comportamiento de los sistemas constructivos y los
desagües en las áreas públicas y residencias del sitio. De esta manera y con el apoyo de tecnologías se avanza en la comprensión
de aspectos del sitio que habían sido poco estudiados.
[145]
Chair
Robles García, Nelly [145] see Frykholm, Soren
Robles García, Nelly [145] see García, Dante
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  477
Rocha, Bruna (UFOPA, Brazil), Vinicius Honorato (Universidade Federal do Oeste do Pará, Brazil), Márcio Amaral (Instituto
Mamirauá), William Balée and Lana Guimarães Melo
[161]
The Pristine Myth and Its Consequences for Amazonian Forest Peoples: An Example from the Upper Iriri
Located in the Xingu-Tapajós interfluve, the Terra do Meio is currently made up of a mosaic of protected areas and indigenous
reserves. This case study considers the relationship between the riverine traditional communities (who call themselves beiradeiros)
of the upper Iriri River and the Brazilian state, from the time when the area they inhabit since the late nineteenth century was
decreed an Ecological Station—a modality of conservation unit that prohibits human occupation. Based on the “pristine myth”—the
notion that the environment should be totally protected/preserved—these beiradeiros have been pressured, at times violently, to
leave the area. This paper will present recently acquired data, produced by work integrated through a historical ecological
perspective, which relates to the the antiquity of human occupation of the beiradeiro’s territory and the relationship between these
“recent” inhabitants with an ecological infrastructure built by past occupants that its current occupants manage and promote.
Roche Recinos, Alejandra (Brown University), Andrew Scherer (Brown University) and Charles Golden (Brandeis
University)
[54]
Stone Goods and the Organization of Late Classic Period Regional Economies of the Middle Usumacinta River Region
In this paper we present the results of the analysis of nearly 42,000 chert and obsidian artifacts from sites in the Middle Usumacinta
River region to examine economic production and exchange at the level of the polity. Our study includes a range of household and
non-household contexts, revealing entanglements of the lithic economy within the sociopolitical dynamics of the region during the
Late Classic period (AD 600–900). The urban center of Piedras Negras demonstrates a remarkable paucity of long-distance trade
goods (e.g., obsidian and greenstone), relative to Yaxchilan, Palenque, and other neighboring polity capitals. Yet, Piedras Negras’
subsidiary, Budsilha, enjoyed better access to some of these same goods, likely resulting from the economic networks surrounding
an obsidian workshop found at that site. The craftspeople at Budsilha produced far more blades than were consumed at the site
itself, suggesting that they were among the major producers in the area. Coupled with other lines of archaeological evidence, these
data point to the complicated nature of Maya economies where economic productivity and trade connections were not equally held
among polity capitals and subordinate centers may have enjoyed greater economic opportunity than the polity capitals that
governed them.
Roche Recinos, Alejandra [265] see Rodas, Ricardo
Rockwell, Heather (Wyoming SHPO)
[190]
East Coast to the High Plains: Expanding Public Outreach Opportunities in Archaeology
Public outreach in archaeology has grown to be an essential part of successful historic preservation offices. I have had the privilege
of working for two State Historic Preservation and State Archaeology offices with active and exciting public outreach efforts. This
presentation will discuss some of the creative public outreach work that the Wyoming state office is currently undertaking. In
addition, I will be discussing some of the current challenges these programs are facing and how we can push forward and remain
relevant in the modern era. Finally, I will discuss how programs like these shape the next generation of archaeological scholars and
our ability to protect historic resources.
[190]
Discussant
[190]
Chair
Rockwell, Heather [190] see Benney Basque, Yvonne
Rodas, Ricardo (Universidad de San Carlos de Guatemala), Alejandra Roche Recinos (Brown University) and Omar Alcover
(Brown University)
[265]
The Practice of Conflict: Slingstones and Fortifications in the Maya Lowlands
Among the Maya, early fortresses and networks of defensive walls suggest that real, or perceived threats were a concern from as
early as the Preclassic period (ca. 500 BC). Despite the growing number of fortifications identified, the relationship between
defensive features, strategy, and weaponry remains blurred, often discussed as separate elements in the practice of war. In this
paper, we investigate the presence of spherical artifacts, potential slingstones, at sites across the Maya lowlands. Specifically, we
assess caches of slingstones identified at Macabilero, a Late Preclassic fortress, and at Budsilhá, a secondary center of Piedras
Negras in the Usumacinta River Valley. Our analysis is focused on the artifact’s morphology, the measurement of physical
attributes, and other visible features. Moreover, we incorporate iconographic, archaeological, ethnohistoric, and ethnographic data
to argue that these early weapons might have been used at these defensive settlements. We maintain that this type of weapon was
likely common across the lowlands, as it required little training to be effective. Through a dual investigation of weaponry and
fortifications, we aim to elucidate on the strategies and intended outcomes of violent conflict at different points in time in Maya
history.
Rodas, Ricardo [128] see Alcover, Omar
Roddick, Andrew [105] see Reilly, Sophie
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   478
Rodgers, Emily
[4]
Petrographic and Geochemical Insights into Ceramic Technology and Provenance on the Paria Peninsula, Venezuela
This study integrated macroscopic, petrographic, and geochemical analytical techniques to analyze ceramic assemblages from two
sites, Quebrada de Balerio and La Alquería, on the Paria Peninsula, Venezuela. The Paria Peninsula is considered a transitionary
location in the migration of the Saladoid people from the Lower Orinoco to the islands in the Caribbean. Within these assemblages,
all of the ceramics stylistically aligned with the Saladoid series, except for one Barrancoid series sherd. Petrographic analysis, X-ray
fluorescence, and scanning electron microscopy were used to interpret the provenance of the ceramics, ceramic production
methods, and possible correlations between material selection and decorative techniques. The results indicate that the Saladoid
series sherds were produced locally, while the Barrancoid series sherd was produced elsewhere. Analysis of the decorative slips
and of the grog inclusions revealed a continuity of the ceramic technology and materials source locations within the sites. The
integrated analytical approach of this preliminary study displays the potential for future archaeometric studies of ceramics relating to
the migration of the Saladoid people.
Rodning, Christopher (Tulane University) and Stephen Acabado (University of California, Los Angeles)
[239]
Game Theory, Chaos Theory, and the Archaeology of Indigenous Responses to Global Spanish Colonialisms
Dominant historical narratives have favored interpretations that conquered groups yielded to the political and economic might of
colonizing powers. Recent models in archaeology, however, emphasize that indigenous responses to colonialism are more complex
than succumbing or capitulating to colonial and imperial hegemony, and that indigenous peoples significantly shaped the historical
courses of culture contact. This paper considers the applicability of game theory and chaos theory toward explaining indigenous
engagements with Spanish colonists in the Philippines and the Native American South. These cases offer examples of indigenous
groups making decisions and pursuing strategies meant to ensure that local communities would both survive and thrive in changing
geopolitical landscapes, including cases in which groups resisted or accommodated colonial enterprises, or both at once. For
example, the Ifugao of the Philippines shifted from dry-rice to wet-rice cultivation after Spanish contact. Although the Spanish
colonial regime favored wet-rice cultivation, this practice generated monetary power and political capital for the Ifugao, and enabled
successful resistance by the Ifugao to Spanish colonial hegemony. Archaeological and historical sources illustrate that Native
American groups navigated and managed the Spanish colonial presence in the American South within indigenous frameworks of
warfare and diplomacy, trade and exchange, and monumentality.
Rodríguez, Anabelle (Rutgers University)
[57]
The Archaeology of the (In)visible: Local Expertise and Curatorial Agency at the Xunantunich Archaeological Reserve
Archaeologists learn to master a particular form of academic discourse that results in public gatherings and specialized publications
geared toward the exchange of scientific knowledge. Through these and other related activities, they effectively build up their
professional reputations thanks in great measure to the collective efforts of many. A key aspect of my current work on the history of
archaeological conservation focuses on stories about fieldwork and nature-culture conservation at the Xunantunich Archaeological
Reserve, in Cayo District, Belize. Most of these stories have been shared by local masons, excavators, and a conservation
technician from San Jose Succotz and Benque Viejo del Carmen, the two villages closest to the popular site. Other stories about
former workers at the site are now emerging after decades of laying dormant thanks to archival research. These oral and written
stories voice out individual and collective experiences, aspirations, concerns, and expectations, revealing that it is through the
longstanding (in)visible agency of many unsung individuals that the restored appearance and archaeological materiality of
Xunantunich has been expertly curated into what is visible to the public today.
Rodriguez, Katherine and Nicholas Herrmann
[215]
Applying Geophysical Prospection to Interpret Historical Burial Practices at Two Cemeteries on St. Eustatius, Dutch Caribbean
This research examines the relationship between the Old Church Cemetery and the Jewish Cemetery on the Dutch Caribbean
island of Sint Eustatius. These cemeteries are located near each other, yet the people buried in them had different religious
ideologies and social positions. Utilizing ground penetrating radar and gradiometry, I searched for unmarked burials for a more
accurate representation of the cemeteries while they were in use to analyze the cultural relationship between the Dutch Reformed
and the Jewish community in the late seventeenth and eighteenth century. In ArcGIS, possible grave anomalies were identified, and
the dimensions of extant and possible burials measured. This narrowed down what anomalies could be a burial based on the
dimensions of the anomaly. Anomalies that persist throughout the GPR grids or match historical maps were identified as burials.
The data suggest potential unmarked burials in the Old Church Cemetery in the Jewish Cemetery. The marked Jewish burials orient
northwest to southeast and the marked Dutch Reformed burials orient east to west. Differences in dimensions of extant burials were
detected by t-test. These results suggest evidence of different cultural traditions and will be researched further.
Rodriguez, Maria Fernanda [125] see Pintar, Elizabeth
Rodríguez, Mónica [225] see Marengo, Nelda
Rodríguez-Alegría, Enrique [239] see De Lucia, Kristin
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     479
Rodriguez Ceja, María [101] see de la Rosa, Yuri
Rodriguez Osorio, Daniel (University of Minnesota)
[246]
Disentangling Landscape: A Political Ecology Approach to the Tairona Regime at the Northwestern Side of the Sierra Nevada de
Santa Marta (Colombia)
This paper examines how different environmental contexts and political-economic programs framed the dialectic between the
organic/nonorganic elements/participants of the environment (including humans), and yielded uneven transformations of space and
matter at the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta (SNSM), a glaciated mountain located in northern Colombia, inhabited in prehispanic
times by several indigenous communities known as the Tairona (200–1600 CE). I draw on results from recent archaeological
projects at the massif by analyzing field data gathered on its northwestern side to explore the constitution of a lithic architecture that
favored spatial openness and connectivity, over exclusion, as values for the constitution of power and authority. I explore the
dialectic whereby the diversity in sources of raw material to build stone terraces, pathways, and staircases, conditioned the building
techniques the Tairona implemented, and the ideology and power relationships among them shaped those materials, constituting a
social ground for the structuration of the Tairona landscape. Moreover, I utilize GIS and archive information to shed light on the
potential scope of the agriculture system developed to sustain the Tairona urban regime. Rather than a primeval forest, I aim to
deem the SNSM as a landscape that has been transformed over the past 1,800 years.
[246]
Chair
Rodríguez Pascua, Miguel [197] see Combey, Andy
Rodriguez Romero, Carol [243] see Varillas, Rosa María
Rogers, Ashleigh (University of Queensland) and Marshall Weisler (University of Queensland)
[27]
Limpet (Cellana spp.) Shape Is Correlated with Basalt or Eolianite Coastlines: Insights into Prehistoric Marine Shellfish Foraging in
the Hawaiian Islands
The study of archaeological mollusk remains yields important information regarding human foraging as mollusks occur on a range of
substrates including rocky shores, coral reefs, mud flats, and sandy beaches while the morphology of their shells reflect their habitat
and mode of life. The windward shoreline of Moloka’i, Hawaiian Islands, is formed mostly of smooth basalt boulders or eolianite
(limestone) substrate, supporting abundant intertidal rocky shore resources. These contrasting littoral shores influence the
composition of the intertidal mollusk populations, but both support large numbers of the ubiquitous Hawaiian limpet (Cellana
exarata, C. sandwicensis, C. talcosa). We wanted to know if shell shape (i.e., form and dimensions) of the Hawaiian limpet varied
between shoreline types. In other words, could the shape of archaeological limpets indicate particular shorelines where prehistoric
foragers obtained these shellfish? We sampled modern mollusk populations on basalt and eolianite coastlines and compared the
results to species composition and shape in late prehistoric archaeological middens adjacent to the sampled areas. While the three
limpet species inhabit different elevations along the littoral shore, our results demonstrate that modern limpet shell shape (and
archaeological limpet assemblages) correlates to basalt or eolianite coastlines thus providing new insights into prehistoric Hawaiian
foraging practices.
Rogers, J. Daniel [26] see Kohler, Tim
Rogers, Thatcher (University of New Mexico)
[71]
Dusting the Tomes Off: Quantitative Investigations into Charles Di Peso’s Paquimé
The recent surge in studies of inequality, social networks, and chronometric assessment of archaeological sites in the American
Southwest demonstrates the value of revisiting published and unpublished data. These approaches, however, have seldom been
applied to prehispanic communities located along the contemporary U.S.-Mexico Border or in Northern Mexico. This is problematic
as arguably the most sociopolitically complex community and a polity core in the prehispanic Southwest/Northwest, Paquimé, is
located there. Excavations at Paquimé by Charles Di Peso and colleagues and the publication of nearly all excavation data in a set
of analytical volumes have set and inspired nearly all consequent investigations into the Casas Grandes culture. In this talk, I
quantitatively investigate the published and unpublished architectural, ceramic, and chronological data from Paquimé and nearby
communities to facilitate a regional comparison and context for Paquimé.
Rojas, Manuel [74] see Gayo, Eugenia
Rojas Sepulveda, Claudia [134] see Hall, Sarah
Roldan, Jonathan [53] see Mitchell, Spencer
Roldan, Jonathan [178] see Rutherford, Cady
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     480
Rolett, Barry (University of Hawaii)
[24]
From Dune Stratigraphy to a Model-Based Cultural Sequence for the Marquesas Islands of East Polynesia
The Marquesas Islands comprise part of East Polynesia, a culture area that also includes Hawai’i, New Zealand and Tahiti.
Calcareous sand dunes are rare in the Marquesas but play an outsized role in Polynesian archaeology. Dune sites yield remarkably
rich evidence of human settlement and the preservation of organic remains is unparalleled. Yet the stratigraphy of these sites is
complex. Drawing upon results from the excavation of key Marquesan dune sites (Hanamiai, Ha’atuatua and Hane), this
presentation examines the value of biomarkers and chronologically diagnostic artifacts in constructing chronological models.
Prominent markers, such as the remains of extinct fauna, allow the correlation of stratigraphic sequences within and among sites. A
two-phase cultural sequence is defined, consisting of the Archaic and Classic eras. The Archaic era, representing initial human
colonization and a period during which distant communities were linked by systematic long-distance voyaging, is particularly
significant because its defining traits are widely distributed across East Polynesia. A model-based approach incorporating both
stratigraphic and artifact sequences lays the foundation for resolving questions concerning human colonization of the Marquesas
and other East Polynesian archipelagoes, as well as the duration of the Archaic era.
Rollefson, Gary [125] see Heidkamp, Blair
Rolph, Kevin (College of Wooster) and Olivia Navarro-Farr (College of Wooster)
[213]
Tools of the Trade: An Ethnohistoric and Archaeological Examination of Tools Used in the Fur Trade in Southern Ohio
The arrival of Europeans to the New World forever changed the social and economic landscapes of Native Peoples who occupied
the continents. Colonial institutions profited off the land and those who occupied it. One institution that exemplified this was the Fur
Trade. Throughout the North and Northeast colonies, European nations acquired furs from a variety of mammals to meet the trans-
Atlantic demand. To maximize profits in the New World many European colonizers turned to Native peoples to aid in their economic
endeavors. Native Americans employed trade routes and knowledge of the land to their advantage in the new economic landscape.
In this poster, we illustrate the role that the Late Prehistoric/Early Historic people played during the Fur Trade by investigating, the
context for two hide-processing tools, endscrapers and beamers which appear to spike in usage during the period of (1450–1750
C.E). We evaluate Ethnohistoric evidence to determine whether the Native peoples may have been engaged in hide production
work as a response to increasing European demand.
Román, Katherine
[141]
Tracing the Past: Ancient and Modern Borrowing of “Foreign” Imagery in Paracas
Through time, people have assimilated, appropriated, and used foreign (i.e., nonlocal) symbols and motifs that were considered
significant at the time due to religious, political, or ideological reasons. During the Formative period (1700–200 BC), the Paracas
groups settled in the Peruvian south coast incorporated Cupisnique motifs from the north coast into their visual repertoire, as
depicted in their world-renowned textiles and pottery. Nowadays, Paracas artists crafting souvenirs for sale have adapted
precolumbian designs from other regions of Peru, both as a recognition of its value and a connection with their heritage as well as a
result of the lack of local referents. In this regard, these concepts of transmission, borrowing, and remaking of ideas in the process
of craftsmanship are analyzed, with the goal of identifying possible parallels in how images transcend territories.
Roman-Ramirez, Edwin (Proyecto Arqueologico del Sur de Tikal)
[209]
Discussant
Romero, Ashuni (CINAH Quintana Roo) and Nelda Marengo
[189]
“From the Coast to the Jungle: Inventory and Record of Archaeological Sites in Puerto Morelos, Quintana Roo, Mexico”
The municipality of Puerto Morelos is located in northern Quintana Roo, Mexico. Beginning in the past century, and continuing
through present day, researches have reported numerous archaeological sites in this region. However, many of them do not have a
precise location, and we do not know about their conservation status. As a result of this issue and the large growth of modern
infrastructure in the area, I created the “Proyecto de Inventario y Registro de Sitios Arqueológicos en el Municipio de Puerto
Morelos, Quintana Roo” (Inventory and Record of the Archaeological Sites in Puerto Morelos, Quintana Roo Project), which seeks
to update information for archaeological sites in the Puerto Morelos region. My main goals include: gaining information on the actual
condition of the sites and gaining knowledge about cultural processes of the area.
Romero, Danielle (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[122]
Looking through the Mirror: Design Similarities on Mimbres Decorated and Corrugated Ceramics
Ceramics research within the Mimbres has been conducted at length with a majority of the research focused on the various types of
decoration while corrugated and other textured wares are put to the side as standard cooking vessels. The variety and temporal
changes in decorated elements and motifs have been scrutinized for their applications to individual and group identity and their
relationship to changes in ideology and other social systems. Although not as rapid or varied, textured wares also underwent
changes and saw the rise of stylized Reserve types. Recent excavations at the Elk Ridge site have yielded vessels from different
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   481
wares that share similar stylistic traits indicating that the textured wares may serve similar purposes of signaling outside of their
utilitarian purpose. Using vessels recovered from the Mimbres Valley, this research analyzes decorated rim designs and their
potential analogues on textured wares.
Romero, Danielle [122] see Shikrallah, Elizabeth
Romih, Sasha (Fort Huachuca Cultural Resources)
[165]
The Historic Railroad at Fort Huachuca, AZ
The Fort Huachuca Cultural Resources program presents the first archaeological recording and investigation of the historic Fort
Huachuca, AZ railroad. The railroad played a crucial part in the development of one of the oldest Army Forts in the country, and
access to rail largely contributed to which forts lasted into the modern Army Corps. Set in a high-altitude desert littered with tall
shrub grass and mesquite trees that characterize Western Era films, Fort Huachuca has been a center of Southwestern pioneer
history for well over 100 years. A large portion of the Old Post was made a National Historic Landmark in 1976, including dozens of
buildings and a parade field, but the rail tracks were already gone by then. While the tracks and rolling stock of the Southern Pacific
owned Lewis Springs line are long gone, much of the railroad grades and ballast are still intact. Over 10 wooden trellises, a wooden
bridge, and thousands of glass, metal, and ceramic artifacts make up the site of the old railroad. In partnership with several local
museums and historical societies, dozens of historic maps and archival documents contributed to reconstructing the extent of the
railroad, and documenting its history.
Rondeau, Rob (Simon Fraser University) and Chris Carleton (Max Planck Institut fur Chemische Okologie)
[82]
Beringia Underwater: The Search for New Archaeological Sites
In the last twenty years, advances in underwater remote sensing technologies, computational sciences and undersea mapping now
allow us to search for archaeological sites on the submerged continental shelf. A larger sample size of archaeological sites pre-
dating 12,000 cal BP in Alaska, Yukon and parts of the Pacific Northwest Coast helps us predict where best to look for new sites. A
new predictive model developed at SFU, the Locally-Adaptive Model of Archaeological Potential (LAMAP), recently used 182 sites
in Central Alaska to predict possible new sites there. LAMAP has also successfully identified archaeological sites in Central America
and Turkey. Now, the goal is for it to do the same on the Pacific Northwest Coast, predicting the location of new early sites there.
Rondeau, Rob [238] see Carleton, William
Roney, John [5] see Lazik, Lauren
Roney, John [122] see Whisenhunt, Mary
Roney, John [156] see Zaragosa, Gabriella
Rooney, Matthew (University of Florida)
[3]
Introducing Ethnohistorical Evidence for Charity Hall, an 1820s Chickasaw Boarding School in Mississippi
After the French and Indian Wars of 1763, British traders poured into the lands east of the Mississippi River, including North
Mississippi where the Chickasaws lived. They ignored British prohibitions on trade, and many intermarriages occurred, resulting in a
mixed-ancestry population that emerged as a new ruling class. It was these Chickasaws who, in the years leading up to removal,
invited missionaries into their territory to build schools, including Charity Hall, which has now undergone two summers of
archaeological field excavations. The archaeological investigation of Charity Hall is significant because it is only the second
Civilization Fund Act school that operated during that first decade ever examined materially in the southeastern United States. Over
the past century, those interested in both the church and the tribe have collected documentary evidence of the day-to-day
operations of the school, including letters written by founder Reverend Bell himself to the Indian Office of the Department of War,
which was largely responsible for funding the operation. This paper will review an amalgamation of ethnohistorical materials and
show how they enhance our archaeological field investigations.
Roos, Christopher (Southern Methodist University)
[117]
Discussant
Roos, Christopher (Southern Methodist University)
[255]
Up in Flames: How an Independent Archaeology Made a Pyrogeographer
Well-preserved and well-replicated paleobotanical assemblages from the Grand Canyon area led Alan Sullivan to develop a model
of anthropogenic burning to enhance the productivity of wild resources. He has spent the better part of three decades assembling
evidence to support this model. During this time, I was an undergraduate student under Sullivan. Although the anthropogenic
burning story was not motivating for me at the time, twenty-first-century megafires in the Southwest changed my perspective. How
had Native people coexisted with fire-prone environments for centuries when in less than one century our communities face
existential threats from wildfire? Independent Archaeology taught me the importance of thoughtful assessment of what made
evidence relevant for particular research questions. I knew that to assemble relevant evidence to answer human-fire sustainability
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  482
questions, I had to look beyond archaeology. Beyond archaeology was a realm of important human-fire-climate research questions
to which archaeological information had value. In thinking like an “independent” archaeologist, I ultimately found my way to the
holistic science of fire on earth. Sullivan’s Independent Archaeology set me on a trajectory to become a pyrogeographer.
[255]
Chair
Roosevelt, Anna (University of Illinois, Chicago)
[127]
Animism in Amazonia
The myths and arts of Amazonians today and iconography of the ancient art suggest that animism as a religion and social concept
has long influenced thinking and action in the basin. A central characteristic of this animism is belief in the innate
interconnectedness of life-force, landscape, society, and personhood among humans, deities, plants, and animals in Amazonian
land, water, and sky. Whether the Amazon Woman Shaman, her anaconda spirit animal, the hallucinogenic Banisteriopsis vine, and
certain trees in the living Amazon river and in the otherworldly river of the Milky Way Galaxy, or her suitor the Sun with macaws,
harpy eagles, and the stellar beings in the sun’s paths between the solstices, or some other nexus of deities, humans, animals, and
spaces, such connections are evident since people entered the basin. People made the connections from a solid base of social and
natural science knowledge, and their concepts reveal an acute understanding of social behavior, reproduction, ecology, and
astronomy through time and space. As examples of Amazonian animism, its use, and its variation in time and space, this paper
analyzes images and ideas from early prehistoric sites to modern peoples of both white-water mainstream and black-water
tributaries.
Rosales, Edgar
[10]
Mica in Xalla: A Glittering Archaeological Indicator of Power and Specialized Production
Mica, a shiny silicate mineral with a layered structure, was highly valued by the Teotihuacan people. Mica has unique physical
properties, but we propose that the most striking one was of an optical nature, owing to the fact that it is a multicolored specular
material. The Teotihuacan elite groups emphasized this value, so they preferred micaceous species of golden tones, to handicraft
production specializing in shiny luxury items. More than 90% of the mica found in the Classic city is concentrated in two compounds,
to the north and the south of the Sun Pyramid: the Xalla Palace and the Viking Group. This research describes approximately 37 kg
of sheet mica found in Xalla during the Project Teotihuacan. Elite and Government, but also the provenance and contexts in which
prehispanic mica has been found, as a foreign raw material imported from the Valley of Oaxaca and Ejutla, in the cosmopolitan city
in Central Mexico. This workshop under state control shows us a center of exceptional economic and religious strength.
Rosales, Verónica [260] see Muñoz, Lizette
Rosch, Heather
[159]
Making Do with What We’ve Got: Understanding Rural Ottoman Life using the Sources Available
Despite repeated calls to action by a handful of archaeologists, there is still a deficiency of targeted research being conducted on
the Ottoman Period within our field. When the material and information available from archaeology is lacking, the full picture of
Ottoman rural life is best understood through a combination of sources. This has been the case in the rural areas of southwestern
Anatolia, where there is little archaeological knowledge about Ottoman residents from which to pull information. Here excavations
are less effective due to the often ephemeral nature of settlements and historical research was less popular in favor of studies of the
elites and city dwellers for many years. Recent efforts from survey projects can be combined with the available historical and
ethnographic research to understand human occupation throughout the Ottoman period. With the Burdur-Isparta region as a case
study, each field can provide pieces of the puzzle through which aspects of life such as land tenure, ceramic manufacture, and
interaction with other areas, can be understood.
Roscoe, Paul (University of Maine)
[146]
Apocalyptic Responses to Severe Climate Change: Modeling National Vulnerabilities
Given currently inadequate mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions, it is increasingly likely that many parts of the world will be
exposed to severe climate change. Throughout human history, troubled times have provoked apocalyptic—End-of-Times—
responses, and there is little reason to believe they will not emerge under severe climate change as well, greatly complicating
mitigation and adaptation responses. Because apocalyptic interpretations and movements evolve only under particular conditions
and in specific social-structural niches, however, nations differ markedly in their vulnerability to them. Drawing on the European
historical record and fieldwork on New Guinea millenarian movements, this paper attempts a preliminary modeling of these
vulnerabilities.
Rosen, Arlene (University of Texas at Austin) and Lisa Janz (Trent University)
[125]
“The Brown Steppe Is Like an Ancient Story”: Foraging the Arid Steppe and Wetlands in the Middle Holocene of the Mongolian Gobi
Desert
Recent studies have highlighted the importance of wetlands to mobile foragers in semi-arid environments. This is evident among
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     483
past foragers of Western North America, as well as in the Levantine Epipaleolithic. Resources remain abundant around marshes,
even when plant and animals in the arid lands surrounding them are much less predictable and yield only sparse patches of food.
Current research in the eastern Gobi Desert of southern Mongolia demonstrates that once the present-day desert steppe was
lusher, with endorheic lakes and their surrounding wetlands punctuating the landscape. These lakes were mostly saline throughout
much of the Late Pleistocene, and disappeared by the beginning of the Holocene. However, new geoarchaeological and phytolith
research shows that former Pleistocene lakebeds supported small freshwater ponds and wetlands during the Middle Holocene.
These marshes formed a rich environment for hunter/gatherers who found reliable sources of grass seeds, rhizomes of sedges, and
a variety of animals concentrated near these water sources. The reliably resource-rich points on the semi-arid landscape minimized
subsistence risk, and facilitated movement of hunter-gatherers throughout this region of the otherwise inhospitable Gobi Desert, up
until the period of time when pastoralists began to dominate this landscape, ca. 3500 years ago.
Rosen, Arlene [171] see Damick, Alison
Rosen, Arlene [62] see Farquhar, Jennifer
Rosen, Arlene [40] see Hart, Thomas
Rosen, Steven (Ben-Gurion University)
[171]
Between the Rock and the Hard Place: Cyclicities of Adaptation in the Negev over the Long-Term
From Late Pleistocene through recent times, the nomadic societies of the Negev have adapted their lifeways to ever changing
environmental and social circumstances. Superimposed on the arid environment and the specific geography of the region, yearly
cycles of movement, exploiting resources available during different seasons, transformed over the millennia to ever more complex
patterns. The seasonal cycles and their long-term changes can be integrated into a larger harmonic set of fluctuating habitation
florescence and decline in the region. With respect to the seasonal cycles, a basic ecological substrate of mobility based on
aggregation/dispersal according to seasonal availability of subsistence resources is well evident. Over the long term, an increasing
number of factors affected the seasonal round, including adaptation to environmental change, the increasing influence of social
factors such as subsistence and technological change, ideology, and the impact of external polities. The changes in the seasonal
round include increased number of functionally different seasonal stations, increased seasonal fission into functionally distinct
subgroups, increased external connections, and expanded geographic zonation.
Rosencrance, Richard (Museum of Natural and Cultural History)
[195]
Diachronic Western Stemmed Tradition Lithic Technology during the Younger Dryas at Connley Cave 4, Oregon
The majority of Western Stemmed Tradition (WST) sites are surface assemblages and those found in buried contexts are typically
small. Lithic analyses of surface sites benefit from large sample sizes, but are limited by equifinality in terms of tool kit composition
and raw material use. Excavations by the University of Oregon Archaeological Field school have uncovered over 200 WST lithic
artifacts in a well-dated buried context spanning the Younger Dryas at Connley Cave 4, Oregon. Coupled with the nearly 200
artifacts recovered by Stephen Bedwell in the late 1960s, Connley Cave 4 has one of the largest diachronic WST lithic assemblages
in the Americas. This paper examines projectile point, core, and flake tool technology as well as raw material selection and
conveyance of these three WST assemblages.
[195]
Chair
Rosencrance, Richard [170] see Jenkins, Dennis
Rosencrance, Richard [66] see Quiroz, Itzel
Rosencrance, Richard [66] see Saper, Shelby
Rosencrance, Richard [236] see Stueber, Daniel
Rosencrance, Richard [195] see Sturtz, Sara
Rosenswig, Robert (University at Albany)
[23]
The Adaptive Mosaic of Mesoamerica’s Archaic Period
Mesoamerica’s Archaic period (10,000–4000 BP) lasts longer than the Formative, Classic, Postclassic, Historical, and Modern
periods combined. Therefore, it is at once the most important and understudied epochs and the time when maize, beans, cacao,
and a host of other plants were domesticated in the region. As one of a small handful of centers of food production, these
developments are of more than local significance. This paper characterizes Mesoamerica’s inhabitants during Archaic period as
forming a mosaic of adaptations. In particular, I compare the Soconusco zone of southern Mexico and northern Belize as the first
and last places to adopt ceramic container technology and sedentary village life. Despite these differences, the inhabitants of both
regions shared a similar diet of mixed foraging and horticulture.
[23]
Chair
Rosenswig, Robert [26] see Ortman, Scott
Roskams, Steve [188] see Humphreys, Stephen
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       484
Rospopo, Steven and Linda Wheelbarger (San Juan College)
[236]
Lithic Analysis from the Point Pueblo Chacoan Great House, Northwestern New Mexico
The 2019 San Juan College field school excavation at the Point Pueblo D-Shaped Chacoan Great House yielded an impressive
quantity of lithic material including a Tchamajilla, several projectile points, axes, ground stone, lithic cores, lithic formal and informal
tools, and debitage. Limited excavations were conducted on four large multi-story rooms attached to the north side of the Great
House. Lithic analysis will focus on artifacts from the western portion of Room 34 which also contained a large concentration of
Pueblo II ceramics associated with a Chacoan occupation of the structure dating between AD 1070 and 1140. Discovery of the
northern wall of Room 34 at a much lower elevation than expected suggests that the integrated multi-story rooms were terraced into
the slope overlooking the San Juan River. This multi-component analysis provides analytic information on the Room 34 lithic
assemblage, which will complement concurrent analysis of ceramics from the Point Pueblo Great House and aid in demonstrating
the extent of Chacoan influence and interaction at Point Pueblo.
Rossi, Franco (John Carter Brown Library, Brown University) and Heather Hurst (Skidmore College)
[57]
Communities and Concessions: Archaeological Storytelling and Public Engagement in a Biosphere Border Zone
The archaeological sites of San Bartolo and Xultun sit in the Maya Biosphere of Northeast Guatemala in a zone designated as part
of the Árbol Verde forest concession granted to nine communities living in northeast Petén. The Árbol Verde Concession was one of
several forest concessions granted after the Guatemala Peace Accords (1996) aimed at promoting forest stewardship and
sustainable land practices among communities in Petén, a border region associated with licit and illicit resource extraction and
trafficking of various kinds (the looting of archaeological materials among them). The closest community to SB-X, but outside of the
Árbol Verde concession, is the village of Uaxactun, which has a long history as a chicle camp, archaeological project headquarters
for the Carnegie Institution, and most recently positioning itself as an eco-tourism gateway into Petén. Although there is not a nearby
descendant community that identifies with ancient SB-X, local community participation in the archaeological project has forged a
connection to the site through economy, landscape, and cultural heritage. This paper explores some of the questions and
complexities of multilingual storytelling, engagement of different “publics” and competing interests of local communities in a
biosphere border zone.
Rossi, Franco [138] see Hurst, Heather
Rossouw, Lloyd [162] see Bousman, Britt
Rotella, Brianna and Kaitlin Brown (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[239]
Comparing Chumash Communities at Mission San Buenaventura and Mission La Purísima Concepcíon
Between 1782 and 1812, Chumash communities throughout south-central California relocated to mission establishments along the
coast and inland valleys. Mission San Buenaventura was the first mission built in the Santa Barbara Channel region and it primarily
included coastal and Northern Channel Island populations. In contrast, Mission La Purísima Concepcíon was the last mission to be
constructed in the Chumash area and was mostly composed of Native peoples from Santa Ynez Valley. This paper explores
similarities and differences in the artifacts recovered from the Native Family Apartments within these two Mission spaces using both
existing museum collections and recent archaeological investigations. By comparing and contrasting systems of trade and
exchange, local industries, and foodway practices, we examine how different Chumash groups responded to colonialism at distinct
moments in time, negotiated their social identities in mission spaces, and maintained key aspects of cultural continuity throughout
the early and late Mission Period.
Roth, Barbara (UNLV)
[136]
Great Kivas and Community Integration during the Pithouse Period: Insights from the Harris Site
The Harris site was a thriving pithouse village in the Mimbres River Valley during the Late Pithouse period from ca AD 500 to the
late AD 900s. Households occupying the site were integrated into the community via a series of sequentially-used great kivas
surrounding a central plaza. This paper discusses the role of these great kivas in the Harris community using data from UNLV’s
excavations of a Three Circle phase kiva and associated plaza features in use during the early AD 800s coupled with data from Emil
Haury’s excavations three great kivas, including one large later Three Circle phase kiva (House 10) that was ritually burned. I
discuss the ways that different household groups were integrated into the community through time, the role of ritual sponsorship by
particular households in community integration, and the impact of the burning of House 10 on the Harris community.
Roth, Barbara [6] see Person, Dylan
Routledge, Jennifer (Trent University), Lisa Janz (Trent University) and Paul Szpak (Trent University)
[76]
Ostrich Extirpation from the Eurasian Steppe
Around the Pleistocene/Holocene transition, changes in climate and environment on the Eurasian Steppe led to the extirpation of
Struthio asiaticus (the Asian ostrich). Stable isotope analysis conducted on samples of archaeological ostrich eggshell, from sites
circumscribing the steppe, has provided δ13C, δ15N and δ18O results which aid in the reconstruction of these environmental shifts
and help us speak to the circumstances surrounding the extirpation of the species. Samples span a time depth of 40,000 years and
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   485
include the period prior to regional extirpation. A change in the monsoon belt at the Holocene transition led to increased moisture
and changes in the vegetative profile of the steppe. Struthio a. adaptations to hot dry environments likely became maladaptive under
these circumstances, factoring into their demise.
Rovanpera, Jennifer [236] see Thompson, Thomas
Rowan, Yorke [125] see Heidkamp, Blair
Rowe, Brian [30] see Parish, Ryan
Rowe, Chris [187] see Howe, David
Rowe, Robert
[198]
Please Don’t Call Them Megafauna
The Pleistocene.…basically a no-man’s land that is trapped between the disciplines of archaeology and paleontology when it comes
to the animals that inhabited that period. For American archaeologists they are sometimes too old to consider them as having
archaeological connotations. For the Paleos, these are not fossils and by some standards are considered too young for their
studies. It is important for archaeologists to understand these animals and their environmental niches. There are specific reasons on
where and why these animals are found in archaeological context. This paper focuses on bison, mammoth, the occasional sabre
cat, and a few other species that have been found in archaeological context. Using field examples from several states, the remains
of these animals can be used to ascertain the environment that each lived in and in doing so this data can be used to widen the
databases of the prehistoric environment in which the earliest of humankind in the Americas survived. Whatever you do, don’t call
these animals “Megafauna”.
Rowe, Sarah (University of Texas Rio Grande Valley) and Guy Duke (University of Texas Rio Grande Valley)
[257]
Going Their Own Way: New Insights on Valdivia Culture from the Buen Suceso Site
Archaeological investigations of the Buen Suceso site continue to complicate syntheses of the Valdivia culture, one of the earliest
ceramic traditions in the Americas. Buen Suceso is one of the few sites with occupation from every phase of the Valdivia tradition,
dating between 3700 and 1450 BC. While never static, occupation at Buen Suceso could best be described as conservative, as
social practices characteristic of the earliest phases are maintained, and possibly reified, even in later phases. Further, patterns of
increasing social differentiation that have been noted from other sites, including spatial reorganization, mound construction,
differentiated burials, and the elaborated use of spondylus, are largely absent from Buen Suceso. Instead, there is tantalizing
evidence to suggest that the inhabitants of Buen Suceso pursued practices that stood in opposition to these societal trends. This
paper focuses on two areas of the site, representing occupation of both Early and Middle Valdivia, to explore the ways in which
occupants of Buen Suceso constructed their social world.
Rowe, Victoria [36] see Coolidge, Frederick
Royal, Kyleigh [17] see Buchanan, Briggs
Royer, Julien [78] see Waterman, Anna
Rozwadowski, Andrzej [25] see Jiménez Pasalodos, Raquel
Rubinatto Serrano, Juliana (Wake Forest University) and Paul Thacker (Wake Forest University)
[36]
Eagle Owl Prey Assemblages and Biostratinomic Processes: the Archaeological Implications of Dispersal, Transport, and Time
Averaging
Pellet, nesting, and roost accumulations have yielded critical middle-range benchmarks for interpreting strigiform prey assemblages
at archaeological sites. Few studies, however, explicitly examine dispersal dynamics, transport mechanisms, and time-averaged
accretion that impact bone assemblages from birds of prey hunting prior to cave and rock shelter burial. This poster examines
taphonomic patterns resulting from preburial processes affecting Eurasian Eagle Owl (Bubo bubo) prey assemblages along the
karstic cliffs and slopes at the Abrigo de Vibora rockshelter complex in Portugal. Rabbit and rodent remains dominate the recovered
collection with smaller numbers of voles, shrews, hedgehogs, pigeons, and other birds present. In contrast to samples from nest and
roosting contexts, element sorting and differential preservation are linked to dispersal and downslope movement through slopewash.
Recovered small mammal element ratios change as distance increases from the immediate drop zone although some classic eagle
owl diagnostic indices remain intact. Bias introduced by collection procedures including sediment sieve-size is explored. Time-
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      486
averaging of the downslope bone accumulations is demonstrated by the recovery of banded racing pigeon elements. The sorting
processes and extended time interval of slow downslope accumulation at Abrigo de Vibora provide important middle-range theory
for archaeological interpretation of bone assemblages from cave and rockshelter contexts.
Rubio, Alison [184] see Wescott, Konnie
Ruby, Bret (National Park Service, Hopewell Culture National Historical Park), Rainer Komp, Friedrich Lüth, Lukas
Goldmann and Sebastian Messal
[107]
Geophysics and Changing Perceptions of the Hopewell Mound Group
The Hopewell Mound Group is one of the largest, most complex, most famous, and longest-studied monumental Indigenous
landscapes in North America. Fieldwork marking the very dawn of Americanist archaeology began here in the early nineteenth
century and encountered a striking set of material symbols of such artful quality, prodigious quantity, and astonishing diversity to
have been rightly recognized as the type collection for the Hopewell horizon. However, agricultural plowing steadily eroded the
above-grade features. Recently, the National Park Service forged an international partnership with the German Archaeological
Institute to complete a high-resolution, landscape-scale geomagnetic survey of the entire complex. The results reveal subsurface
landscapes of unexpected integrity and complexity, marked by ditched enclosures, shrine buildings, timber post circles, communal
earth ovens, and other previously unknown ritual architecture. These results wrap a new contextual frame around the findings of the
older investigations. This paper will correlate the new geomagnetic contexts with observations made during the foundational
expeditions of Squier and Davis, Moorehead, and Shetrone, with particular attention to mound composition and stratigraphy,
prepared floors and pavements, sub-mound structures, and purposeful deposits.
[107]
Chair
Ruffe, Danielle (University of Texas, Austin) and Manda Adam (University of Texas, Austin)
[206]
Ancient Maya Architecture Detection Using Lidar and Machine Learning
Due to its ability to penetrate the dense canopy, Airborne light detection and ranging (lidar) has become a revolutionary tool for
understanding the Maya Region. Due to the customizable nature of lidar data, researchers can create algorithms to train computers
to automatically detect a suite of anthropogenic modifications. While some anthropogenic modifications can be visually identified,
traditional visual identification is time-consuming and can result in features being missed. Creating algorithms and employing
automatic feature extraction techniques saves valuable time and allows for the identification of features that may not be visible to the
human eye. This project will focus on the development of using computer-training methods to detect ancient Maya architecture
using lidar collected in northwest Belize, in particular the site of Gran Cacao, which is approximately 4 km2. Using lidar-based Digital
Elevation Models (DEMs), training sites will be programmed into artificial intelligence from past field research excavations. In
addition, this project will test the feasibility of automated feature extraction techniques to portray site organization and define feature
groups.
Ruhl, Thomas (University of Cincinnati)
[178]
Chultunes, New Scale and Perspective
Chultunes have been a topic of investigation for more than a century, since Thompson’s work at Labna. Suggestions over their
purpose have gone in every direction since then, and the only consensus that seems reachable today is that they are multi-purpose,
both in space and time. However, this is the result of a bias integral to this topic of investigation from its start. This study addresses
this issue by offering another perspective and another scale of investigation on the topic. We build a database of a maximum of
documented chultunes to truly capture the spatial and temporal distribution of the features, their attributes, or combinations of
characteristics, across the Maya Lowlands. We can then compare the results with the patterns of other characteristic features of
Maya civilization, such as reservoirs, and look for correlations, positive or negative. Only this way can an issue presenting so much
variability be better understood. Also, the subject receives a more thorough anthropological look, acknowledging bias, looking at its
sources, and proposing a different view of these human-made subterranean chambers. The data built through this process will be
available open-source to allow updates, further additions, and more importantly, comparisons with databases on other topics.
Ruiz, Judith (UNAM), Isabel Casar (UNAM, Mexico) and Vera Tiesler (UADY, Mexico)
[225]
Human Sacrifice and Body Processing in Eastern Mesoamerica Past the Maya Collapse: New Evidence from Toniná, Lagartero,
and Champotón
A number of non-reverential, highly processed human assemblages containing mutilated sternal bones have been documented in
different parts of Postclassic period Mesoamerica and beyond after being described by Carmen Pijoan in a massive ritual deposit
from Tlatelolco, in the Aztec capital. In this presentation, we document and interpret five such deposits. These come from three
securely dated Eastern Mesoamerica contexts at the sites of Toniná and Lagartero, two late centers in the Chiapanecan Highlands,
and Champotón, on the west coast of the Yucatecan peninsula. All damaged sternal bones display forceful horizontal or diagonal
blows to green bone, which appear to have severed the upper from the lower segment in one single action. All contexts show
additional signs of having been flayed, defleshed, and disarticulated. Six pairs of adult hands and three more pairs of feet were
recovered from one of these assemblages. Bioarchaeological isotopic research provides glimpses into the lifestyles and diets of the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   487
individuals, while skeletal imagery prompts reflections on the possible ritual choreographies and ceremonial occasions surrounding
their deaths, namely those related to Xipe rituals.
Rumberger, Jackyln [189] see Joyce, Arthur
Runggaldier, Astrid (University of Texas, Austin)
[128]
Modular Building Blocks: How Essential Features of a Maya Palace Could be Scaled and Recombined from Late Preclassic Times
Onward
As with other forms of ancient architecture, investigation of Maya palaces over more than a century focused first on Late Classic
structures. Only subsequently, over recent decades, interest in earlier palaces drove researchers to ask new questions that refined
discussions over identification, morphology, function, and ultimately definition of what constitutes a Maya palace. Some of those
questions are still largely open-ended, with differing opinions on whether palaces exist in the Preclassic period, what kinds of
inferences emerge about the institutions of rulership they are connected with, and how those institutions, and by extension palaces,
change from Late Preclassic, to Early Classic, and later periods. Many features understood as characteristic of Maya palaces, such
as high degrees of regional variation, or the conflation of administrative and residential functions, were ascribed to these
architectural complexes on the basis of Late Classic forms, often the result of centuries of evolution and change. This presentation
revisits a Late Preclassic palace, which was rebuilt in later centuries, at the site of San Bartolo in Guatemala, where some of the
basic functional features of a palace were clearly identifiable, and are recognizable as essential elements across a wide range of
palaces in the Maya Lowlands.
Runggaldier, Astrid [17] see Covey, R. Alan
Runggaldier, Astrid [14] see Flanagan, Kelin
Runggaldier, Astrid [109] see Granados, Rosario
Rusch, Bruce (NH SCRAP)
[190]
Using the SCRAP System as a Platform for the Advancement of Archaeological Knowledge in the State of New Hampshire
The New Hampshire State Conservation and Rescue Archaeology Program (SCRAP) is a public participation program for
archaeological research, management, and education. New Hampshire’s Archaeology Division conducts field schools and
workshops to train interested members of the public in archaeological research skills, interpretation, conservation, and education.
SCRAP seeks to increase site discovery and evaluation, to reduce the rate of site destruction, to recover information from
archaeological sites about to be destroyed, to inform the public, and to conduct original research. This paper deals with the original
research aspect of SCRAP’s goals and mission statement. From the inception to the final days of the investigation and conservation
of a field site, several archaeological and anthropological questions are generated. These questions often relate to issues
surrounding ecological context, horizon placement, site formation, function or site use, in addition to the site’s inhabitants’ behavioral
characteristics. Each of these speculative questions provides fertile grounds for original research. Discussed in this paper are two
Paleoamerican sites investigated and recorded by the SCRAP organization that provided original research and insights into Paleo
horizon settlement patterns in New Hampshire.
Russ, Jon (Rhodes College), Umer Aziz (Rhodes College) and Morgan McDonald (Rhodes College)
[63]
SPME/GC-MS Analysis Archaeological Smoking Pipe Residues
Solid Phase Micro-extraction (SPME) is a solvent-free sample extraction method. The SPME contains a needle-like fiber that is
coated with a polymer that adsorbs organic compounds, typically in the headspace above a sample sealed in a vial, thereby
eliminating the need to dissolve samples in a solvent. After exposed to a sample, the SPME can then be placed into an injection port
of a gas chromatograph, which releases the absorbed organic compounds into the instrument for analysis. There are many
beneficial uses for SPME applied to organic residue analyses of archaeological artifacts, in large part because samples do not need
to be dissolved in an organic solvent. The only modification is by applying moderate heat to a sample, which is well below the
combustion point of organic compounds. Thus, organic residue analysis can be applied to samples scraped from an artifact or even
intact artifacts. The aim of this study was to investigate the efficacy of SPME for organic residue analysis of prehistoric smoking
pipes. We conducted temperature and time trials to optimize the SPME method for maximum extraction, as well as analyzing
previously-tested archaeological samples to verify that the SPME can detect the same compounds detected using GC.
Russ, Jon [211] see Davis, Jera
Russ, Jon [215] see Fields, Mara
Russ, Jon [63] see Tolan, Grace
Russell, Bradley [269] see Hare, Timothy
Russell, Bradley [20] see Glumac, Bosiljka
Russell, Bradley [138] see Masson, Marilyn
Russell, James [235] see Perrotti, Angelina
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   488
Rutherford, Cady (University of Texas, San Antonio), Marisol Cortes-Rincon (Humboldt State University), Jonathan Roldan
(University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Spencer Mitchell (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[178]
Wonky Structures or Wonky Tree Falls? Ground Truthing and Further Discoveries in a Hinterland Maya Household
Continued excavations at a hinterland Maya household have uncovered construction sequences, interesting architecture, and ancient
tree falls able to confuse both lidar and survey results. Research in the area of hinterland households will help to build our
understanding of variation present within and between regions. This analysis examines construction methods, the size and layout of this
household group, the raw materials used, crafting, and access to trade goods in order to identify household level variations and access
to resources in this hinterland area. Recent excavations have begun to illuminate the construction sequence of the household as well
identifying structures where the lidar and mapping data was misled by tree fall or other postdepositional processes.
Rutherford, Cady [230] see Cortes-Rincon, Marisol
Rutherford, Cady [53] see Mitchell, Spencer
Ruvalcaba, José Luis [20] see Alonso, Alejandra
Ruzo, Luis Octavio [242] see Schofield, Abagail
Ryan, Elisa (U.S. Bureau of Reclamation)
[92]
Discussant
Ryan, Karen (Canadian Museum of History), Elsa Cencig (Avataq Cultural Institute), Susan Lofthouse (Avataq Cultural
Institute) and Tommy Weetaluktuk (Avataq Cultural Institute)
[50]
The Social Lives of the Qajartalik Petroglyphs
In 2017, the Canadian government nominated eight places as candidates for future designation as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
One of those is Qajartalik, located off the mainland coast of Nunavik, where more than 180 anthropomorphic faces were carved into
soapstone outcrops. Although Qajartalik has not been precisely dated, stylistic comparison of its faces with better-dated mobiliary
“art” indicates that Qajartalik was created by Dorset carvers, possibly during the latter part of the Dorset era (1500–700 BP).
Coinciding with the Mediaeval Climatic Anomaly, this was a dynamic period in the Eastern Arctic marked by large-scale population
movements, seasonal communal gatherings, and a widespread artistic tradition involving both naturalistic and abstract
representations of animals and humans. Within this cultural world, Qajartalik, and a much smaller petroglyph site relocated in 2019
on the mainland, remain unique as the only known examples of non-portable Dorset “art.” This presentation discusses a new
programme of collaborative and community-initiated research at and around Qajartalik which seeks to better understand why the
petroglyphs may have been created, their place within the Dorset world, and how Qajartalik continues to be experienced within the
contemporary North.
Ryan, Kimberley (Bureau of Land Management)
[92]
Discussant
Ryan, Susan [149] see Throgmorton, Kellam
Ryden, Ronald, Michael Stubing (Jacobs Engineering) and Mark Chenault (WestLand Resources Inc.)
[79]
Assessing the Utility of Excavators and other Heavy Equipment for Archaeological Excavation
Archaeologists conducting long-term data recovery excavations for the South Mountain Loop 202 Freeway project in Phoenix,
Arizona used large excavators (track hoes) to remove the plow zone and overburden from above prehistoric features at several
sites. After extensive analysis, the excavators proved to be faster, more efficient, more cost effective, and, in the hands of an
experienced operator, as precise as backhoes for uncovering features in plan view. The excavator was especially useful in exposing
linear canal features and the lateral canals that branched from them, leading to the discovery of gridded, prehistoric field cells dating
to the Hohokam Sedentary period. The track hoe was also efficient at uncovering other common features including pithouses, earth
ovens, and even delicate features. With this study, we provide quantitative data showing the increased efficiency, including a cost
comparison, of these types of heavy equipment for archaeological excavation.
Rye, Elayne [8] see Dozier, Crystal
Sabatke, Stephen (SWCA)
[44]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    489
Sabloff, Jeremy (Santa Fe Institute)
[102]
Discussant
Sabo III, George [107] see Lockhart, Jami
Sabo III, George [166] see Trubitt, Mary Beth
Sadori, Laura [234] see Gavériaux, Fanny
Safronov, Alexander
[164]
Wars of the Western Maya Kings: Military Conflicts in Lacandon Selva at the Turn of the Seventh–Eighth Centuries
The last quarter of the VII century was marked by the intensification of military and political struggle in the Ususmasinta Basin. Loss
of control over the Western Lowlands by Kaanu’l power at this time led to wars between the largest political centers of the region—
Piedras Negras, Palenque, Yaxchilan, Tonina and Saktz’i. The Lacandon Selva (Chiapas Piedmont) area in southwestern part of
the Usumasinta Basin became the epicenter of their political interests, since this area opened access to the control of the important
Usumasinta communication route. In current presentation, we will try to reconstruct some problematic episodes of these wars base
on reviewing of epigraphic sources from Tonina, Piedras Negras and so called “Bonampak area”—complex of unprovenance
monuments including inscription of Saktz’i kings, and it’s correlation with new archaeological data. As the result, we will show a
more complete picture of military and political events at this period. Base on GIS methods we want to model main communication
routes and approximate political boundaries of Western Maya kingdoms and to describe the logic of the military struggle in the area
of Lacandon Selva on the south of Usumasinta Valley in the Late Classic period.
Sahib, Mohammed [252] see Klenck, Joel
Sakai, Sachiko (California State University, Long Beach)
[237]
Settlement Patterns of the Early Occupation among the Virgin Ancestral Puebloans during the Basketmaker III Period in the
American Southwest
The ultimate goal of this study is to gain a better understanding of the settlement patterns among the Ancestral Puebloans who lived
in the marginal environment. The traditional model of settlement patterns among the early population in the American Southwest
suggests they had relatively mobile lifeways with limited agricultural practices. This leads to the proposition that the habitation during
this time was for a short term and that limited energy was expended to construct structures. In this paper, I would like to investigate
if this traditional model explains the settlement patterns at Mt. Trumbull near the northwestern Grand Canyon area. A Basketmaker
III pithouse site, 71 ASM, was chosen for the excavation following previous GPR survey to answer several questions, such as the
length of the occupation, seasonality of the site use, and the energy devoted to construction. During the previous two summers, the
excavations showed that a five-meter-diameter pithouse was dug into the limestone bedrock, which suggests a relatively large
amount of energy was expended. Furthermore, a hearth on the pithouse floor suggests that the house was likely used year-around.
OSL dates of more than 30 ceramic artifacts from various layers suggest that the pithouse was occupied multiple times.
[237]
Chair
Salas Bautista, Eva [101] see de la Rosa, Yuri
Salazar, Lucy and Richard Burger (Yale University)
[182]
The AMS Dating of the Karwa Textiles and Its Implications for the Spread of the Chavin Cult
The discovery of the Karwa textiles on the shores of the Bahia de la Independencia half a century ago provided strong evidence of
the spread of Chavin cult from the northern highlands to the south coast sometime during the Early Horizon. The development of
AMS dating provides the opportunity to directly date the textiles themselves and toward that end, a sample of these textiles from the
Yale University Art Gallery were analyzed along with a sample of Chavin weavings also believed to come from the south coast. The
resulting measurements confirm that textiles date to between 700–400 cal BC, dates contemporary with the Janabarriu Phase at
Chavin de Huantar. This result, while consistent with earlier estimates based on relative dating, has important implications for
understanding the trajectory of the center at Chavin de Huantar and the timing of its pan-regional influence.
Salazar Chávez, Victor (George Washington University) and Jeffrey Blomster (George Washington University)
[235]
Quotidian and Ritual Use of Maize at Early Formative Etlatongo, Oaxaca, Mexico
Recent research on subsistence systems in Early Formative (1600–900 BCE) Mesoamerican communities contest longstanding
concepts linking the growth of early sociopolitical complexity with full-time agriculture. Lowland-focused studies have introduced
mixed non-agricultural models in coastal regions that were able to support both sedentary groups and much larger complex
societies. While these studies bring important challenges to long-held models of the primacy of full-time agriculturalists in early
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      490
sociopolitical complex societies, their applicability beyond the lowlands to contemporaneous societies lying in different
environmental settings remains understudied. In this paper, we present the case study of the Early Horizon (1400–1000 BCE)
highland community of Etlatongo in the Mixteca Alta of Oaxaca. Analysis of a large and well-preserved charred macrobotanical
collection sheds light on maize-based diets and the role of this important crop in both subsistence and early public rituals. Compared
to contemporaneous lowland societies, maize constituted a major part in the diet of ancient villagers at Etlatongo, as well as an
inherent component in communal ceremonies, setting the grounds for the latter maize iconography so commonly associated with
the political economy of Mesoamerica.
Salazar Chávez, Victor [211] see Blomster, Jeffrey
Saldana, Melanie (California State University, Los Angeles) and James Brady
[137]
Archaeology Confronts the Constructed Subterranean: Reviewing a Half Century of Ambivalence
Archaeology has had an ambivalent relationship with the constructed subterranean starting with the cave beneath the Pyramid of
the Sun at Teotihuacan. Geologist Federico Mooser mistook the cave for a lava tube, a mistake that stood for 15 years. Good and
Obermeyer investigated the cave at Oxtotipac and recognized that the cave was man-made; Sanders and colleagues, however,
labeled the Oxtotipac caves as quarries even though the heavy artifact concentration appear to be inconsistent with that function.
John Fox also recognized that the cave at Utatlan was constructed, was over 100 m long, and terminated under the central plaza
but appears not to have considered it important enough to map. These and other examples finally came to be accepted in the new
millennium. In the last decade cave archaeology has vastly expanded the scope of the constructed subterranean. These will be
discussed in the context of the field’s continuing ambivalence.
Saldaña, Gabriela, Tia Watkins (University College London), Rosamund Fitzmaurice (University College London), Julie
Hoggarth (Baylor University) and Jaime Awe (Northern Arizona University)
[178]
Analysis of the Built Environment of the Group B Acropolis at Baking Pot: Results of the 2019 Field Season
The ceremonial center of Baking Pot, Belize is one of the longest occupied sites in the Belize River Valley, starting in the Late
Middle Preclassic (600–300 BC) and spanning through the Terminal Classic (AD 750–900/1000) period, with some evidence of
reoccupation during the Late Postclassic (AD 1200–1521) period. Considerable research efforts over the past three decades by the
Belize Valley Archaeological Reconnaissance project (BVAR) have contributed significantly to our understanding of the Baking Pot
site core and its hinterland. In this poster we present the results of recent excavations at Structure B7, a large audiencia (an
elongated multi-roomed structure) that provided the primary formal entrance into the private palatial compound of Group B.
Research in the 2019 field season focused on understanding the organization and spatial layout of elite monumental architecture
based on questions regarding accessibility and interaction between elite agents within such compounds. This poster reports on the
field methods, data collection, and analysis of the architecture and materials recovered during the 2019 field season.
Salgado, Silvia [168] see Steinbrenner, Larry
Samson, Alice [239] see Martinez Milantchi, Maria Mercedes
Samuels, Amanda [72] see Yakabowskas, Dana
Samuelsen, John (University of Arkansas)
[222]
An Isotopic Assessment of Late-Prehistoric Interregional Warfare in the South-Central United States
There is a great need to develop better methods to identify and quantify warfare when it occurs without accompanying written
documentation, and to consider alternative explanations of data. This study tests if late-prehistoric Caddo communities in southwest
Arkansas were committing large-scale acts of violence against neighboring regions. Concurrent archaeological evidence of
increased violence in the Southern Plains and the Eastern Woodlands may reflect increasing tensions between regions.
Alternatively, unusual burial treatments often attributed to warfare might indicate alternative practices involving transport of partial
skeletal remains for special burial at important regional centers. Previous research has suggested that deposits of skulls and
mandibles at the Crenshaw site in southwest Arkansas were victims of warfare from other regions, but research based on Sr
isotopes suggested they were local burials. This study recognizes the weakness of using Sr isotope data alone and uses Pb
isotopes in combination to evaluate the geographic origin of the remains. In order for this to be accomplished, a clearly developed
method for constructing an isotopic background for Pb isotopes was needed. This study used prehistoric animal teeth to construct a
background for southwest Arkansas and other regions in surrounding states to define and demonstrate the method.
Samuelsen, John [107] see Hammerstedt, Scott
San Román, Manuel (Universidad de Magallanes), Flavia Morello Repetto (Universidad de Magallanes), Jimena Torres
(Universidad de Magallanes), Carolina Belmar (Universidad de Chile) and Omar Reyes (Universidad de Magallanes)
[177]
San Juan 1 Site: New Archaeological Information for Marine Hunter-Gatherers from the Middle-Late Holocene of Chiloé Island,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  491
Chile (42º S)
The archaeological study of San Juan 1 site, located on the interior coast and the central portion of Chiloé Island, is presented. The
site is located next to the San Juan River and on a paleobeach formation adjacent to the modern coast plain between 10 and 3 m
above present-day sea level. Excavations in this large archaeological shellmidden generated a rich assemblage of faunal and
artifact information. The results indicate that this is a shellmidden produced by successive human occupations of hunter, gatherer
and fisher groups during the Holocene, and that they were carrying out multiple domestic activities with a main trend of subsistence
practices based on marine resources. Lithic materials show an outstanding technology dominated by bifacial façonnage knapping of
Chaitén volcano obsidian and other minor artifacts as used boulders with crushing and abrasion activity marks. Radiocarbon dates
range from 5990 cal years BP to modern. The settlement pattern, the lithic industry and the exploited resources represent the
characteristics and background information of the canoe groups of the northern archipelago of Patagonia. Acknowledgement: Grant
FONDECYT 1170726.
San Román, Manuel [119] see Morello Repetto, Flavia
San Román, Manuel [61] see Reyes, Omar
Sanchez, Fabiola (Mensabak Project), Joel Palka (University of Arizona State) and Josuhé Lozada (INAH)
[204]
Women’s Hands in the Rock Art of Mensabak Lake, Chiapas, Mexico: An Approach from the Agency Theory
Representations of hands in rock art is a polysemy motif registered among different archaeological sites in Chiapas, Mexico.
Painted hands are a recurrent representation in the cliffs of Mensabak Lake in the Lacandon Rainforest, where these paintings were
made by both positive and negative techniques. This paper will discuss the semantics of hand representation in rock art and will
compare the results of the study with present day Maya Lacandon. The team used a participant methodology to measure hands of
men and women from different ages to identify the sex and age range of the people who made prints on the cliffs. Those results
indicated that 22% of the hand prints in the rock art in Mensabak Lake were made by young women. The action and participation
range of young Maya women used in rituals in the sacred cliffs has been made using the human agency theory. Parallel to this
research, we will use the ethnographic data gathered to contrast Maya Lacandon women’s role in current rituals performed in the
shrines in the surroundings of this sacred lake.
Sánchez de la Torre, Marta (PPVE, Universidad de Zaragoza), Xavier Mangado (SERP, Universitat de Barcelona), François-
Xavier Le Bourdonnec (IRAMAT-CRP2A [UMR 5060]), Bernard Gratuze (IRAMAT-CEB [UMR 5060]) and Mathieu Langlais
(PACEA [UMR 5199])
[30]
Lithic Procurement at Montlleó Open-Air Site (SW Europe): Tracing Past Human Routes
Montlleó open-air-site (Prats i Sansor, Catalonia) is located in one of the largest high-attitude valleys in the Pyrenees, the Cerdanya
Valley, in SW Europe, at 1144 m asl. The site is a natural road to cross the Pyrenees in the Eastern part. The site, discovered in
1998 and excavated since the 2000 by a multidisciplinary research team from the SERP (University of Barcelona), was occupied by
hunter-gatherer groups during the Upper Palaeolithic. The research works have detected so far at least two different chronocultural
occupations: one possibly dated from the Badegoulian (16900±110 BP and 18860±80 BP non cal) and another from the Lower
Magdalenian (15440±80 BP and 15550±140 BP non cal). Lithic raw materials recovered at Montlleó are diversified by the presence
not only of exogenous rocks, as chert, but also by local rocks, like rhyolite, quartz, quartzite and lydite. The archaeopetrological
study of the recovered lithic set has comprised micropalaeontological, petrographical and geochemical analyses (energy dispersive
X-ray fluorescence and laser-ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry). Results have allowed determining several
origins for rocks, showing a great knowledge of the Pyrenean territory and making evident the existent relation between both
Pyrenean slopes during the Late Glacial Maximum.
Sánchez-Miranda, Guadalupe [79] see Krug, Andrew
Sanchez Morales, Lara [206] see Quiroz, Carlos
Sánchez Mosquera, Amelia and Juan Miguel Kosztura (Universidad Nacional de Colombia)
[257]
Camellones y tefras en el subsuelo de Quito: Evidencias de cultivos y dinámicas temporales
Recientes trabajos en torno a la construcción del Metro de Quito han permitido identificar 23 evidencias de campo elevados
(camellones) en el subsuelo del trazado. Mediante la combinación de estudios geológicos, fechamientos de suelos, análisis de
fitolitos y análisis de espacio se propone reconstruir la historia del entorno de la actual capital del Ecuador para el/los momentos en
los que esos camellones fueron productivos. Estos, los primeros análisis de fitolitos de camellones del subsuelo quiteño también
nos permiten entender la manera en la que se alimentaban los antiguos habitantes, los cambios de cobertura vegetal y la dinámica
poblacional.
[257]
Chair
Sánchez Torres, Edgar Octavio (Escultor y resturador independiente) and Rebecca González Lauck (INAH Tabasco & MNA)
[191]
Nuevas observaciones sobre el trazo y manufactura de algunas esculturas olmecas de La Venta, Tabasco
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  492
En el 2012 se realizó una revisión del corpus escultórico procedente de la zona arqueológica La Venta, en la costa del golfo en el
sureste mexicano. El objetivo principal fue documentar el estado de conservación de las esculturas labradas en estilo olmeca
expuestas o resguardadas en cinco recintos del Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia y de lo que ahora se denomina la
Secretaría de Cultura del gobierno del estado de Tabasco. Este estudio permitió observar las piezas como pocas veces en el
pasado e identificar algunas marcas enigmáticas en las piezas. Con conocimiento de primera mano del proceso de esculpido por el
primer autor, se reconocieron algunas marcas que brindan nuevas luces sobre el proceso de labrado y manufactura. Por otro lado,
en otras piezas que se pensaban “mutiladas” en procesos rituales, se vislumbraron nuevas posibilidades para entender su
concepción y posibles funciones.
Sandeford, David (School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University) and José Lobo (Global
Institute of Sustainability, Arizona State)
[26]
Settlement Scaling Theory and Political Order in the Prehistoric Oaxaca Valley
This paper explores the economic implications of the emergence and collapse of political order in the prehistoric Oaxaca Valley. We
analyze a large-scale archaeological dataset documenting three millennia of political, infrastructural, and socioeconomic
development by combining two lines of complex systems analysis, settlement scaling theory and the complex network model of
human societies. While settlement scaling theory has had remarkable success predicting and explaining properties of ancient and
modern urban systems, in the Oaxacan case and others it has been unable to explain empirical regularities which appear to have a
regional or sociopolitical scope. The complex network model of human societies states that populations are structured as discrete,
hierarchical, self-similar, modular social networks. This structure is particularly well documented for the settlement networks and
sociopolitical structure of primary states such as Zapotec state. We use this insight into the complex network structure state
societies to extend settlement scaling theory to a regional or political scope. When the predictions of settlement scaling theory are
extended to account for the complex network structure of the Zapotec state several empirical problems are resolved. Unlike
previous work, our analysis makes the assumption of a political order explicit and documents its effect on economic growth.
Sanders, Mariana
[71]
Chair
Sandgathe, Dennis [36] see Abdolahzadeh, Aylar
Sandman, Larry [63] see Herzner, Louis
Sandweiss, Daniel (University of Maine)
[23]
The Central Andean Coastal Archaic?
Some archaeologists working in the Central Andes use the term “Archaic,” though it is unclear exactly how to apply Willey-Phillips’s
definition (a stage of reduced mobility and intensified resource procurement before the advent of agriculture) along the coastal plain.
Specialized, intensive fishing dates from the Terminal Pleistocene, but at least some fishing sites were seasonal. Should the Archaic
begin with these earliest sites? Domesticated plants appear by the start of the Holocene, but are not accompanied by ceramics or
obvious indicators of sedentism. Small-scale monumental architecture is present by 7000 cal BP and large monuments start
between 5000 and 6000 cal BP. The earliest canals date to about 5000 cal BP and shortly thereafter large-scale irrigation is
necessary to explain the amount of crops and the size of sites, at least in the Norte Chico area north of Lima, Peru—sites that have
all the hallmarks of sedentism although the economy was based on a combination of fishing and farming. And yet pottery does not
occur south of modern Ecuador until after ~3600 cal BP. There is also considerable latitudinal variation in the record. Here, I
consider this record in assessing the utility of the Archaic concept for the region.
Sandweiss, Daniel (University of Maine)
[59]
Discussant
Sandweiss, Daniel [8] see Landazuri, Heather
Saniel-Banrey, Maria [63] see Tankersley, Kenneth
Santana Sagredo, Francisca (Universidad de Antofagasta), Chris Harrod (Universidad de Antofagasta), Petrus Le Roux
(University of Cape Town) and Mauricio Uribe (Universidad de Chile)
[61]
Camelid Herding in the Atacama Desert (Northern Chile): New Evidence Based on Stable and Radiogenic Isotope Analysis
Pastoralism in the Andes has mostly been described as an activity that occurred in the puna and altiplano. So far, there is a
considerable lack of information on diet reconstruction and mobility of camelids in northern Chile. This work presents new stable
carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and radiogenic strontium isotope results for camelid samples with the aim to evaluate pastoralism
practices in coastal and inland sites from Northern Chile dating from 1000 BC–AD 1470. A total of 135 samples were analysed
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     493
including bone collagen, tooth enamel, fibers and textiles. Results show chronological differences on the consumption of C3 and C4
plants, while δ15N values suggest ingestion of plants affected by the aridity effect or use of fertilisers. Values of the Sr isotope results
are associated with the lowlands. We conclude camelid herding was a common practice in the lowlands of northern Chile. The
implications of this study are considerable as the enriched values in 13C and 15N observed in the camelids will have a direct impact
on ancient human diets.
Santasilia, Catharina (University of California, Riverside)
[168]
Ethics and INAA: Early Formative Movement
In this paper I am addressing the ongoing debate about incorporation of objects without provenance, including the ethics behind
excluding the material, as well as methods available to potentially establish provenance. This paper will introduce the impact INAA
has on our understanding of Tlatilco and how it has helped establish new data potentially resolving the site’s relations to its
contemporaries.
Santiago, Louis [178] see Fedick, Scott
Santillan Goode, Julianna (University of California, San Diego), Matthew Sitek (University of California, San Diego),
Margaret Schoeninger (University of California, San Diego), Paul Goldstein (University of California, San Diego) and
Arianna Garvin (University of California, San Diego)
[61]
Paleodiet Reconstruction in the Tiwanaku Periphery: New Stable Isotope Data from the Locumba Valley, Peru
This paper explores the relationship of diet to Tiwanaku sociopolitical organization with new data from a Tiwanaku cemetery at the
site of Cerro San Antonio (L1) in the Locumba Valley, a frontier context in southern Peru. Extensive survey of the valley conducted
by Proyecto Arqueológico de Locumba from 2015–2019 suggests that Tiwanaku populations in the Locumba Valley practiced food
production that had complex connections to the Tiwanaku core. The present study discusses the first stable isotope analysis of
Tiwanaku individuals from the Locumba Valley, with data on bone carbonates from 8 individuals analyzed at the University of
California San Diego’s (UCSD) Paleodiet Laboratory. Results will help to better understand the relative proportion of lower elevation
maize consumed by the peripheral Locumba Tiwanaku population. The data will be contextualized via comparison with published
paleodiet stable isotope data from the Moquegua Valley and published paleodiet stable isotope data from the Tiwanaku core.
Santillan Goode, Julianna [267] see Garvin, Arianna
Santoro, Calogero [171] see McRostie, Virginia
Santoro, Calogero [74] see Ugalde, Paula
Santos, Amanda Grace
[231]
Cultural Heritage and Rural Archaeology in the Alentejo, Portugal: A Case Study
The collaboration of Cultural Heritage Management and archaeology allows the data to be more accessible to the wider population,
now as well as in the future. The Direcao-Geral do Patrimonio Cultural (DGCP), established in 2012, oversees the many heritage
projects within the Portuguese landscape. The DGCP lends itself as a model through which many local municipalities, and even
entire countries, can cultivate their network of heritage projects and archaeological sites together. Extensive travel throughout the
Alentejo, participation in two archaeological digs in the area, and contact with local archaeologists revealed the multifaceted reality
of cultural heritage management projects. Implemented correctly, these projects can overcome limitations and bridge the gap
between the past revealed by archaeology and the reality of the cultural landscape today. A number of villages excel in bringing
attention and support to their heritage in the form of small museums. Their success supports the need of a wider focus on cultivating
heritage projects with the goal of a comprehensive narrative that successfully connects each municipality with local museums.
[231]
Chair
Saper, Shelby (University of Oregon), Richard Rosencrance (University of Oregon Museum of Natural and Cultura) and
Katelyn McDonough (Texas A&M University)
[66]
Assessing Typology of Pre-Mazama Corner-notched Points in the Northern Great Basin
Some researchers support a “long-chronology” for corner-notched points in the Great Basin, with these points dating to as old as
8,500 cal BP. Opponents support a “short-chronology,” suggesting corner-notched points are younger than 5,000 cal BP. This
debate suffers from the use of a variety of typological schemes, regional variability, and lack of buried sites. Corner-notched
projectile points exhibiting atypical morphology from traditional types have been found in a well-stratified context associated with
cultural features at the Connley Caves, Oregon. In this poster, we apply a variety of typological schemes to these points and others
found in contexts below Mount Mazama tephra (ca. 7630 cal BP) in Oregon to provide information on the typology and age of pre-
Mazama corner-notched points in the northern Great Basin.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  494
Saracino, Jennifer (Flagler College)
[127]
Placing Tlaloc: Indigenous Markers of Sacred Place in the Uppsala Map of Mexico City (ca. 1540)
The Mapa Uppsala (ca. 1540), the earliest known map of Mexico City painted after Spanish conquest, presents the urban plan of
the island city and its environs, along with depictions of indigenous inhabitants and place glyphs. Scholars generally concur that it
was made by indigenous artists, however, previous art historical considerations of the Mapa Uppsala emphasize the artists’
wholesale adaptation of European-style naturalistic landscapes in their representation of the city and its environs. However, the
landscape is also represented and defined by almost 200 native place glyphs that designate indigenous conceptualizations and
perceptions of space and place. This paper examines various pictorial and glyphic markers on the map associated with the Tlaloc
ritual complex. By analyzing these sites of prehispanic ritual significance, this paper aims to complicate previous characterizations of
the artists’ adaptation of European-style landscapes by demonstrating instances where the pictorial evidence points toward
continued associations with the deity Tlaloc in the cultural landscape. Through this analysis, this paper explores how the interaction
among the map’s various features—extensive and detailed road network, city plan, and prehispanic deities—conveys a uniquely
indigenous perspective on Mexico City’s early colonial landscape.
Sarathi, Akshay (University of Wisconsin, Madison), Jonathan Walz (SIT-Graduate Institute) and Laure Dussubieux (Field
Museum)
[249]
The Trade and Use of Glass Beads at the Site of Unguja Ukuu, Zanzibar (Seventh–Eleventh Centuries CE)
Excavations at the site of Unguja Ukuu, Zanzibar in 2018 revealed the extensive use of glass beads through the occupation
sequence of the site. This presentation summarizes continuity and change in the glass bead trade at the site during different
occupation sequences. Further, the trade in, modification, and use of glass beads at the site must be placed in the larger context of
beads of other materials found at the site, and of other imported items that originate in the regions from which these beads arrived.
This larger context reveals that imported glass beads were likely prestige goods of not insignificant value, and that they were part of
a vibrant economic system that tied East Africa to the remainder of the Indian Ocean world. The social, cultural, political, and
economic contexts of the regions where these beads were manufactured will also be examined in an effort to understand how
oceanic trade networks transcended local political and social change while influencing them in fundamental ways.
Sassaman, Kenneth (Univ of Florida)
[23]
The End Is Not Near: An Archaic World-Renewal Perspective on Our Own Future
If measured by the grandeur of Poverty Point, the Archaic Period in the American Southeast went out with a bang. In the centuries
leading up to its abandonment, Poverty Point was the locus of world renewal that united communities across much of the region.
This network of persons was structured by places of cosmological import and the pathways that connected them. Although human
access to places of this sacred geography (e.g., mounds, caches, cemeteries) became difficult as climate grew increasingly
unpredictable, the extant network of persons afforded opportunities for displacement, relocation, and reorientation to become what
archaeologists describe as the Early Woodland. Through the lens of world renewal, what appears to be the end is just another
beginning, one predicated on reconciliation between the space of experience and the horizon of expectation. From this history come
useful insights on our own future of population displacement and resettlement.
Sassaman, Kenneth (Univ of Florida)
[70]
Discussant
Sattler, Robert (Tanana Chiefs Conference), Carrin Halffman (University of Alaska, Fairbanks), Joshua Reuther (University
of Alaska, Fairbanks), Michael Grooms (University of New Mexico) and Robert Bowman (Tanana Chiefs Conference)
[202]
Late Holocene Occupation of the Rampart Canyon, middle Yukon River, Alaska
Rampart Canyon is a bedrock constrained corridor between broad lowlands along the middle reach of the Yukon River basin in
central Alaska. The river breach is a focal zone for annual migrations of pacific salmon to their spawning grounds in the headwater
region of the Yukon River drainage. Froehlich Rainey’s survey of the region in the 1930s has recently been supplemented with
subsurface testing at the Rampart Dune site, the first pre-contact site to be systematically tested in the Rampart Canyon corridor.
Perched on an overlook topographic setting, the site is a complex of ground caches across a relict dune field adjacent to the main
channel of the river. Multiple pit features of varying sizes and morphologies traverse several vegetated sand ridges. Ground-
penetrating radar imagery has guided data recovery of well-preserved birch-bark and salmon remains in the largest pit feature (c.
1400–900 cal BP). A buried cultural zone in adjacent eolian deposits dates to c. 1150 cal BP. The Rampart Dune site is the only
known multicomponent, stratified archaeological locale in the middle reach of the Yukon River. An associated, diverse fossil insect
assemblage provides supplemental environmental proxies.
Saucedo, Alfredo [150] see Carballo, David
Saul, Julie [53] see Drake, Stacy
Saul, Julie [178] see Godhardt, Ava
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     495
Saule, Jolyane
[17]
Bifacial Tool Types Variability during the Late Paleoindian Period in the Eastern Townships, Québec
Kruger 2 (BiEx-23) is located on a terrace overlooking the Saint-Francis River in the Eastern Townships. The site bears the
distinctive material of the Plano tradition with over 890 tools collected (and almost 190 000 debitage elements). Several Plano sites,
including Fortier (BkEu-3), Gaudreau (BkEu-8) and Cliche-Rancourt (BiEr-14), have been found in the region, but none have the
same material density as Kruger 2. While seriation of diagnostic objects for the Western Plano tradition is well-defined, its Eastern
counterpart is still poorly understood and documented. The uniqueness, in terms of variety in tool types, raw material used and
quantity of artifacts, of the site makes the analysis of the tool assemblage indispensable for the understanding of the Eastern Plano
tradition. The goal of this research is to employ geometric morphometrics and traditional attributes to document the morpho-
functional tool types found on Kruger 2. The project focuses on form and format variations to distinguish the main morpho-functional
categories: projectile points (Agate-Basin and St-Anne-Varney), drills, preforms, and bifaces. A subsidiary question is also
discussed: to which extent raw material choice influences the metric characteristics of tools?
Savenkova, Tatyana [173] see Kim, Alexander
Sawchuk, Elizabeth [171] see Hildebrand, Elisabeth
Sawyer, Johann [166] see Heep, Nathan
Sawyer, Johann [47] see King, Adam
Scaffidi, Beth (Arizona State University), Natasha Vang (Vanderbilt University) and Tiffiny Tung (Vanderbilt University)
[61]
Early Childhood Diet and the Institutionalization of Social Identity and Social Inequality: Stable Isotope Analysis of Sequentially
Forming Human Tissues at the Cemetery of Uraca, Lower Majes Valley, Peru (ca. 200–750 CE)
Subsistence practices are not just borne out of necessity—food consumption is a conscious symbolic or logistical choice reflecting
various aspects of social identity. The foods infants are fed and what children and adults eat are linked to social class, occupation,
gender, or other social categories. Stable isotope analysis of apatite (δ13C) and collagen (δ13C, δ15N) from incrementally-developing
tissues (first, second, and third molars, and bone) are examined in a mortuary population from the Lower Majes Valley (Arequipa,
Peru) dating to just before and during the era of Wari imperial dominance (ca. 200–750 CE) to understand how childhood diet
restricted or broadened dietary options during later childhood, adolescence, and adulthood. Isotope ratios (δ13C) from first molars
show that injured, elite men consumed a greater relative proportion of prestigious C4 foods like maize during infancy compared to
women and the uninjured, a pattern that continued during middle childhood and adolescent years. Isotope ratios (δ13C, δ15N) from
bone collagen show these dietary differences diminished by adulthood and the years immediately preceding death. Elite boys seem
to have been groomed for adult roles by being fed distinct childhood diets that increased their access to high-status foods
throughout much of their lives.
Scaffidi, Beth [243] see Dean, Jake
Scarborough, Vernon (University of Cincinnati)
[33]
Discussant
Scarborough, Vernon [98] see Fladd, Samantha
Schach, Emily (University of California, Santa Cruz) and Jane Buikstra (Arizona State University)
[260]
Feeding the Dead at Chiribaya Alta: A Comparative Analysis of Mortuary Practices
Andean mortuary practices reflect aspects of individual and cultural identities as well as broader attitudes toward the dead. Multiple
studies at Chiribaya Alta have identified various social identities possessed by the dead. Few, however, have addressed the broader
cultural practices and attitudes toward the dead reflected in Chiribaya Alta mortuary contexts and their relationship to other Late
Intermediate Period groups within the Moquegua Valley. The inclusion of foods and eating utensils within graves at Chiribaya Alta
suggests that the practice of “feeding the dead” was an important element to funerary rites. In this paper we examine the presence
of eating implements and foods within graves at Chiribaya Alta (n=307) to consider their potential symbolic meanings within funerary
practices. A comparison of food related mortuary practices between Chiribaya and other LIP groups in the Moquegua drainage, will
be used to understand relationships during this time period. Thus, this study will allow for a consideration of the multiple ways in
which the act of feeding the dead fulfills the mourner’s obligations to the dead, social identities at Chiribaya Alta, and relationships
between archaeologically-identified LIP cultures.
[260]
Chair
Schach, Emily [242] see Blackman, David
Schach, Emily [260] see Birtell, Tabitha
Schach, Emily [5] see Wieland, Spencer
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      496
Schachner, Gregson [98] see Solometo, Julie
Schaefer, Benjamin [160] see Bowen, Corey
Schaefer, Jonathan (University of Missouri), Suzanne Eckert (University of Arizona), Jeffrey Ferguson (Univeristy of
Missouri) and Deborah Huntley (TetraTech)
[203]
Obsidian Use and Regional Interaction in the Lion Mountain Community of West-Central New Mexico
The Lion Mountain Community of west-central New Mexico in the southeastern Cibola region is a large Pueblo III period aggregated
community. Based in part on ceramic and architectural data, this community shares similarities with contemporaneous villages
located in the Zuni Region to the west. The focus of this research is examining what interactions the Lion Mountain Community may
have had with the broader Cibola Region and how this may have changed though time. Furthermore, how was outside interaction
similar or different in comparison to nearby contemporaneous sites which have been hypothesized to represent different cultural
affiliations. Building upon previous research, this study utilizes in-field ED-XRF analysis of obsidian to provide a narrow but precise
indication of regional interaction for these sites.
Scham, Sandra
[159]
Archaeology and Ethnic Nationalism: The Desired Past of White Supremacists
In 2009, in the Journal for Social Archaeology, I defined the concept of a “desired past” as having, as its primary quality, the element
of longing. In this sense, as I wrote then, longing is not nostalgia but a compelling belief that the desired past should have created a
different present. I saw the desired past as a benighted, but generally benign, yearning for a history that never was. Since then, it
has become apparent to me that the desired past also has some considerable overlap with what government and the media
characterize as “extremist narratives.” A case in point is the obsession of white supremacists with medieval history and archaeology.
Medieval historians and archaeologists are, understandably, aghast at this development but few of them can really articulate why
the oppressive Christian Western Europe of the Medieval Period should not serve as a model for other oppressors. This suggests
that the study of the Medieval past, like other archaeologies rooted in western humanism, has not evolved an inclusive view of its
past.
Schank, Cody [206] see Donn, Leila
Scharf, Elizabeth (University of North Dakota)
[78]
Archaeological Implications of a Late Holocene Pollen Record from the Florida Panhandle, USA
In late prehistoric times in the southeast U.S., researchers commonly find clear anthropogenic signals in pollen records. Vegetation
responses to human disturbance typically involve decreases in arboreal pollen paired with increases in classic disturbance
indicators, indicative of large-scale clearing of forested areas for cultivation. This study examines a pollen record from the western
panhandle of Florida, where a sediment core from Clara’s Bog was retrieved. Results show that this area was covered by relatively
unchanging woodlands through the parts of the late Holocene represented in the core. In this presentation, results are compared
and contrasted with other parts of the region and implications for interpreting the archaeology of the study area are discussed.
Scheinsohn, Vivian (INAPL-CONICET / University of Buenos Aires), Fabián Crespo (University of Louisville), Paula Miranda
(Banco Nacional de Datos Genéticos, INAPL), Florencia Rizzo (INAPL-CONICET) and Denise Evans (INAPL)
[143]
Health and Disease in Northwestern Patagonia Hunter-Gatherers: Archaeological Models and Paleopathology
PPaleopathology offers contributions about the influence of biological, socioeconomic, and cultural factors on the health of human
societies on individual and population scales (Suby et al. 2016). For hunter-gatherers, Little and Blumler (2015) have suggested that
population size, density, and high mobility influence the possibility that certain pathogens thrive. While the expansion of epidemics is
limited, given the lower densities of hunter-gatherer populations and limited accumulation of waste, they are not safe from diseases
since they would be subject to significant parasite loads as well as infections of bacterial or viral origin. They would also be more
prone to zoonotic diseases (Froment 2001, Blurton Jones 2016) and/or accidents associated with close contact with animals
(snakebites, hunting accidents, etc.) or rugged topographies (Scheinsohn and Matteucci 2004). Thus, we can generate expectations
departing from archaeological peopling models (i.e., Borrero 1994–1995) assuming, for instance, that in a well-known area, hunter-
gatherers would have a risk avoidance strategy regarding accidents. In this work, we present our expectations and results in this
regard departing from the hypothesis that the distribution of paleopathological and traumatic indicators in hunter-gatherers from
Northern Patagonia during the Late Holocene can be explained in terms of the Borrero (1994–1995) peopling model.
Schele, Elaine (Austin Community College)
[130]
The “Happy Accident” of 1970: Linda Schele Meets Moi, Merle, and Palenque
Linda Schele’s cathartic visit to Palenque, Mexico in 1970 was transformative for her. She fell in love with the ancient ruins, the
forest surrounding it, the people of Palenque and with the art and architecture of the site. She spent the next two years obsessively
studying its architecture and its jungle, drawing the buildings and creating oil paintings of its rich foliage. (I will share photos and
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                497
scans of these drawings and paintings with the audience.) She was also teaching studio art at the University of South Alabama
during that time and began a habit of returning to Palenque on scheduled breaks from her teaching job, bringing two to three art
students with her on each trip. During her third year of study at the site, she became enamored with Palenque’s iconography and
with the mysterious inscriptions as seen in its stone carvings which culminated in her participation in the First Palenque Roundtable
organized by Merle Greene Robertson in 1973. This is the story of Linda’s awakening to the ancient Maya, to art history and to
Maya epigraphy.
Scherer, Andrew (Brown University)
[209]
Discussant
Scherer, Andrew (Brown University), Charles Golden (Brandeis University) and George Kollias (Brandeis University)
[265]
A Comparative Perspective on Warfare in the Classic Maya Kingdoms of Piedras Negras, Yaxchilan, and Sak Tz’i’
Our understanding of Classic Maya warfare is, by necessity, biased toward the royal historical record. Carved monuments and
painted murals and vases afford our best evidence for the timing, cause, and consequences of warfare and are rich in the
symbolism and imagery attached to combat and violence. However, the royal historical record provides scant data pertaining to the
broader social experience of warfare, including the nonelite experience of violence and the threat thereof. Here, the built
environment—namely the form and distribution of fortifications and settlement—is our best line of evidence. In this paper, we
compare new evidence for the distribution of defenses and settlement in the kingdom of Sak Tz’i’ to our prior work on warfare in the
polities of Piedras Negras and Yaxchilan and highlight how the social experience of war was highly varied across Maya kingdoms
during the seventh and eighth centuries of the Late Classic period.
Scherer, Andrew [126] see Jimenez, Socorro
Scherer, Andrew [54] see Roche Recinos, Alejandra
Scherer, Andrew [202] see Schroder, Whittaker
Schiery, Ben [55] see May, Alejandra
Schiery, Ben [176] see Torquato, Melissa
Schleher, Kari (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center), Michelle Turner (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center), Mariana
Lujan Sanders (University of New Mexico), Genevieve Woodhead (University of New Mexico) and Daniel Leja (Binghamton
University, SUNY)
[149]
Lumping and Splitting: Design Variation on Mancos Black-on-white Pottery in the Central Mesa Verde Region
Within the central Mesa Verde region, the Mancos black-on-white pottery type is a bit of an enigma. Mancos black-on-white,
produced from AD 920–1180, includes a wide range in variation in design and technology. During its production period, similar
designs were used across the broader Ancestral Pueblo world. In the Cibola region, for example, the same range of designs were
used, but Chaco archaeologists have separated out this range of design variation into four pottery types. The Crow Canyon
Archaeological Center is currently working on the Northern Chaco Outliers Project, which is focused on the Lakeview Community, a
cluster of four great houses. Mancos black-on-white is one of the most common pottery types recovered. Because of this prevalence
and the vast amount of variation in the design and technology present on sherds of this type, Crow Canyon archaeologists have
devised a detailed, attribute-based analysis conducted on a sub-set of the 40,000 sherds analyzed to date. The goal of this project
is to test whether these differences in design and technology correspond to temporal or production group differences across the
Lakeview Community, allowing for more fine-grained discussions of this variable pottery type. We will present preliminary results
from our design study.
Schleher, Kari [147] see Schwindt, Dylan
Schloeman, Thomas [37] see Zhao, Yu-chao
Schloss, Rachel (University of Toronto)
[197]
A Comparative Study of Adobe Brickwork at Huaca Colorada and Tecapa
The Cañoncillo archeological complex in the southern Jequetepeque Valley of Peru is a sacred landscape distinguished by four
neighboring ceremonial centers of Jatanca, Huaca dos Cruces, Huaca Colorada, and Tecapa. Although these centers reached their
heights in distinct time periods across time span of 2,000 years, recent excavations in the complex have confirmed phases of
overlapping occupation during the Middle Horizon and Late Intermediate Period. In particular, Swenson and Berquist (2017)
hypothesize that the foundation of the site of Tecapa was contemporaneous with the last phase of occupation at the neighboring
Moche pilgrimage center of Huaca Colorada. This idea suggests that Tecapa was built much earlier than previously assumed, as its
architecture indicates strong highland influences, standing in stark contrast with Huaca Colorada’s intrinsically coastal style of
construction. This paper seeks to understand the relationship between the neighboring sites of Huaca Colorada and Tecapa through
a comparison of their adobe brickwork. Brick form, recipe, and manufacture technology will be assessed from formal,
geoarchaeological, and chemical methods of analyses to gauge whether the differences in architectural style at Tecapa and Huaca
Colorada translate to distinct construction technologies underwriting the making of place and political subjects.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    498
Schmader, Matthew (University of New Mexico)
[239]
First Contact, Pueblo Resistance, and Multiethnic Conflict on the Vázquez de Coronado Expedition of 1540–1542
The immense expedition into the American Southwest led by Francisco Vázquez de Coronado from 1540 to 1542 was the first
contact with outsiders experienced by many indigenous groups of the region. Coronado’s entourage included Europeans from
several countries, North Africans, blacks, and soldiers from numerous Mexican ethnic groups. Well over 2,500 people made their
way into the Southwest and made contact with today’s western pueblos, Rio Grande pueblos, and plains groups. Conflicts that
occurred at several key sites reflect the multi-ethnic mix of the participants, along with mixed technologies and tactics. Ongoing
research at one of the major expeditionary conflict sites, Piedras Marcadas Pueblo (located north of Albuquerque NM), has been
funded by the American Battlefield Protection Program. The site contains a mixture of medieval European military technology,
indigenous Mexican weaponry, and evidence of Pueblo resistance. Results of recent funded fieldwork highlight the roles of those
involved and the material found at the battle site.
Schmidt, Kari (American Museum of Natural History)
[129]
Integrating Species Biology into Archaeological Studies: New Perspectives on Scarlet Macaws in Ancient Puebloan Cultures
From time immemorial, birds have been an integral part of the human story, fulfilling various roles of economic, social, and spiritual
importance. Among the most colorful and charismatic is the scarlet macaw, long venerated by ancient Puebloan cultures. High
concentrations of feather artifacts and skeletal remains have been recovered through the region, more than 1,000 km from the
species’ native lowland habitats. Questions regarding the acquisition and maintenance of these Neotropical birds can be difficult to
ascertain from a retrospective view of physical remains and artistic representations. Research into the natural history of wild
populations can help fill this void and provide critical insights into our understanding of scarlet macaws in archaeological contexts.
Recent work integrating archaeogenomic data with contemporary patterns of phylogeographic structure has identify southern
Mexico and northern Central America as the most probably source of Puebloan macaws. Moreover, the high intrapopulation
diversity of wild macaws contrasted with close genetic affinities recovered among ancient mitogenomes suggests the latter were
bred locally, rather than continually harvested from native nest cavities. Ongoing research is employing simulation studies to model
the historical distribution of scarlet macaw habitats and evaluate whether source populations were once found in closer proximity to
Puebloan areas.
Schmidt, Morgan (Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi) and Jennifer Watling (University of Sao Paulo)
[161]
Formation Processes, Fertility, Spatial Extent, and Carbon Content of Amazonian Anthropogenic Soils in the Upper Xingu
Recent research in the Upper Xingu carried out in partnership with the indigenous Kuikuro community (Associação Indígena Kuikuro
do Alto Xingu—AIKAX) has revealed that modified soils associated with remains of archaeological settlements and possibly with
ancient cultivation areas may be much more extensive than previously thought. We are working to determine the fertility, carbon
content, and overall spatial extent of these soils in the region. Ethnographic research with Kuikuro farmers has revealed the
intentionality inherent in the formation of fertile dark earth soils (terra preta) around contemporary villages as well as the importance
of ancient dark earth sites. Remote sensing and artificial intelligence will allow us to extend our ground-truth data to a wider area
and determine overall extents of modified soils. Combining ethnographic, archaeological, microbotanical, environmental, and
satellite data will allow more robust interpretations of landuse in the past.
Schmidt, Morgan [161] see Watling, Jennifer
Schmidt, Patrick [162] see Blessing, Matthias
Schmidt, Patrick [216] see Pargeter, Justin
Schmidt, Ryan [244] see Blohm, Tre
Schmitt, David [22] see Lupo, Karen
Schneider, Danielle
[91]
Discussant
Schneider, Joan
[89]
Discussant
Schneider, M. Jesse [271] see Ardren, Traci
Schneider, Tsim [214] see Panich, Lee
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      499
Schnell, Joshua (Brown University)
[143]
Ancient Maya Dentistry: Documenting Therapeutic Dental Interventions Using Scanning Electron Microscopy
The ancient Maya are often highly regarded for their skill in working with teeth, evidenced by longstanding traditions of filing and
inlaying. In one study of nearly 500 dentitions, only 1 in 20 drilled cavities for inlays breached the pulp chamber, a considerable
success rate suggesting a pervasive knowledge of dental anatomy. However, the study of aesthetic practices has overshadowed
the study of the therapeutic aspects of ancient Maya dentistry, which have received comparatively little attention despite
archaeological, iconographic, and textual evidence attesting to the importance of oral health. Following the identification of extracted
teeth in a marketplace at the site of Piedras Negras in 2017, this project was initiated in order to better understand extraction
techniques and other potential therapeutic interventions. It applies methods utilized by other studies of early dentistry, in turn, rooted
in studies of dental microwear and fossil tooth studies, to study a large and diverse sample of ancient Maya teeth for the first time.
Here I report on preliminary results of utilizing tooth replication techniques and scanning electron microscopy to detect and analyze
microwear associated with lesions and defects in pathological teeth from a number of sites from across the Maya region.
Schoeninger, Margaret [61] see Santillan Goode, Julianna
Schofield, Abagail (Boston University), Luis Octavio Ruzo (Association for the Study of Traditional Arts and), Luis Jaime
Castillo (Secretary of Culture, Peru) and David Carballo (Boston University)
[242]
A Geospatial and Archaeoastronomical Analysis of Stone Monuments at Marcahuasi, Peru
This project presents a geospatial evaluation of an ancient Andean landscape at the site of Marcahuasi, Peru, and its possible
cultural significance using ESRI mapping and planetary software. Marcahuasi is a site with clear native Andean architectural
remains, including habitational, storage, and burial structures, but also rock formations of debated origins and date. The goals of this
project were to assess the geometrical and possible astronomical relationships between the stone monuments and to evaluate
which, if any, were modified by human activity. These relationships will help determine if these monuments were created by a pre-
Inca culture, reflective of Inca imperial influence, or wholly natural. Eleven of the rock formations, or markers, were assessed for
astronomical relationships and evaluated for possible modification by human activity. While there are potential geometrical and
astronomical relationships present for some monuments, the majority of the stone monuments did not present significant alignments
with the sun during the summer and winter solstices. The lack of geometrical and astronomical relationships could indicate that
these monuments are primarily natural in origin, though some aspects of the monuments may have been modified by humans.
Future analysis will test for other astronomical alignments significant to Andean religion and cosmology.
Schollmeyer, Karen (Archaeology Southwest)
[122]
Chair
Schollmeyer, Karen (Archaeology Southwest)
[156]
Animal Remains in Communal Spaces and Ritual Activities in the Mogollon Area, AD 1000–1450
Communal spaces are most often identified archaeologically through architectural features, but unusual artifact deposits also allow
us to recognize spaces used for ritual practices and communal events. This research examines distinctive deposits of animal bones
from structures in the Mimbres and upper Gila areas of southwest New Mexico from the Mimbres Classic through Cliff phase Salado
periods (AD 1000–1450). Uncommon animal taxa are recovered in contexts such as purposeful floor deposits, floor feature fill, and
deposits people left behind in partially filled-in rooms or other contexts where “ordinary” use of a structure had clearly ended. Some
deposits include taxa associated with religious activities in Southwestern ethnographies, such as carnivores, raptors, and water
birds. Other deposits are remarkable for containing numerous remains of animals not commonly found in archaeological contexts,
such as fish. Additional taxa are most common as food remains, but are also sometimes associated with unusual contexts where
people imbued them with other important meanings. Comparing distinctive animal bone deposits across time and space allows a
more nuanced understanding of variation in the uses of communal spaces for ritual and important events.
Schollmeyer, Karen [122] see Chamalian, Zaynab
Schollmeyer, Karen [122] see White, Sean
Scholnick, Jonathan (Bucknell University)
[213]
The Decline of Small Farms in Pennsylvania during the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries
This study traces the shifting agricultural strategies of households that lived and worked on a small farm in central Pennsylvania
during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Small Pennsylvania farms shifted away from diversified farming during the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries due to the influence of modernization and post-war industrial farming practices. This was a period in
which the number of farms and the farming population in rural America experienced a dramatic decline. The Keebler Farm in
Lycoming County, Pennsylvania, was initially occupied during the 1830s, and it continued producing agricultural goods through the
early twentieth century. Although parts of the farm have been continuously cultivated, land-use practices have dramatically changed
the footprint and production of the farm, as parcels have been developed for residential properties, natural gas extraction, and most
recently as a biological field station affiliated with a small liberal arts college. This study presents the results of the 2019 Lycoming
College Field School.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        500
Schroder, Verginica [159] see Turcanu-Carutiu, Daniela
Schroder, Whittaker (University of Florida), Charles Golden (Brandeis University), Andrew Scherer (Brown University),
Timothy Murtha (University of Florida) and Omar Alcover (Brown University)
[202]
Reconstructing the Lakamtuun Kingdom: Aerial Remote Sensing and Reconnaissance along the Lacantun River, Chiapas, Mexico
Mayanists rely on emblem glyphs that link Classic period royal dynasties to places to reconstruct macropolitical structures across
the Southern Lowlands. The Lakamtuun emblem glyph is one of many examples of a dynasty that has not yet been securely
situated. The use of this title among the Lacandon Ch’ol during the Late Postclassic and Colonial periods as well as its persistence
as a placename attached to the Lacantun River in Chiapas, Mexico suggests that the seat(s) of this kingdom lay somewhere along
this major tributary of the Usumacinta River. In this paper, we combine methods of reconnaissance and excavation with remote
sensing, primarily through the interpretation of lidar transects collected by NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center GLiHT system. By
applying these methods between the archaeological sites of El Palma and Benemerito de las Americas, Primera Seccion we test
various models of political organization of the Lakamtuun kingdom. We suggest that to the extent that “Lakamtuun” behaved as a
toponym, the title was most likely used to refer to a series of shifting capitals, perhaps reflecting a strategy of political cycling that
contributed to the resilience of the kingdom into the ninth century AD if not later.
Schroeder, Bryon (Center for Big Bend Studies - Sul Ross State University)
[101]
Late Archaic Maize in the Trans-Pecos of West Texas: Implications and Future Research
The recovery of late archaic maize from the Trans-Pecos, peripheral to the American Southwest, adds to an expanding list of
primary crop acquisition by foragers who occupied arid regions. But it lacks clear demographic and settlement patterns diagnostic of
this period from adjacent areas. Absent these key similarities, local researchers argued the early use of cultigens was superficial.
But it is now clear the initial use of maize was both early and extensive across the Southwest, including the Trans-Pecos, with
variable effects on settlement and subsistence. This has led to a debate on how to label this early period of cultivar use; is it an
extension of archaic lifeways with limited food production, or the onset of an earlier agricultural period? What is clear is the use of
maize preceding the formative period spans an appreciable area of diverse desert ecotones. Therefore, situating the role of maize
as well as the initial introduction and intensity of use in the Trans-Pecos region is dependent on a larger context that includes all
known examples. This talk explores the role of food production in the Trans-Pecos with new radiocarbon and dietary isotope data,
adding to the larger discussion of early maize use.
Schroeder, Bryon [8] see Niquette, Richard
Schroeder, Eric (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory)
[169]
Status and Inequality during the Toyah Interval (1250–1700 CE): A View from the Mortuary Data
Much of the archaeological literature on the Late Prehistoric Toyah Interval views the populations of central and southwest Texas as
highly mobile hunter-gatherers characterized by a relatively simple social organization that was more or less egalitarian and
operating largely at the band level. However, early Spanish colonial records document the existence of social inequality with respect
to gender, age, and status. These documents particularly note the existence of special status individuals who would travel long
distances to group aggregation/trade fair sites to not only engage in trade, but to organize labor for the production of commodities
and enlist support in raiding and warfare. This paper examines the subject of inequality and special status during the Toyah Interval
through a synthesis of the available mortuary data with respect to patterns related to differential nutrition and health, grave goods,
and evidence of violence.
Schroeder, Sissel (University of Wisconsin, Madison) and Samuel Munoz (Northeastern University)
[255]
The Paradox of Incommensurate Paleoecological and Archaeological Evidence
Drawing on Sullivan’s considerations of human ecodynamics and settlement patterns, we examine paleoecological and
archaeological evidence for human use and occupation of the floodplain of the American Bottom in west-central Illinois. Around AD
450, changes in the relative abundance of terrestrial pollen, particularly a rapid reduction in most arboreal taxa and an increase in
non-arboreal taxa including plants that were part of the Eastern Agricultural Complex, offers evidence of extensive land clearance
for farming of indigenous domesticates. However, there is a noteworthy absence of archaeological evidence for human occupation
of the floodplain prior to AD 600. Development of a vast anthropogenic landscape in the American Bottom floodplain at a time when
there are few traces of people living there and long before the emergence of elites and sociopolitical hierarchies has important
implications for theories about the origins and spread of agriculture, the ecological impacts of a relatively small number of people,
and the dynamic nature of the archaeological record.
Schuldenrein, Joseph (Geoarcheology Research Assoc)
[132]
“Bringing Up Sonny”: The Trajectory of Pragmatic Archaeology in the Twenty-First Century
Heritage Management and CRM are currently entering early adulthood, a rite of passage wherein the why’s, how’s and where’s of
106 are unquestioned. If development, preservation, and legacy guided the profession’s emerging stages (latter twentieth century)
then climate change, disaster, war and sustainability have reconfigured today’s priorities. It’s a sign of the times. Sonny Trimble and
partners have arguably guided this rite of passage. His projects chronicle a trajectory that grew stepwise with time. Technology at
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        501
the forefront of these projects provided templates for deeper knowledge of past economic and social systems. These afforded a
window on future sustainability. Our profession can, is, and must move to relevance with visions derived from more refined
documentation of the past. We review Trimble’s maturation, as he has systematically recast 106 to revive the heritage of
disenfranchised minorities (African Burial Ground), recast light on Native American legacy (Carlisle Cemetery), extract meaning from
the otherwise futile Iraq War (Mass Graves), and to stage a revival to America’s economy during the Great Recession (VCP and
Curation) in a manner reminiscent of FDR’s New Deal. Yet Trimble’s contributions remain incomplete and there are challenges
ahead for him and the pioneering teams motivated by his vision.
Schultz, Julian (University of Michigan) and Tanya Peres (Florida State University)
[76]
Mollusks at Mound Field: Examining the Phylum’s Role in Woodland Period Life on Florida’s Big Bend
Prehistoric inhabitants of the Florida Gulf Coast subsisted on a variety of maritime resources. Investigations at the Woodland Period
ring-midden site Mound Field (8Wa8) yielded substantial subsistence data regarding the dietary practices of its prehistoric
inhabitants and the construction of the ring-midden itself. These data show a heavy exploitation of the eastern oyster (Crassostrea
virginica) throughout much of the site’s occupation, followed by a steep decline in the taxon’s prevalence (based on MNI
percentages). This poster will present the data, examine the factors that may have contributed to the drop-off, and discuss the
implications it may have had to the ongoing inhabitation of the site.
Schurr, Mark (University of Notre Dame) and Madeleine McLeester (University of Notre Dame)
[124]
Isotopic Evidence for Protohistoric Field Locations in Northeastern Illinois
In the western Great Lakes region of the USA, late prehistoric and early historic indigenous fields are often difficult to investigate
because their archaeological signatures are faint and easily destroyed. They have been identified largely via few remnants of ridged
fields and historical records. With the majority of Indigenous fields destroyed, important aspects of cultivation remain ambiguous,
especially the ecology of cultivated areas. In addition to archaeological indicators of field location, the choice of specific environmental
settings (prairie, wetland, upland forest, etc.) can be encoded in the stable isotope ratios of cultigens. Stable carbon- and nitrogen-
isotope ratios of maize kernels and wild plants from the Middle Grant Creek site (11WI2739), an early seventeenth-century village in
northeastern Illinois, are used to better understand agricultural practices during one of the coldest periods of the Little Ice Age.
Schurr, Theodore [169] see Fleskes, Raquel
Schurr, Theodore [100] see Vilar, Miguel
Schwartz, Christopher (Arizona State University) and Kelley Taylor (Sacred Scarlets)
[129]
The Human Experience of Transporting and Raising Scarlet Macaws at Paquimé in Chihuahua, Mexico
Archaeologists have long known that birds figure into the lives of past humans in substantial ways. In the U.S. Southwest and
Mexican Northwest, birds were valued as a dietary resource, for their ritual significance, as integral elements of indigenous
cosmologies, and for the economic value of their feathers. This multifaceted significance is perhaps nowhere more clear than the
site of Paquimé in northern Chihuahua where archaeologists have found evidence for the long-distance transport and local raising of
scarlet macaws (Ara macao), despite a nearest natural habitat hundreds of kilometers to the south in eastern and southern Mexico.
Though the macaws of Paquimé have been well-studied, traditional zooarchaeological approaches occasionally lose sight of how
human-animal interactions shaped the daily lives of people in the past. This paper employs an archaeology of the human
experience approach to examine what the experience of transporting and raising scarlet macaws would have been like for traveling
tradespeople and the prehispanic inhabitants of Paquimé. We examine the biology and characteristics of modern scarlet macaws
that would have necessitated specific treatments in the past and point out challenges and potential solutions for those that
transported and raised them.
[129]
Chair
Schwarz, Kevin (ASC Group Inc.)
[55]
Iterative Temporal Hygiene and Bayesian Analyses of Large Radiocarbon Datasets: The Impact of Kernel Density Estimation upon
Clarifying Temporal Relationships among Woodland-period Phases, Middle Scioto Valley, Ohio
The accumulation of radiocarbon dates for Scioto Valley Woodland-period sites has created a palimpsest, which inhibits
chronological understanding of cultural change. The project iteratively integrates temporal hygiene and Bayesian analyses of large
radiocarbon datasets from multiple sites, in an attempt to clean up problematic features of such datasets and provide for accurate
archaeological inference. Temporal hygiene is applied and compared using three levels of stringency, in order to eliminate
problematic assays, which result from early low-accuracy radiocarbon dates and non-optimal selection and reporting practices.
Kernel density estimation (KDE) smoothing reduces statistical over-dispersion, which results from summing measurement
imprecision and issues with the calibration curve. Bayesian analysis is built into the KDE routine, resulting in a more accurate
analysis than otherwise possible. This degree of subtlety of the analysis would be impossible if Null Hypothesis Statistical Testing
were used alone, due to inherent conceptual limitations in NHST. Analysis of 22 radiocarbon dates from five sites at the Columbus
Southerly Wastewater Treatment Plant, and comparisons of 40 dates from relevant regional sites, provide for a refined chronology.
This chronology better temporally defines previously overlapping Hopewell hamlet occupations, terminal Middle Woodland-early
Late Woodland nucleated settlements, and Newtown phase village occupations.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    502
Schwindt, Dylan (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center), Kari Schleher (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center), Michelle
Turner (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center), Grant Coffey (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center) and Jerry Joplin (Crow
Canyon Archaeological Center)
[147]
Using Computer Vision and Deep Learning Algorithms to Predict Pottery Types: An Example Using Ancestral Pueblo Pottery from
the Central Mesa Verde Region
Computer vision, machine learning and artificial intelligence techniques have made much progress in the past several years. Cloud
computing has rendered these tools more accessible than ever to researchers in a wide range of fields. Here we explore
applications of these models to classify Ancestral Pueblo pottery types in the central Mesa Verde region of southwestern Colorado.
We explore a range of models, from deep learning models based solely on image analysis to models that include imagery combined
with simple, user provided observations to predict pottery typology. We also compare deep learning models that predict typology
directly with more traditional models that use attributes to predict typology to models that combine both approaches. Finally, we
discuss the most promising predictive models for public education products about archaeology and ancient Indigenous technologies.
Scott, Ann (Terracon Consultants)
[137]
Chair
Scott, Jorden (New Mexico State University)
[122]
Connections between the Mimbreños People and Local Avian Species
The purpose of this poster is to examine the cultural group known as the Mimbres in the American Southwest and investigate their
relationship with avian species through a multi-vocal interpretation of pottery iconography, present from AD 1000–1150. Many
studies have focused on southwestern species of birds, but often with a direct focus on popular birds, including the eagle, turkey,
and the macaw for two main reasons: 1) these avian species are associated with ritual use and are further preserved in the
archaeological record through burial, and 2) these species imprint as chicks, allowing them to easily be kept as house birds. Each of
these themes surrounding the three birds has led to their status in studies; however, two key factors have often been ignored. The
first is the lack of Native voice and the second is a lack of focus on birds that are rarely present in the archaeological record and do
not showcase the ability to imprint. Mimbres pottery displays the direct interaction held between Mimbreños and these common
species, but these bowls also, depict many other bird species. This research intends to offer a beginning, multi-vocal platform for
understanding relationships between Mimbres populations and small wild aves.
Scott, Jorden [136] see Arakawa, Fumi
Scott, Jorden [122] see Cron, Lindsey
Scott, Michael (Trent University) and Paul Szpak (Trent University)
[64]
Chew the Fat: Examining Applications of Lipids in Archaeological Bone
In this study we applied gas chromatography-mass spectrometry to lipids extracted from the bones of modern and archaeological
fauna in order to evaluate the potential use of bone lipids for furthering studies of palaeo-ecology. The aims of this study were three-
fold: 1) Determine what similarities exist between lipids in bone and soft tissue to better understand how they are routed through
diet. 2) To assess their preservation in the bones of archaeological specimens by confirming whether they vary among species
according to ecological expectations or are simply the result of degradation/contamination. 3) To measure the effectiveness of
various lipid extraction techniques used by archaeologists and ecologists by examining the lipids obtained from bone by each
technique. Our analyses have demonstrated that lipid profiles vary depending on when the lipids are extracted (i.e., before or after
demineralization of the bone). The total abundance of lipids found in bones is much less than in soft tissues, however, bone lipids
most resemble marrow and adipose lipids in terms of types and proportions present. Additionally, lipid profiles vary among species
in archaeological bone.
Scott Cummings, Linda (PaleoResearch Institute)
[119]
Introduction of Wheat into North America: The Role of Spanish Missionaries
Colonization of Central and North America involved Spanish mission construction and growing wheat necessary for Eucharist bread.
Using evidence of threshing technology, represented by cut phytoliths, as an indicator of trait adoption, we examine missions in
California and the Puebloan region. Introduction of a new religion, new icons, new structures, and new food into traditional cultures
is examined using quality of threshing evident in these locations. Traditional threshing sledge use in Spain, the Near East, and
circum-Mediterranean produces tiny to microscopic cut straw fragments, establishing a standard. This also was observed in
California adobe. The New Mexican Pecos Mission adobe samples, however, yielded wheat seeds and large straw fragments with
cuts, indicating coarser chopping and suggesting difficulties in adoption of the new system. Challenges of supplanting well-known
maize cultivation and processing by wheat in the Puebloan community are compared with success in introducing wheat cultivation
and processing to people in California who did not have a grain-based economy. Maintaining standards appears to have been more
difficult in New Mexico, suggesting other challenges in a transition not only from maize to wheat, but also in religion and socially, as
is evidenced by the Pueblo Revolt of 1680.
Scott Cummings, Linda [180] see Gingerich, Joseph A. M.
Scott Cummings, Linda [66] see Varney, R. A.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        503
Scullin, Dianne
[25]
Moche Sonic Artifacts: Creating a Desired Soundscape
Music is humanly organized sound, it imposes sound as an order on the world through active and often elaborate cultural choices.
Despite only forming a small portion of the overall soundscape within which all human beings reside, the overtly intentional nature of
music, and the relative durability of sound-producing artifacts, present relatively accessible entry points for the archaeological
analysis of social and cultural soundscapes. The design, manufacture and use of Moche sonic artifacts represent a direct
intervention into the environmental soundscape of the North Coast of Peru between AD 100 and AD 900. This intervention moves
beyond the sounds that the human body can generate, to a world of entirely new humanly created sound. This paper will present
data concerning the types of sounds produced by the wide variety of Moche sonic artifacts in order to uncover both what types of
sound the Moche people desired, or perhaps required, and the wider implications of these sonic interventions.
Sealy, Judith (University of Cape Town)
[240]
Territoriality and marriage patterns in coastal hunter-gatherers from δ15N
Throughout the world, productive coastlines and riverine environments supported less mobile—even sedentary—hunter-gatherers.
Along the southernmost coast of Africa, there is evidence for low mobility in the form of localised clustering of δ15N values in skeletal
remains. In particular, there is a marked discrepancy between unusually high δ15N values in people buried on the Robberg
Peninsula and nearby Plettenberg Bay, compared with moderate values at Matjes River Rock Shelter, 14 km to the east. The two
groups had different diets (or economies); people buried in the former area specialised in high trophic level marine foods, while
those in the latter were generalists. A major estuary probably marked the boundary between two hunter-gatherer territories. New
research compares δ15N in the dentin of early-forming permanent teeth (incisors and first molars) with bone from the same
skeletons, to ascertain whether people from Robberg/Plettenberg Bay married within their own group (both dentin and bone should
show high δ15N), or whether marriage partners came from further afield (δ15N in dentin should be lower than bone). Results thus far
support within-group marriage. This raises interesting questions about group sizes required to maintain long-term viability, and the
nature and extent of regional networks.
Sealy, Judith [240] see Pfeiffer, Susan
Searcy, Michael [147] see Jepsen, Jacob
Searcy, Michael [173] see Snow, Meradeth
Searcy, Michael [169] see Summers-Wilson, Rachel
Seare, Abraham (Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago)
[268]
Digital Methods in Archaeology: The Mortuary Patterns of the Ocoña and Churunga Valleys of Southern Peru and Its Digital
Typology
The Corral Redondo Archaeological Project has conducted excavation, survey, and conservation studies for two field seasons in the
Ocoña and Churunga valleys of southern Peru. One of the primary objectives of the project is to understand the cultural occupation
sequence of the region through a combination of excavation at the site of Corral Redondo and systematic archaeological survey. By
studying mortuary patterns from nine sites, the author explores the utility of a digital typology when used to conduct a comparative
analysis of tomb construction and cemetery locations. The mortuary context is primarily examined spatially and architecturally, using
digital methods including GIS, photogrammetry, and an online database, OCHRE (the Online Cultural and Historical Research
Environment). While exploring the prehispanic mortuary behavior in the Ocoña and Churunga valleys, the author will also showcase
the strengths of these digital methods in archaeological studies to document, analyze, and preserve information for the future, with a
special focus on database implementation.
Searles, Jessica
[213]
Early Nineteenth-Century Coffin Construction in North America
This study examines what coffin styles were popular in a specific place or region. Is there a particular reason for the style; religious,
economic or otherwise? This study also investigates whether or not the coffins are being built with little attention to detail or if it is a
well thought out craft? What types of wood are being used? Is the wood coming from nearby or is it being brought in from a much
farther distance? After analyzing the coffin wood and hardware from Fort Brooke in Tampa, a comparison of the data is made with
other sites to give a deeper view of the significance of coffin construction during the expansion era of sub-tropical frontier Florida.
Sears, Erin (University of Kentucky/Smithsonian Institution)
[168]
My Q-Mode Brings all the “Boys” to the Yard
The professional and personal chapters in Ronald L. Bishop’s life have always incorporated aspects of archaeology. This paper
discusses the historic connections to other disciplines that allowed Bishop to create an interdisciplinary trajectory while as a
graduate student and continuing a new career path that incorporated archaeometric approaches within an anthropological context.
How Late Classic Maya ceramic figurines became incorporated into the Maya Ceramics Project will also be discussed.
[168]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      504
Sebastian, Lynne (SRI Foundation)
[58]
Discussant
Sedig, Jakob (Harvard University)
[136]
Mimbres Great Kivas and Communal Structures at the Woodrow Site
This paper discusses what has been learned about the ceremonial structures at the Woodrow site, a multicomponent Mimbres village
on the upper Gila. One of the most notable architectural features at the site is the northern great kiva, which has been surveyed through
remote sensing and partially excavated. While generally similar to other Mimbres great kivas, it also had a number of distinguishing
features, such as being one of the largest in the Mimbres region. The northern great kiva was also part of the sacred-ceremonial center
of the site, located only a few steps from another large great kiva and prominent central room block. Another atypical feature of the
northern great kiva is its use history. After the structure’s original use ended the roof and center post were removed. An alignment of
large stones was then placed in the center of the structure. Such a dramatic remodeling of one of the most prominent ritual structures in
the upper Gila would have been conspicuous and deeply symbolic. This, along with its association with other ceremonial structures,
suggest differences between the upper Gila and Mimbres river valleys in how ritual space was conceived and used.
Sedig, Jakob (Harvard University)
[173]
Chair
Sedig, Jakob [173] see Punzo Díaz, José Luis
Sedig, Jakob [173] see Sirak, Kendra
Seersholm, Frederik [19] see Linderholm, Anna
Segschneider, Martin (NIhK), Hauke Jöns (NIhK), Moritz Mennenga (NIhK) and Jonas Enzmann (NIhK)
[238]
SPLASHCOS-Network, SPLASHCOS Viewer, and the Mesolithic Site of Strande
Since 2009, the European Commission-funded SPLASHCOS-Project has been setting up a Europe-wide network as a framework
for scientific exchange about findings, methods and techniques as well as for discussions about strategies concerning the long-term
preservation and heritage management of prehistoric landscapes and sites in the marine waters. One major outcome of the
collaboration is the information system SPLASHCOS-Viewer, which was set up to provide free public internet access to all
information currently available on submerged stone-age find-spots in the European Seas. As an example, a more detailed view is
taken on the ongoing research of the well-preserved Mesolithic site Strande in the Baltic Sea near Kiel, Germany.
Seibel, Scott (AECOM) and Matthew Harris (AECOM)
[9]
The Water and the Land: How the Private Sector and Government Work Together to Plan for Climate Change Impacts to Cultural
Resources
Government, inclusive of the local, state, and national levels, is the largest aggregate landholder in the United States and has under
its direct jurisdiction the largest array of cultural resources in the country, not to mention the cultural resources under jurisdictional
oversight. As such, government is at the spear’s point of climate change impacts to cultural resources and thus the need to develop
responses to preserve important heritage on behalf of its constituents. That said, the direct ability of government to develop
solutions and respond directly is limited by staffing constraints dictated by annual budgets and circumscribed mandates focused on
the locations and resources under their direct control and oversight. Conversely, while the private sector typically controls only
relatively small and discontinuous landholdings and has no legal mandate, it has a broader, more holistic perspective on potential
solutions due to the range of clients it serves, the geographies it covers, and its greater flexibility to engage staff with specialized
knowledge and expertise. This poster demonstrates how AECOM as a company works with municipal, state, and federal
government agencies to provide strategies and solutions that address climate change impacts to their important cultural resources.
Seibel, Scott [9] see McDaid, Chris
Seidel, Andrew (Arizona State University)
[99]
Persons and Places: Ontology and Landscape Use among Kentucky Adena Groups
Aside from their role in mortuary programs, the construction of burial mounds by past populations is frequently understood as being
involved in the formation and maintenance of territorial systems. The consideration of anthropological interpretations of non-Western
ontologies, however, enables the proposition of alternative ways in which past groups may have engaged with such monuments.
Using metric and morphological characteristics of the cranium and dentition exhibited by individuals derived from nine Adena burial
mounds located in northern Kentucky, this presentation evaluates the degree to which Adena burial mound populations are
consistent with the expectations of a territorial model. Results suggest that, although the use of Adena mounds as places of
interment was complex and exhibits both geographic and diachronic variation, their characterization as territorial phenomena is
problematic. Moreover, this presentation illustrates how consideration of non-Western ontologies enables archaeologists to ask new
questions of old data and to produce more nuanced interpretations of past behavior.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  505
Seidemann, Ryan (Louisiana Department of Justice) and Christine Halling (Louisiana Department of Justice)
[248]
Assessing the Taphonomy of 29 Human Anatomical Specimens Confiscated in Louisiana
Anatomical specimens used for teaching frequently become available for sale online. In one Louisiana case, authorities to
confiscated 29 human anatomical specimens. These specimens are used to highlight the breadth of information that can be
gathered from such specimens. Anatomical specimens are easily identified by the autopsy techniques used to prepare them and the
hardware applied to them. Postmortem alterations of these specimens result from frequent handling by students and teachers,
increasing the likelihood of damage, loss of teeth, pen or pencil marks, or even the buildup of a patina on the surface. The
specimens discussed here are all skulls, displaying subtle variations of preparation that seem to be indicative of different anatomical
supply companies’ preparation techniques. These specimens represent individuals of all ages and ancestry, with some unique
pathological conditions including labret wear, generalized porosity, and evidence of infectious disease processes. Anatomical
specimens pose unique challenges with regard to postmortem damage that can make analysis more challenging, but overall contain
verifiable information and confidence that the anatomical specimen was likely prepared by a company rather than a victim of looting.
Seidemann, Ryan [80] see Halling, Christine
Seikel, Katherine (AmaTerra Environmental; Australian National University), Mindy Bonine (AmaTerra Environmental) and
Timothy Griffith (AmaTerra Environmental)
[176]
The Headwaters Site: Preliminary Site Analysis and Featured Finds
Site 41CM204, the Headwaters Site, is a serially occupied archaeological site in New Braunfels, Texas. The site is located at the
headwaters of the Comal River and was occupied seasonally for approximately 8,000 years, up to and including the historic period.
However, the Archaic Period deposits are the most notable, with excavations revealing over 30 identified features, particularly
burned rock middens and earth ovens from hot-rock cooking activities. Excavations conducted by AmaTerra Environmental, Inc. at
the Headwaters site in 2018–2019 recovered over 100,000 artifacts and samples. This poster presents the results of the 2018–2019
excavations focusing on feature types, artifacts, and preliminary analysis of site components.
Seikel, Katherine [194] see Bonine, Mindy
Seikel, Katherine [100] see Levin, Maureece
Seitsonen, Oula [62] see Égüez, Natalia
Selden, Robert, Jr., Michael Shott (University of Akron) and Morgane Dubied (Université de Bourgogn)
[17]
Processing Matters: 3D Mesh Morphology
Substantive advancements have been made toward automating the application of landmarks and semilandmarks. These
approaches can aid in expediting the landmarking process, while simultaneously reducing landmarking errors and investigator bias.
This study enlists a template-based approach to quantify deviations in mesh processing outputs using a Pontchartrain dart point
from the collections of the National Forests and Grasslands in Texas, which was scanned and processed at multiple resolutions
using microCT and laser scanners. Following data collection and output, meshes were processed using an automated and
replicable workflow. A batch processing protocol was developed in Geomagic Design X and Control X to facilitate exploratory
comparisons of the processed meshes, which indicated that the greatest changes to the meshes occurred along the lateral margins
of the dart point. Results of the geometric morphometric study evince implications for processed meshes curated in digital
repositories, making it clear that should investigators endeavor to incorporate curated meshes that they should begin with the
unprocessed data, enlist uniform processing protocols across the sample, and comprehend the many vagaries of 3D data collection
and processing across different modalities.
Selden, Robert, Jr.
[95]
Discussant
Selden, Robert, Jr. [17] see Covey, R. Alan
Selden, Robert, Jr. [17] see Etter, Bonnie
Self, Caleb [252] see O’Mansky, Matt
Seligson, Ken (California State University, Dominguez Hills)
[20]
A Whole Lot of Holes: An Abundance of Quarries at Muluchtzekel as a Marker of Geological and Material Wealth
Aided by lidar-derived digital elevation models, the systematic survey of the eastern Puuc site of Muluchtzekel in the Northern Maya
lowlands has led to the identification and ground-truthing of dozens of limestone quarries. The quarries range in size from a few
meters in diameter for the smallest pit quarries to over 50 m in the length for the longest ledge quarries. Their prevalence, along with
the high frequency of masonry and vaulted structures in the region, suggest that stone extraction and processing were significant
socio-economic industries in the Puuc. This paper presents excavation data from a large ledge quarry, multi-elemental analyses of
stone samples, and spatial and contextual evaluations of quarry shapes, sizes, and locations across the site. Findings suggest that
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     506
the higher status inhabitants of Muluchtzekel could count on having access to high quality architectural stone regardless of where
they chose to build their residences. Preliminary analyses suggest that certain grades of fine-grained local limestone could have
been used as extraction tools for quarrying softer grades of limestone, thus avoiding a complete reliance on the importation of non-
local chert.
Seligson, Ken [230] see Ringle, William
Sellet, Frederic [244] see Potter, Bethany
Seltzer, Heather (Aspen CRM Solutions)
[214]
Life on the Northern New Mexican Frontier: Historic Homesteading in the Rio Grande del Norte National Monument
The area of the Rio Grande del Norte National Monument, near Taos, New Mexico was extensively used during both prehistoric and
historic times. The historic period has typically been the lesser emphasis for cultural resource investigations in the area. The area
around the Monument, saw growth in 1880 when a branch of the Denver & Rio Grande Railroad, called the Chili Line was
established. The construction of the Chili Line encouraged the growth of pastoralism and logging and with that, more Anglo and
Hispanic settlers came to the area. In addition, the Homestead Act of 1862 provided land grants to individuals in the Taos area. This
poster reports the results of a recent survey within the Monument, in which many different historic land use practices were
documented, including early turn of the twentieth-century homestead sites, sheep herding camps, features documenting early
vehicle exploration, perlite mining, and woodcutting. In particular, the Gibsons’ 1920s Homesteads and possible Athabaskan
artifacts and features that predate this homestead but were found within the same site are the primary focus for this poster. Results
are contextualized with data from the greater Taos area to investigate daily life and trade relations on the frontier.
Semanko, Amanda (New Mexico State University)
[270]
Prehistoric Dogs of the Southwest
For more than 15,000 years, dogs have held a position that transcends the dichotomy of human society versus animal world. In view
of this, the Canine Surrogacy Approach derives from the observation that prehistoric dogs had special social roles which allowed
them to consume the same foods as people and accompany humans during migration. Often, dogs were employed as guardians of
homes and crops, and even granted burials similar to humans. I explore this proxy approach through the case study of a
Georgetown-phase (AD 550–650) dog burial from Kipp Ruin, a Mimbres site in southern New Mexico. Analyses of stable isotopes
can shed light on the diets of both dogs and humans, and I will demonstrate their potential to identify migration patterns as well. To
further contextualize the life histories of domestic dogs, I compare the frequency and circumstances of other dog burials in the
Southwest with ethnohistoric and ethnographic data from indigenous southwestern cultures.
Semon, Anna (University of North Carolina)
[185]
Surveying New York City Collections at the American Museum of Natural History
The North American Archaeology Collection at the American Museum of Natural History contains more than 4,000 cataloged objects
from New York City. These accessions were acquired or donated to the museum between 1869 and 2017. In this poster, I examine
these legacy collections by exploring the materials and artifact types collected from the area. In addition, I present spatial data
associated with these accessions and focus on reconstructing several site locations within the boroughs, including City Island,
Pelham Bay Park, and Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx; Inwood and Washington Heights in Manhattan; and Mariner’s Harbor, Old
Place, Tottenville, and Watchogue in Staten Island. This research helps to explore city development through time and improves our
understanding of past landscapes in New York City.
Semon, Anna [119] see Musch, Abigail
Seowtewa, Octavius [156] see Baxter, Erin
Seowtewa, Octavius [127] see Dongoske, Kurt
Sepulveda, Marcela [74] see Gayo, Eugenia
Serafin, Stanley [237] see George, Richard
Sesler, Leslie (La Plata Archaeological Consultants)
[165]
The Famous, the Infamous, and the Unknown: A Just-so Story at the Intersection of Archaeology and History in Canyon of the
Ancients National Monument, Southwest Colorado.
Archaeologist sometimes make up “just-so” stories to help explain to themselves what the archaeology is telling them. Sometimes
these stories are whispered to trusted colleagues when no one important is listening. Sometimes these stories are made more
public, and occasionally, if a person has sufficient academic capital, they even get published. This is a “just-so” story of sorts, but
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       507
with the backing of history. The story concerns the archaeological survey of a 160-acre parcel of acquired land in Yellow Jacket
Canyon, within Canyon of the Ancients National Monument in southwestern Colorado. Only one site had been previously recorded
within the parcel, a small Pueblo III village with an estimated 25 to 40 rooms and at least 10 kivas. This site and several others
found during the survey are intricately interwoven with a set of historic events and intriguing historical figures, all important in their
own time. Viewed through the lens of history, some were honorable, some unscrupulous, and some deplorable.
Settle, Kathleen
[167]
Bethel Cemetery Relocation Project: An Introduction and Overview
The Bethel Cemetery was relocated to allow for the expansion of industrial facilities surrounding the Indianapolis International
Airport, located on the southwest side of Indianapolis, Indiana. The project involved initial mapping and documentation of all marked
burials in the cemetery, background and genealogical research on all identifiable interments, geophysical investigation to identify
unmarked grave shafts, professional removal of headstones, systematic excavation of all interments, analysis of all skeletal material
and grave goods, headstone restoration, and finally, reburial of all recovered materials. Local and state agencies, members of the
community, descendants, and military groups were involved in all stages of the project. The project also paired with local universities
and facilitated multiple master’s theses, allowing researchers to conduct a thorough analysis of grave goods and burial patterns
used by the community at the time the cemetery was active. The new cemetery layout reflects original grave locations and kept
family groups together as much as possible, which will continue to allow descendants to pay their respects to their ancestors.
Seyler, Samantha (University of Pennsylvania)
[105]
Terraces All the Way Down: A Comparative Analysis of Agricultural Landscapes within the Mantaro Valley and the Ceja de Montaña
to the East
The contemporary world is characterized by a completely modified landscape, a product of long histories of human-environment
interactions. In the Andes, this long history of human modifications of the environment is most apparent in the agricultural terrace
systems that dominate the visual landscapes of the steep Andean Mountains. While these features and associated agricultural
infrastructure have been ignored in traditional settlement surveys and site excavations, landscape archaeologists recognize terraces
as significant features of the built environment. Scholars recognize that human-manipulation of land for agriculture through the
construction of field boundaries, terraces, canals, roads, and other infrastructure, reflect not only economic and political organization
in the past, but also ideas about aesthetics, ideology, cosmology, and proper forms of land management grounded in community
identity and landscape history. In this paper, I use satellite imagery to document patterns of land use between two ecologically
distinct but historically connected regions of the central Peruvian Andes. Through the comparison of land use patterns between the
Mantaro Valley and the ceja de montaña to the east, I provide a general assessment of agricultural landscapes of this region, as
well as a tentative discussion of the relationships between agricultural communities of these two distinct zones.
Shackley, Steven [5] see Lazik, Lauren
Shackley, Steven [203] see Moss, Jeremy
Shafer, Harry (Texas A&M University, Professor Emeritus)
[136]
New Perspectives on the Ritual and Communal Space Use at the NAN Ranch Ruin, Grant County, New Mexico
Recent syntheses in Hohokam archaeology and new data from excavated Classic Mimbres sites such as Swarts, Mattocks and Old
Town has called for a new look at ritual and communal space use at the NAN Ranch Ruin, a Classic Mimbres pueblo in the Mimbres
Valley. The NAN Ranch Ruin is one of the longest occupied Classic Mimbres sites and stands out as one of the more complex
Mimbres site yet investigated with regards to architectural and extramural features. The chronology extends through the Pithouse
and Classic Mimbres periods. An evolution of ritual and communal space use is apparent in the changes from the pithouse to
pueblo periods. This paper will focus specifically on ritual and communal space during the Classic Mimbres period together with
review of Late Pithouse Period ritual space.
Shakour, Katherine (University of South Florida)
[134]
Making Impossible Decisions: Examining Disaster Responses in Nineteenth-Century Ireland
Scholars have studied how disasters impact contemporary communities and have explored the strategies and institutions that may
contribute to regrouping of individuals, households and societies. In disaster research, island communities are said to be particularly
vulnerable to the catastrophic events and the long-lasting impact. Specific to Ireland, some scholars have explored the nineteenth
century famine, but they have largely been historians and economists. While famines can be difficult to identify in the archaeological
record, this project utilizes consumption of ceramics to understand the coping mechanisms and survival techniques of communities
during the nineteenth-century famine. In this paper, the author examines how communities on Inishbofin and Inishark, islands about
five miles off the coast of County Galway, Ireland, responded to the nineteenth century disaster through permanent and seasonal
migration and short- and long-distance migrations. This research uses ceramic assemblages from the two islands and comparative
collections from County Mayo, County Donegal, and County Roscommon. The comparison allows for a discussion on how island
communities accessed different resources following the trauma of the famine. As a result, scholars need to reconsider the
circumstances in which communities are classified as more or less vulnerable during trauma and disaster.
[134]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    508
Shannon, Robert [203] see Kelly, Nigel
Shao, Huiqiu [212] see Wang, Chunxue
Shapiro, Craig (The Ohio State University)
[77]
Geospatial Analysis of Prehistoric Agricultural Systems in Samoa
This project utilizes geospatial technologies to identify the archaeological features of Samusu Village, located in the Sāmoan island
of Upolu’s easternmost district of Aleipata. Outlined in this inland area are the remains of a network of prehistoric agricultural ditches
that still channel rainwater—alleviating the effects of flooding and erosion at lower elevations. Using the lidar dataset for Sāmoa and
ArcGIS, this project analyzes the frequency and configuration of ditch and terrace systems to study their effectiveness as flood
management systems in Sāmoa. Flood capacity of the agricultural ditching system is determined via GIS-based hydrological
analysis; the flow structure of the ditches’ sections and nodes are similarly outlined via geospatial network analysis. Testing the
Aleipata complex focuses on determining maximum water flow capacity, identifying areas at high risk for inundation, and serving as
a replicable model for predicting the resilience of human-modified environments. Such modeling determines the change in efficacy
of any flood management system within a flood-prone landscape. Sāmoa, therefore, is a seminal case study for agricultural systems
as a risk management system for extreme climatic events and for expanding the use of lidar as a tool for promoting climate
resiliency.
Sharkey, Elizabeth
[186]
Walking the Arbitrary Line: Improving our Federal Archaeology Permitting Process
The practice of federal archaeological permitting by state and county lines is an archaic process. Permits should be issued based on
an applicant’s experience within cultural, or even geographical, rather than political boundaries. Our discipline should seek to
abolish the Eurocentric compartmentalization of cultural resources based on irrelevant modern boundaries which ignore the
permeable nature of cultural boundaries. This study seeks to illuminate the irrelevant nature of the permitting process that excludes
qualified archaeologists from conducting work in culture regions with which they are clearly familiar.
Sharon, Gonen [60] see Berger, Uri
Sharp, Kayeleigh (Southern Illinois University Carbondale)
[182]
Monuments, Canals, and Ancient Emojis: The Northern Gallinazo Polity in Perspective
Gallinazo sociopolitical organization is rarely considered outside the Virú Valley heartland. My recent work in the Lambayeque
region of northern coastal Peru, however, brings to light several key features that are transforming long-standing perceptions. In
particular, the notable pattern of large-scale monument building near dramatic natural landforms juxtaposed by stone-masonry
residential complexes that are often found in association with canal systems and mineral resources. This presents a picture of a
thriving, self-sufficient, self-governing regional workforce. Most intriguing are the strong associations between these likely mono-
and multi-ethnic first-millennium sites and the major presence of pottery decorated with emoji-like expressions in the Castillo-style
(a.k.a. Gallinazo). As I discuss in this paper, the northern Gallinazo is far from being a utilitarian substratum of other cultural
traditions. The two prominently Gallinazo sites of Songoy-Cojal situated in the mid-Zaña Valley and Huaca Letrada in the La Leche
Valley provide strong evidence to support this claim. Might the Lambayeque region hold answers to questions of independent
Gallinazo developments and social identity? In this paper I present new lines of evidence that help to place the northern Gallinazo
polity in perspective.
Sharp, Kayeleigh [254] see Bradley, Benjamin
Sharpe, Ashley (Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute)
[27]
The Learning Curve: Toward a Better Understanding of Zooarchaeology in the Tropics
As a science, zooarchaeological analysis in the tropics is now several decades old, yet it is facing new challenges daily. The main
source of the dilemma, which conversely makes the tropics so interesting, is that there are more animal taxa in these regions than
anywhere else in the world. Biologists continue to make new identifications every day of extant fauna, both by identifying previously
unknown animals in the field but also through the use of new genetic techniques on old collections, even archaeological collections.
As well, all animals have their own unique environmental niches and behaviors, which influenced how past peoples have hunted,
reared, or viewed specific species. Here I present a few case examples of dilemmas I and others have encountered in both the field
and lab while examining zooarchaeological remains. Currently the study of tropical fauna from archaeological sites necessitates a
steep learning curve, and there are many potential pitfalls regarding misidentifications, misunderstanding animal behavior,
misinterpreting human behavior, and errors in data collection. Nonetheless, there have been several recent advances in
archaeology and biology that may allow us to overcome some of these problems in the near future, which should encourage future
investigators in the field.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  509
Sharratt, Nicola (Georgia State University) and Ryan Williams
[127]
Extractive Activities and Animate Landscapes: Apu and Resource Acquisition in the Andes
Archaeological, ethnohistoric, and ethnographic records all indicate the enduring and far-reaching importance of animate
landscapes in Andean South America. In particular, apu—powerful mountains worshipped as spirits that could both protect and also
wreak catastrophe—figure significantly in reconstructions of politics, identity, and religion in diverse times and places in the Andes.
However, relationships with the landscape are comparatively less integrated into the increasingly robust and scientifically
sophisticated scholarship on the acquisition of natural resources for craft production in the prehispanic Andes. Instead, while the
application of techniques derived from analytical chemistry has generated a wealth of geochemical data on raw materials and
artifacts, interpretations of those data are strongly influenced by theories of political economy. In this paper, we reevaluate
geochemical data on clays and archaeological ceramics from three distinct Andean regions: Cuzco; the Moquegua Valley in
southern Peru; the Azapa and Lluta valleys of northern Chile. Complementing the compositional data derived from Laser Ablation
Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry with ethnohistoric and ethnographic perspectives on local landscapes, we explore
how choices about clay procurement—an intrusive and extractive intervention into the landscape—in these three regions were
shaped by relationships with sacred places.
Sharratt, Nicola [260] see Muñoz, Lizette
Shaw, Justine (College of the Redwoods) and Thania Ibarra (Escuela Nacional de Conservacion, Restauracion, y) and
Justine Shaw
[130]
Everyday Life during the Late Terminal Classic in the Cochuah Region
Following a peak in construction activity during the Terminal Classic, most of the 105 sites documented in the Cochuah Region in
the central Yucatán Peninsula were abandoned with only a fraction boasting minor Postclassic activity in the form of small shrines
and temples. However, at a number of settlements, a much-reduced population continued during a newly defined phase termed the
Late Terminal Classic. During this time, in addition to open-fronted (C-shaped) structures, residents built small, round foundation
braces and scavenged tools and ceramic vessels from earlier structures. Excavations of the round constructions have revealed a
mix of cultural continuities and innovations as inhabitants struggled to continue in what would have been an extremely challenging
and turbulent time period. The excavations are able to provide details about what everyday life was like through the patterning of soil
chemistry, ancient starches, and artifact distributions in and around four of the round structures. This patterning is considered in
comparison to a variety of archaeological and ethnographic examples.
Shaw, Justine [130] see Shaw, Justine
Shaw, Ryan [24] see Rabinowitz, Adam
Sheets, Kimberly (Washington State University)
[270]
Using Strontium Isotope Analysis to Connect Ancestral Hopi to the Landscape, Homol’ovi Settlement Cluster, Northeast Arizona
Faunal assemblages from the Homol’ovi Settlement Cluster (HSC) are characterized by an abundance of bighorn sheep (Ovis
canadensis). This is unusual because these animals are nonlocal to the immediate area surrounding HSC sites. This paper presents
the results of strontium isotope analysis conducted on specimens from two HSC sites, Homol’ovi I and Chevelon Pueblo. Four
potential source locations were considered (Grand Canyon, Black Mesa, San Francisco Peaks, and White Mountains). When the
isotopic data is contextualized with existing cultural data, I argue that the most likely location of procurement is Black Mesa, the
historic homeland of HSC occupants. Furthermore, I argue that long-distance procurement from the wider Black Mesa region
represented a desire to maintain social connections with the Hopi Mesas. This study emphasizes the role of human-animal
interactions in structuring social identity.
Sheets, Payson (University of Colorado)
[46]
Come On, Mayanists, Let’s Go for the 99%
Throughout my professional career, Maya archaeologists have tended to search for and excavate the tallest pyramids, the largest
palaces, and the most richly stocked tombs. Many have tried to find the finest sculptures, most colorful ceramics, and most intricate
lithic eccentrics. However, these archaeologists focus only on the “one percent” of ancient Maya society. What about the other
99%? What might we learn if Maya archaeologists studied the rest of society, thus understanding why ethnographers avoid studying
miniscule fractions of societies? My own advocacy for the “common” people largely derived from my good luck in encountering them
at the Ceren site in El Salvador, covered by and preserved under volcanic ash. The richness of life at the young village of Ceren has
been astounding, and virtually all of it well beyond any control by external authority. That site certainly has been a “Cerendipitous”
discovery, to teach us much about commoner sophistication. My respect for commoner achievement has been furthered by my
discoveries among egalitarian villages in ancient Costa Rica.
Sheets, Payson (University of Colorado)
[90]
Moderator
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        510
Sheets, Payson (University of Colorado)
[157]
Discussant
Shelach-Lavi, Gideon (The Hebrew University)
[62]
Why Build a Wall? Research on a Medieval Wall-System in Northeast Mongolia
This paper reports on two seasons (2018 and 2019) of archaeological research in Dornod Province, Northeastern Mongolia. Our
research focuses on a section of the so-called “Chinggis Khan’s Wall”: a monumental long-wall system that stretches some 737 km
from Northeastern Mongolia, through Russia, and into Chinese territory. It is associated with 42 clusters of large camps and other
structures. In spite of its huge size, little is known about this long-wall system—it is not clear when exactly it was built, who built it, or
for what purpose. Our project is the first comprehensive attempt to trace the entire length of the wall, and to systematically survey
and test-excavate parts of it, as well as a sample of its related structures. The results of our excavations allow us to reconstruct the
structure of the wall and associated features. This information, as well as a GIS analysis of the location of the wall and the
accompanied structures, is used to address the function of the wall-system and to generate hypotheses about the motivations for its
construction.
[62]
Chair
Shelley, Nathan (Texas A&M) and Kelly Graf (Texas A&M)
[81]
A Preliminary Spatial Analysis of the Late Pleistocene Components at the McDonald Creek Site, Interior Alaska
The McDonald Creek site (FAI-2043) is located about 30 miles south of Fairbanks, Alaska, in the Tanana Flats. Results of
archaeological testing and excavations between 2013 and 2019 identified three distinct archaeological components, Components 1,
2, and 3 dating to about 13.8 ka, 12.7 ka, and 5 ka, respectively. Approximately 40,000 pieces of archaeological materials have
been found in situ with three-point provenience, and most of these come from the earliest component. The high density of artifacts
and features in the early components at McDonald Creek provide a rare opportunity to gain insight into site use, adaptive strategies,
and settlement organization of these early inhabitants of Beringia. For this poster, we will model the artifacts from Components 1
and 2 using ArcGIS and ArcScene to display both 2D and 3D maps of each component separately and in relation to each other.
Then we will use these models to document horizontal artifact clustering in relation to field-identified features to document activity
areas and test the degree of vertical separation between components.
Shelley, Nathan [81] see Graf, Kelly
Shen, Chen [94] see Cheng, Wen Yin
Sheng, Lishuang [162] see Wang, Jiaqi
Shephard, Christopher (Virginia Dept. of Transportation)
[251]
Material Bodies, Living Objects: Bodily Adornment and Death in the Algonquian Chesapeake
This paper explores the relationship between the human body and the objects that adorned them within the Late Woodland through
early Colonial (AD 900–1680) Algonquian Chesapeake. Drawing on the notion that the human body represents the battle ground
upon which political authority is established, I am interested in articulating the many ways that adornment objects (extensions of the
body) were deployed to expand, counteract, or contradict human agency. Historic Algonquian interactions with shell and copper,
tangible metaphors for birth and social action, demonstrate that these materials exhibited human-like qualities and, at times,
animated relations with the insentient (the skeletal remains of dead relatives, for instance). At the same time, these shifting
animacies were bound up in the transformation of people and their bodies into something more akin to objects, as slaves, body
parts taken as war trophies, and skeletal remains that were commingled, burned, or buried. Having observed burial ceremonies, the
chiefly (re)distribution of shell and copper ornamentation, and rituals aimed at suppressing dangerous non-human actors,
seventeenth century English colonials knew the significance of beads and beadwork in the Powhatan political sphere. Efforts then
were aimed at controlling these objects and by proxy, the Algonquian bodies that they adorned.
Sherfield, Anne (Arizona State University)
[7]
Differential Access and Socioeconomic Inequality at Teotihuacan
I investigate patterns of social and spatial inequality at Teotihuacan, Mexico. Differential access to civic resources is a well-
documented mechanism of socio-economic differentiation in historic cities and can be measured by analyzing movement within the
built environment. I measure differential access at Teotihuacan by simulating movement pathways from residential structures to the
great compound and the plazas of the sun, moon, and feathered serpent pyramids. The locational data for this study was gathered
from publications of excavated structures and the Teotihuacan Mapping Project’s architectural survey. A baseline of best possible
accessibility was created using the minimum distance model which assumes that the only variable affecting access is distance.
Then, pedestrian movement from the doorways of residential structures to the great compound and pyramid plazas was simulated
using a GIS-based spatial network analysis. This model shows the constraints that the urban environment had on the movements of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   511
individuals. This analysis evaluates the extent to which a structure’s access to Teotihuacan’s public spaces is a function of its
distance, or whether differential access to ceremonial spaces contributed to creating and maintaining social inequality at
Teotihuacan.
Sheridan, Susan [35] see Berumen, Sara
Sherman, Diana [172] see McBrinn, Maxine
Sherman, Jason (University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee), Samantha Bomkamp (University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee) and
Hannah Blija (University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee)
[229]
Preliminary Results of the Sierra Blanca Archaeological Survey, New Mexico
The Sierra Blanca Archaeological Survey is documenting evidence of the long history of human activity in the Fort Stanton-Snowy
River Cave National Conservation Area, located in the Sierra Blanca highlands of south-central New Mexico. This region was an
important transitional zone between societies of the American Southwest and the southern Plains during pre-contact times. This
paper outlines the goals of the survey project and summarizes the results of the first field season. Sites recorded thus far span from
the Formative period (AD 500–1450)—when a complex web of social, cultural, and economic interactions linked the region’s
inhabitants to neighboring groups—to much more recent times. The latter include historic sites associated with Fort Stanton, a
nineteenth-century U.S. military fort.
Sherman, Simon (University of Memphis) and Ryan Parish (University of Memphis)
[194]
Lithic Sourcing at Poverty Point (16WC5) Using VNIR and FTIR Spectroscopy
Poverty Point is a monumental earthwork center dating to the Late Archaic Period (ca. 3700–3100 Cal BP). The site is well known
for its diverse collection of foreign lithic materials indicative of a wide-ranging acquisition network. Among the extra-local items
recovered from the site are lithic raw materials that were used for bifaces in the form of projectile points and/or knives (PP/Ks). Here,
I determined the atomic and molecular composition of 847 bifaces from the Alexander Collection using Visible/Near-Infrared
Reflectance (VNIR) and Fourier-Transform Infrared Reflectance (FTIR) spectroscopy. The combined wavelength spectra datasets
were compared to a raw material database to determine the location of the parent formations from which the raw materials were
obtained. The PP/K raw materials analyzed were sourced to outcrops stretching across the Southeast, Mid-South and Mid-West.
Sherman, Simon [237] see Peacock, Evan
Sheumaker, Christian (University of Texas, San Antonio) and Laura Levi (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[230]
Scouting the Neighborhood: Identifying Architectural Variation through Lidar at Wari Camp, Belize
Archaeological studies of supra-household affiliations have become more prevalent over the past decade in an attempt to
understand how people organized themselves across space at different scales. Contributing to this trend, the current paper will
focus on neighborhoods as a significant source of socio-spatial variation within ancient Maya communities. At Wari Camp, located in
northwestern Belize, detection of neighborhoods proceeded from pedestrian surveys charged with mapping subtle variations in
residential architecture. Recent acquisition of lidar imagery has made it possible to see architecture and terrain modifications in
several areas of the site that project personnel were unable to access on foot. Unfortunately, it has been difficult to identify Wari
Camp’s neighborhoods remotely, and their detection will require an expanded lidar tool kit. To this end, and for the purposes of this
paper, we will blend Sky View Factor, Slope Severity, and Hillshading visualization techniques. The enhanced visibility afforded by
these techniques should allow us to more effectively identify the differences in residential architecture—known as “integrating
mechanisms”—that signaled distinct neighborhood affiliations. In so doing we hope to reveal how Wari Camp’s neighborhoods
systematically structured residents’ daily practices and created the shared experiences of everyday life.
Shev, Gene (Leiden University) and Corinne Hofman (Leiden University)
[271]
Localized Fishing Traditions at Late Precolonial Sites in Hispaniola and Jamaica
The faunal record of late precolonial archaeological sites in the Greater Antilles suggest that indigenous peoples in the region relied
significantly on marine fish as a food source. Although many contemporaneously occupied sites demonstrate affinities in the forms
of ceramic traditions, settlement patterns and terrestrial foodways, there are distinct differences both in the quantity and types of
marine resources exhibited at these sites. Fish assemblages of four late precolonial sites in the Greater Antilles, El Cabo in the
eastern, and El Flaco and El Carril in the northwestern Dominican Republic, as well as White Marl in Jamaica were analyzed as part
of this research. These sites demonstrated key differences, with a notable diminishment in the quantities of marine resources
relating to distance from the coastline. Although much of the marine fish species present at these sites region share wide
distributions throughout the Caribbean region, there are definitive differences in the presence and absence of certain taxa between
these sites. These differences suggest that alimentation choices were largely dictated by the relative proximity of certain coastal
environments, such as reefs, estuaries and mangroves, in turn fostering localized fishing practices specific to each site.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 512
Shikrallah, Elizabeth (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Danielle Romero (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[122]
Costume or Chimera: Hybrid Human/Animal Imagery on Mimbres Ceramics
The imagery of people and animals on Mimbres ceramics has long fascinated both researchers and the general public. Efforts to
understand the meaning behind these images are countless with varying results of success. This poster focuses on images that
appear to combine elements of animal and human figures in order to investigate design trends and their place in the Mimbres
iconographic world. The dataset for this work includes whole vessels from published reports and ceramic databases that provided a
known site context in order to grasp a full picture of the imagery and lower the chances of including fake or modified images. This
research discusses the ease of deciphering between costumes, transformations, and general diversity (to factor for potter error and
frame of reference bias) in representation. Analyzing the context of these vessels also allows for some discussion on the purpose of
these designs.
Shikrallah, Elizabeth [150] see Badillo, Melissa
Shikrallah, Elizabeth [148] see Willis, William
Shimada, Izumi (Southern Illinois University), Haagen Klaus (George Mason University), Brandi MacDonald (MURR,
University of Missouri), Ken-ichi Shinoda (National Museum of Nature and Science, Japan) and Amy Szumilewicz
(Southern Illinois University)
[105]
Cross-Disciplinary Testing of the Multi-lineage Governance Model: Middle Sicán Case
Monumental mounds called huacas are among the most notable prehispanic features of coastal Peru. What do the multiplicity and
coexistence of such monuments at a single site represent about group(s) that built them? This is the basic question guiding our
ongoing research at the Middle Sicán capital of Sicán on the north coast of Peru. In essence, we aim to clarify the organization of
the Middle Sicán leadership. Six monumental huacas at the site were all built close in time (ca. 1000CE) using the same
construction method and materials, but have different configurations. They all have an elite cemetery close by and share the
seemingly basic religious art. In this paper we discuss emerging results of the systematic comparison of samples from two best-
preserved huacas in regard to the technology and chemical composition (INAA) of fine ceramics, funerary customs, and
bioarchaeological features including aDNA identity and grouping. The first two analyses have already revealed some important
differences. Other analyses are ongoing. Their implications for the multi-lineage governance model are presented.
Shimada, Izumi [5] see MacDonald, Brandi
Shin, Dong Hoon (Seoul National University), Jong Ha Hong (Institute of Korean Archaeology and Ancient History), Jieun
Kim (Lab of Bioanthropology Paleopathology and History) and Sun Kim (Research Institute of Buddhist Cultural Heritage)
[244]
Genetic Analysis of the Fifteenth-Century Horse Remains from the Archaeological Site of Korea
Ancient DNA (aDNA) analysis is now a well established technique in archaeological science, especially for obtaining genetic
information from ancient animal bones discovered at excavation sites. Despite the academic significance of domesticated animals in
understanding human culture and society, their detailed genetic history has not been inferred from aDNA analysis to date. For this
study, we analyzed aDNA recovered from horse bones excavated in the fifteenth- to sixteenth-century archaeological site of South
Korea. We confirmed that the aDNA sequence is identical to those of domesticated Equus caballus DNA reported in
NCBI/GenBank. Phylogenetic analysis was also done for the E. caballus aDNA and other related taxa sequences, to reveal genetic
traits of the domesticated horse that existed several hundred years ago in East Asia, thus providing fundamental information of E.
caballus across time and space. This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2017R1D1A1B03030127).
Shin, Dong Hoon [247] see Reinhard, Karl
Shinoda, Ken-ichi [105] see Shimada, Izumi
Shirar, Scott [82] see Doering, Briana
Shiratori, Yuko (Kyoto University of Foreign Studies) and Ángel González López (North Carolina Museum of Art)
[227]
The Female Terracotta Sculpture at the North Carolina Museum of Art: Pastiche or Fake?
Large-scale female terracotta sculptures were extensively produced in the Mixtequilla region of Veracruz during the Late Classic
period. It is likely that numbers of these sculptures were looted and smuggled into the United States prior to the 1970 UNESCO
Convention on Cultural Property. This paper focuses the female terracotta sculpture at the North Carolina Museum of Art (NCMA),
which shows the characteristics of large-scale female terracotta sculptures from the Mixtequilla region. The authors examined the
sculpture under natural and ultraviolet light, considering its aesthetics, visible restorations, and fragments, and conducted
provenance research. The investigation also included an interview with Brígido Lara, the restorer at the Museo de Antropología de
Xalapa, because the possibility of the NCMA sculpture being one of his creations had arisen. This presentation revisits and recalls
Lara’s forgeries of sculptures from Veracruz.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    513
Sholts, Sabrina [242] see Pott, Laura
Shott, Michael (University of Akron)
[253]
Point Types as Subjects Using Big Datasets from Southern Ohio
Which point types are more or less abundant per unit time? Do types replace one another or morph from one to another? Do they
vary in degree of standardization or in degree of curation by reduction? North American archaeologists rarely pose such questions
despite the staggering abundance of points here. Big datasets might help answer these unusual questions, but nonprofessionals
possess the largest samples. Our collaborative project with nonprofessionals in southern Ohio documented >5,000 points. We
collected two-dimensional landmark data on about 3,000, 3D data on about 250 points. In its own small way, geometric
morphometric analysis of this big dataset begins to answer funny questions like these.
Shott, Michael [17] see Selden Jr., Robert
Shrestha, Ramesh [206] see Fernandez Diaz, Juan Carlos
Sides, Lauren
[51]
Visibility and Collective Memory on the San Giuliano Landscape
At the height of its occupation during the Etruscan period (700–330 BCE), inhabitants at the San Giuliano plateau in northern Lazio,
Italy constructed hundreds of rock-cut tombs in the surrounding escarpment, effectively creating a “city of the dead” adjacent to their
city of the living. Intervisibility between the necropolis and plateau would place inhabitants of San Giuliano in constant visual contact
with the deceased, functioning to incorporate shared understandings of cosmogony, the afterlife, and the mythic identities of the
dead via memory into their daily lives. This paper examines conceptions of memory and social organization at San Giuliano through
viewshed analysis between the necropolis and habitation area. Substantial changes to the vegetation and geology of the San
Giuliano landscape since the Etruscan period have made modern assessments of intervisibility unfeasible. However, viewshed
analysis in ArcGIS makes reconstructing intervisibility possible. Total and cumulative viewshed models revealed statistically
significant visibility between the necropolis and eastern edge of the plateau. Furthermore, multiple viewshed analysis from clusters
of tombs separated by location, style, and chronology reveals significant changes in intervisibility after the fifth century, evidencing
ripples in San Giuliano social organization that correlate with regional shifts in Southern Etrurian economics and trade networks.
Sieg, Lauren (National Museum of the American Indian)
[96]
Moderator
Siegel, Peter, Emlen Myers (Environmental Resources Management) and John Jones (Archaeological Consulting Services)
[221]
Pipeline to the Past: Documenting Heritage and Prehistoric Cultural Dynamics for the San Miguel-Cuiabá Natural Gas Project in
Southeastern Bolivia
Southeastern Bolivia is one of the least-understood regions in South American archaeology. However, this region is of pivotal
significance in regard to precolumbian cultural history and the dynamics of cultural interactions, especially given its location at the
interface between the Andes and Amazonia. Ethnohistorically and ethnographically a large number of tribal groups have been
documented for southeastern Bolivia, including Chiquitoans and affilitated tribes, Chiriguanos, Chanés, Yamparas, Sirionos,
Bororos, Ayoreos, among others. Archaeological surveys and excavations were conducted within the Bolivian portion of the San
Miguel-Cuiabá Natural Gas Pipeline right-of-way (360 km in Bolivia, 266 km in Brazil). The pipeline corridor traverses undeveloped
portions of the country, which are among the most understudied in South American archaeology. In total, 58 archaeological sites
were identified and tested resulting in over 100,000 artifacts. Excavation results, radiocarbon dates, ceramic analysis, and
paleoenvironmental reconstruction fill a gap in our knowledge base for this region of South America. Project findings relate directly
to late prehistoric cultural dynamics at the interface of the Andes and the Amazon and support the general model of precolumbian
dispersal patterns developed by Donald W. Lathrap over 40 years ago.
[221]
Chair
Siegert, Courtney (Texas State University), Nicholas Herrmann (Texas State University) and Todd Ahlman (Texas State
University)
[215]
Geophysical Investigations of Historic Plantation, Military, Institutional, and Cemetery Sites on Sint Eustatius
Sint Eustatius served as a free port in the late seventeenth century, enabling the island to prosper in a evolving global economy. To
better understand the role Sint Eustatius played in globalization, archaeological assessments have occurred at SE094 (Fort
Amsterdam), SE095 (historic plantation), SE127/410 (Lazaretto), and SE600 (unmarked cemetery). These investigations were
conducted to locate the extent and integrity of any prehistoric and historic archaeological sites on the property for continued
preservation. Geophysical investigations, including ground penetrating radar (GPR) and gradiometry, were conducted in 2017 and
2019 to locate subsurface structures or features, including the possible location of the village associated with the plantation’s
enslaved community. GPR data was collected using a 400 mhz antennae and the gradiometer data was recorded using a single
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    514
axis fluxgate gradiometer. Although most commerce on the island revolved around free trade, several plantations were in operation
on the island and were largely supported by the enslaved community. This data contributes to our understanding of site use and the
role the plantation played during the colonial period and provides insight into the lifeways of the individuals which contributed to the
island’s wealth.
Siegert, Courtney [215] see Karastamatis, Kallista
Sievert, April (Indiana University)
[248]
Learning NAGPRA: People, Process, and Product
The Learning NAGPRA Project brought together scores of people from across the country to study, discuss, collaborate and
develop curriculum for assisting in teaching and learning about the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act
(NAGPRA). Surveys of students, educators, museum professionals, and the Register of Professional Archaeologists indicate that,
although there are abundant resources for learning about the law, there has been less attention paid to curriculum to addresses
both the ethical underpinnings of the restorative justice that NAGPRA can affect and the practicalities of compliance. During the
NSF-supported Learning NAGPRA project, tribal professionals worked with non-tribal scholars in every phase of the research, and
convened three collegium meetings—workshops that supported the discussions about curriculum design. We now introduce the
general format of the materials developed, and the process for accessing them through a Learning NAGPRA website at Indiana
University, Bloomington.
Sievert, April [172] see Pope, Melody
Sillar, Bill [127] see Ogburn, Dennis
Silliman, Stephen [112] see Carr, Sarah
Silva, Fabiola and Lorena Garcia (Universidade Federal de Sergipe)
[161]
Landscapes of the Mid-Low Xingu: Archaeology, Temporality, and Longue Durée Indigenous Stories
This presentation deals with the archaeological research carried out in the indigenous land Koatinemo, together with the Asurini do
Xingu indigenous people. From this experience, a reflection on the temporality of the landscapes and on the longue durée
indigenous stories of the mid-low Xingu region was performed. Two horizons of reflection were combined on the approach. The first
one deals with persistent places interconnected with the experience of living in the places, the contact with the historical narratives
and the Asurini’s oral tradition. The second one concerns the artifactual landscape that has been materially transformed over the
time and consists of visible marks left by different human activities throughout the time. In methodological terms, the study applies
techniques of archaeological survey and analysis of ceramic collections from the identified archaeological sites in the referred
indigenous land. At the end, the communication presents a contribution on current knowledge about the indigenous ancestry of the
landscape and the way it is related to the history of the Asurini and of the populations of Juruna and Karib languages from the mid-
low Xingu.
Silva Sifuentes, Jorge (Museo de arqueología y antropología UNMSM), Victor Paredes Castro, James Quilca and Maria
Lozada (University of Chicago)
[268]
La expedición de Toribio Mejía Xesspe en la cuenca del Río Ocoña
En 1943 Toribio Mejía Xesspe visitó Camaná y Ocoña para reconstruir los hechos ocurridos durante el descubrimiento de Corral
Redondo en 1943. Esta visita fue hecha por encargo de Julio C. Tello, quien en ese entonces era el director del Museo de
Antropología. Tello tuvo interés en el evento y también en recuperar los materiales del sitio. En esta ponencia daremos a conocer
detalles de esta expedición basados en los inéditos cuadernos de campo de Mejía Xesspe. Estos no solo ofrecen una detallada
narración de los hechos, sino que también reflejan una visión propia del clima arqueológico de la época.
Silverstein, Jay (Univ. of Tyumen), Robert Littman (University of Hawaii, Manoa), Dora Goldsmith (Freie Universität Berlin),
Sean Coughlin (Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin) and Stacey Bagdi (Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich)
[192]
Uncommon Scents: The Greco-Roman Perfume Industry at Thmuis, Tell Timai, Egypt
Ancient sources reference the quality and importance of perfume manufactured in the Mendesian nome through the periods of
Hellenistic and Roman control of Egypt. Archaeological evidence has identified areas of manufacture for lekythoi and possibly for
the perfume itself at the site of Tell Timai. Sourcing analysis has demonstrated that special clay was imported from a great distance
suggesting an extensive network of trade and possibly an investment in the magical properties of perfume bottles. Experimental
archaeology has resulted in the recreation of the Mendesian perfume bringing the famous fragrance back to life. A picture of an
extensive multinational network involved in the manufacture, marketing, and distribution of Mendesian perfume indicates an industry
that spanned the Mediterranean world.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    515
Simbine, Celso (Eduardo Mondlane University)
[250]
The Maritime Archaeology of Mozambique Island: Lessons from the Commercial Gathering of Beads and Porcelain for Tourists
This paper presents the results of the archaeological survey of porcelain sherds and beads that were collected on beaches around
Mozambique Island. This assemblage represents a long history of maritime interactions dating to at least the fifteenth century
initially focused on the Indian Ocean, but eventually also encompassing the Atlantic. It first describes the collected assemblage
(which includes significant representation from the Ming Dynasty (Wanli period fifteenth to sixteenth centuries) and Qing Dynasty
(seventeenth to twentieth centuries), seventeenth to nineteenth century European wares). It then develops an inventory of site-
formation processes including shipwrecking events, regular harbor activities, and, since the 1960’s, the removal and sale of artifacts
to tourists. Then, the paper explores how each affects the relative presence and distributions of artifacts in the archaeological record
in particular ways ultimately with significant implications for preserving the cultural heritage of the Mozambique Island.
Simborth, Erika, Hans Barnard (UCLA) and Alex Badillo (Indiana State University)
[268]
The Archaeological Survey and Settlement Pattern of the Ocoña and Chorunga Valleys
In 2018 and 2019, an archaeological survey was performed in the region near the confluence of Río Chorunga and Río Ocoña in the
province of Arequipa in southern Peru. The newly collected geospatial data and drone imagery were digitally combined with existing
topographical, geological maps, and declassified satellite imagery. In the direct surroundings of the confluence, six ancient sites
were identified and located: Ancha, Corral Redondo, ancient Iquipi, Jarana Oeste, La Victoria, and Lloklla. Other Prehispanic sites
were recorded in the upper Ocoña Valley: Ispana, Santa Rosa, Piquillay, three settlements with associated cemeteries, Callanga, a
large Inka settlement, and Allanka. Additional sites were documented further east in the Chorunga Valley: Jarana Este, Quebrada
San Pedro, Chillihuay Oeste, Chillihuay 1, Chillihuay 2, Chillihuay Pukara, Gramadal, and Rosario. At Chillihuay 1 and 2 are
numerous elaborate petroglyphs, likely dating to the Middle Horizon. Modern construction, mining activities, flooding events, and
erosion appeared to have severely damaged the ancient structures at many of these sites. While our survey is not yet complete, the
recorded sites provide information about the Prehispanic occupation in the Ocoña and Chorunga Valleys.
Simborth, Erika [268] see Lozada, Maria
Simek, Jan, Erin Pritchard (Tennessee Valley Authority), Alan Cressler, Johannes Loubser (Stratum Unlimited) and Sierra
Bow (University of Tennessee, Knoxville)
[60]
Precontact Cultural Landscapes at Painted Bluff, Alabama
The Mississippian period rock art site at Painted Bluff, Alabama (1MS394) is one of the most complex, beautiful, and impressive
rock art localities in Eastern North America. The number and diversity of its images rivals the dark zone cave art sites of the region,
with 137 individual images so far recorded, all pictographs but for a handful of petroglyphs. Many of the images reflect known
religious iconography from Mississippian times: bird-humans, dancers, animals, and shape-shifters are all depicted. Perhaps most
impressively, the paintings and engravings are organized on the face of a massive limestone cliff more than 100 m high. The glyphs
are disposed into three elevation echelons, each one reflecting a different aspect of the Mississippian cosmos. In short, Painted
Bluff is a dominant natural landscape feature transformed by rock art into a cultural landscape, one that reflects religious canon on a
very large geographic scale. In this, it is part of a wider precontact cultural landscape modified through rock art. This paper will
discuss the art and its context, its structural organization, and efforts that have been carried out, in consultation with a number of
descendant tribal groups, to document, protect, and conserve this important locality.
Simmons, Alan (University of Nevada, Las Vegas; Desert Research Institute, Reno) and Renee Kolvet (Independent
researcher)
[199]
Wood, Grapes, and Meds: Ground Stone Residue Evidence from Neolithic Ais Giorkis, Cyprus
Residue analyses from ground stone artifacts have proven to be a powerful tool for fine-tuned resolutions of many economic issues.
While frequently incorporated into archaeological interpretation, this method is relatively new to the island of Cyprus. Here we report
on the results of a small number of residue washes from Ais Giorkis, an upland site in the Troodos Range. Pollen, phytoliths, and
starch residues suggest diverse activities and practices directly or indirectly linked to the forest. These include the use of wooden
pestles for food and condiment processing, possible evidence of grape consumption, and use of traditional ethnomedicines. Of
particular interest are elevated levels of Caryophllaceae pollen from a grinding slab. Plants in this family are known for their anti-
viral, anti-bacterial, and anti-inflammatory properties and are being studied in modern cancer research. While the current samples
are too small to draw conclusions about early winemaking or knowledge of medicinal remedies, further investigations at Ais Giorkis
and contemporary Cypriot occupations will expand on these findings. The results will be articulated with other data to help establish
Ais Giorkis’ role in early Cyprus and within a wider landscape examining the spread of Neolithic concepts from their continental
cores to the Mediterranean islands.
Simmons, Wilson, John Dudgeon (Idaho State University) and Sara Getz (Idaho State University)
[80]
Age Estimation of Pathological Dentition Using Cementochronology
In archaeology and forensic anthropology, dental methods for estimating age-at-death are often less reliable in adults, particularly
those over 50 years of age because the techniques primarily rely on developmental processes (e.g., tooth eruption) that are
completed by the late twenties to mid-thirties. One exception is cementum, the material that covers the root surface of teeth, which
continues developing throughout one’s lifetime in uniform layers called tooth cementum annulations (TCA). The purpose of this
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    516
research is to test the accuracy of an age estimation method using TCA, also known as cementochronology, on dentition from
modern individuals of known ages, particularly its applicability to pathological teeth. A transverse section of the root of each tooth is
mounted on a slide and examined under a microscope so the annulations can be counted. Then, these are added to the average
age that each tooth begins development, providing the estimate. The sample consists mostly of teeth extracted from individuals by
their dental professionals in and around Pocatello, Idaho as well as some taken from anatomical donors at Idaho State University.
Cementochronology is promising because of its potential to be applied to mature individuals and it is simple enough to be performed
by inexperienced researchers.
Simon, Mary, Kristin Hedman (Illinois State Archaeological Survey) and Mathew Fort (Illinois State Archaeological Survey)
[233]
Possible Sources for 14C Enrichment in Archaic and Woodland Populations of the Midwestern United States
Carbon isotope ratios obtained on skeletal material from pre-AD 400 populations in the Midwest often return ratios that suggest a
slight elevation in heavy carbon. Because these are pre-maize eating groups, the source of enrichment is an ongoing question. Here
we present information from ongoing food web studies and new plant isotope data that sheds light on the source of enriched carbon
in diets and contend that it is not due to any level of maize consumption at this early date.
Simon, Rebecca (History Colorado - OAHP)
[43]
Discussant
Simon, Rebecca (History Colorado - OAHP)
[154]
Discussant
Simon, Rebecca (History Colorado - OAHP)
[193]
Discussant
Simova, Borislava (Tulane University)
[158]
Formal Architecture and Standardized Practice: Tracing the Relationship between E Groups and Ritual Practice at the Site of
Actuncan, Belize
One of the earliest known examples of permanent architecture in the Maya Lowlands, a distinctive plaza-structure complex known in
the literature as an E Group, is also one of the most commonly encountered architectural groups present within Preclassic sites
throughout the region. The rapid adoption of the construction and widespread standardization in form suggest incredible
intraregional integration within the Lowlands, but the nature of this integration remains an important topic of discussion. This
presentation reviews techniques and data generated from the E-Group at the site of Actuncan, located in the Mopan River Valley of
Belize. The research addresses the articulation between emergent permanent, large-scale architecture and formal patterns of
practice. The construction history of Actuncan’s E-Group indicates the presence of local antecedents to the formal complex. This
offers an opportunity to study the changing arrangement and uses of the constructed space and develop a case study for the
adoption of E-Group architecture and associated ritual practice in the Mopan River Valley.
Simpson, Diana (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[131]
Beyond the Brutality: Ritualized Violence in the Archaic Period Southeast
The Archaic Period of the Southeastern U.S. is characterized by major environmental and ecological changes which likely
stimulated ideological changes visible in the archaeological record. This period also demonstrates widespread direct violence which
transcends ecologically based explanations. In particular, the contradictory lack of defensive architecture in tandem with
compounding evidence for widespread trophy taking and killings, suggest a deeper meaning behind these violent actions. Focusing
on shell burial mound sites within the Middle Tennessee River Valley of Alabama, this research investigates how violence emerged
and was ritualized during the Archaic Period, and how this contributed to transformations in broader cultural processes within these
groups. As a student of Dr. Martin, I am constantly encouraged to employ a well-rounded multidisciplinary approach, using a fine-
grained biocultural analysis to interrogate ritual violence in a more nuanced way focusing on lived experience, performance, and
culturally-specific patterns. This approach to research which Dr. Martin embodies and trains her students in, allows my work to make
significant contributions both to our understanding of how ritual violence was enacted within these Southeastern groups, and to a
growing anthropological literature on the complex ways that ritual violence is embedded in ideology and daily practices through time
and space.
Sincerbox, Susan [76] see Jacobson, Jodi
Sinclair-Thomson, Brent [60] see Challis, Sam
Sinensky, R. J. [148] see Berner, Jack
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 517
Singer, Zachary (Towson University)
[13]
Paleo Pale Ale: Reflections on Connecticut Paleoindian Studies with Dr. Brian Jones
In 2012, Dr. Brian Jones brewed “Paleo Pale Ale with genuine cattail root” to celebrate Dick Boisvert and SCRAP’s Octoberfest
excavation of a Paleoindian site in Jefferson, New Hampshire. The 2012 excavation marked ~20 years (1992) since Brian located
and excavated the Late Paleoindian Hidden Creek Site, which was just the third Paleoindian site to be documented in Connecticut.
His dissertation “Human Adaptation to the Changing Northeastern Environment at the End of the Pleistocene” published in 1998
solidified him as a Paleoindian expert. Beginning in 2010, Brian served as my mentor and as a member on my dissertation
committee at UConn teaching me proper techniques for locating, excavating, and analyzing Paleoindian sites. This presentation
discusses Brian’s contributions to Paleoindian studies in Connecticut as both an expert Paleoindian researcher and a mentor.
Singh, Ravindra [272] see Bates, Jennifer
Singleton, Robin (University of Oklohma), Nihan Dagtas (University of Oklahoma), Karissa Hughes (University of
Oklahoma), Nawa Sugiyama (University of California, Riverside) and Courtney Hofman (University of Oklahoma)
[244]
Captive Management and Sacrificial Power: Using Ancient Genomics to Study Animal Sacrifice in Teotihuacán
Excavations of the Moon and Sun Pyramids (1998–2004) at Teotihuacan have yielded both human and animal sacrifices interred as
part of state rituals. These rituals demonstrated the power of the state, and the species chosen reflected that power. Isotopic and
zooarchaeological analyses of the sacrificed animals show that some of them were held for extended periods of time before their
deaths—they have skeletal lesions associated with restraints and evidence of maize based diets—while others were sacrificed fairly
quickly. We conducted genomic analysis on golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) remains that were sacrificed and interred in
Teotihuacán to determine the relationships among sacrificed individuals, and we compared them with extant populations. These
relationships provide insight into how the eagles were procured and managed before sacrifice. By investigating the resource cost for
obtaining and keeping these animals for sacrifice, we can improve our understanding of the ritual economy in Teotihuacán and the
greater Mesoamerican region.
Sinopoli, Carla (University of Michigan)
[88]
Discussant
Sipes, Eric [193] see Gordon, Falicia
Sirak, Kendra (Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School) and Jakob Sedig (Department of Genetics, Harvard
Medical School)
[173]
Exploring Male Sex Bias in Ancient DNA Research
Preliminary research and anecdotal evidence suggest that there is an overrepresentation of male samples relative to female
samples in published ancient DNA research; however, the reason behind this bias is poorly understood. In this paper, we quantify
this sex bias within an ancient DNA database of 3,365 individuals for whom sex was reliably assigned. We compare sex calls made
using molecular methods to osteological sex assessments, exploring their rate of agreement. We find that ~58% of individuals were
sexed as male using molecular methods, and that this is most often consistent with the osteological assessment. We then explore
possible explanations for male bias, including some discrepancy between osteological and genetic sex calls that introduces an
unforeseen bias, superior preservation of more robust male skeletons, preferential burial treatment of male individuals in the past
(e.g., males buried in more prominent positions), intentional sampling bias introduced by researchers (e.g., preferencing male
individuals in order to obtain Y chromosome data), and a higher sequencing success rate for male individuals for reasons that are
unclear. This research aims to clarify if male over-representation is the result of research design and methods, and therefore
correctable, or reflective of ancient cultural practices.
[173]
Chair
Sitdikov, Airat [173] see Flegontov, Pavel
Sitek, Matthew (UC San Diego)
[105]
Communities in the Campo: Household Excavations at a Tiwanaku Frontier Settlement in the Middle Locumba Valley, Peru (ca. AD
500–1100)
In this paper I present preliminary findings from extensive household excavations at the large multi-component site, Cerro San
Antonio (L1), in the middle Locumba Valley in southern Peru. While the site represents a valuable dataset for nearly all periods of
Andean prehistory, this current research has targeted domestic remains with clear affiliations to the Tiwanaku polity, which
influenced much of the south-central Andes during the Middle Horizon (ca. AD 500–1100). Defined by three separate domestic
sectors, the Tiwanaku occupation at Cerro San Antonio appears to be one of the largest settlement enclaves outside Tiwanaku’s
highland center over 200km away in Bolivia. Taking a holistic approach to the domestic assemblage this paper will present initial
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    518
results from ceramic, lithic, faunal, botanic, and textile analysis coupled with detailed built environment and other context-driven
spatial data. Excellent material preservation, shallow deposits, and a detailed, micro-context excavation strategy has yielded an
unprecedented view into the domestic activities and community practices which defined the daily lives of the site’s Middle Horizon
occupants. This will be a powerful comparative dataset for those studying the Tiwanaku polity and daily life in the ancient Andes
more generally.
Sitek, Matthew [267] see Garvin, Arianna
Sitek, Matthew [243] see Huggins, Kathleen
Sitek, Matthew [61] see Santillan Goode, Julianna
Skaggs, Sheldon (Bronx Community College CUNY), Terry Powis (Kennesaw State University) and George Micheletti
(University of Central Florida)
[197]
Be Thine Own Palace: Courtyard Developments and Transformations at the Ancient Maya Site of Pacbitun, Belize
Palaces are a constant feature of ancient Maya society. While they have been studied for decades, their origins remain somewhat
obscure. We are interested in their location within Maya site centers—why spot X as opposed to spot Y—which remains unclear at
many sites, as do the social, political and even practical factors which surely dictated such choices. For the palaces in the
courtyards at Pacbitun we see a shift in focus through time whereby initial public/communal space in the Middle Preclassic was
deliberately transformed into private/non-communal space by the Classic period. With one architectural alteration the same space
switched from ceremonial to non-ceremonial. Why did this occur? By examining palatial architecture, courtyard stratigraphy, ceramic
dates and associations, and radiocarbon assays from Pacbitun’s three courtyards we hope to identify the nature, extent, and
structure of palace development from Middle Preclassic through Terminal Classic times.
Skibo, James (Illinois State University)
[255]
Pots and Sherds: Closing the Gap and Surviving the Zombie Apocalypse
There is a methodological and analytic gap, according to Alan Porter Sullivan III, between the work of prehistorians and
ethnoarchaeologists. At the core of this analytical divide, particularly among those who study ceramics, is the simple fact that
prehistorians most often find and analyze sherds, and ethnoarchaeologists focus on whole vessels. Al Sullivan has explored this
analytical gap, and at times suggested that most of ethnoarchaeology is unusable to the prehistorian. However, he has discussed
some possible ways to mend this gap, focusing particularly on the formation of ceramic assemblages. I explore some of Sullivan’s
remedies, add some of my own, but then conclude with a discussion of the true value of ethnoarchaeology—surviving the zombie
apocalypse.
Skinner, Dougless, Whitney McLaren (Center for the Environmental Management of Military Lands), Barrett Flynn (Center
for the Environmental Management of Military Lands) and Julie Esdale (Center for the Environmental Management of
Military Lands)
[52]
A Look into Modern and Prehistoric Land Use on Army Managed Lands in Alaska
Prehistoric site locations are often ideal places for modern activities. This is especially true in the Jarvis Creek Archaeological
District on Fort Wainwright, where army training activities, development, and recreation regularly take place in and around shallowly
buried archaeological sites. In this case study we use GIS methods to examine: the success rate of archaeological surveys using
shovel testing; the relationship between initial site discovery and site size deduced from NRHP evaluations (Phase II investigations);
and the intersection of modern trails and campsites with inferred prehistoric ones. GIS modeling based on terrain features,
vegetation, and proximity to water coupled with lithic assemblage characteristics has implications for prehistoric subsistence
practices and technological organization. Results from these analyses will aid in the interpretation of the lifestyles of early Alaskans
and better management and protection of archaeological sites on active training lands.
Skinner, Jane (Pennsylvania State University) and Ann Killebrew (Pennsylvania State University)
[234]
A Phoenician Iron Smithy at Tel Akko, Israel
This paper presents the results of the excavation and analysis of an extensive iron industrial area (smithy) of unprecedented size
dating to the sixth–fourth centuries BCE (Persian period) at Phoenician Tel Akko, Israel. This 22-hectare commercial and industrial
harbor town connecting the Mediterranean Sea with the Levant has dominated the Plain of Akko’s ancient landscape for four
millennia. Current excavations of the Tel Akko Total Archaeology Project (2010–present), directed by A.E. Killebrew and M. Artzy
under the auspices of the University of Haifa and the Pennsylvania State University, focus on the late Iron Age and Persian period
(ca. eighth–early fourth centuries BCE) Phoenician city in Area A at the summit of the tell. Here evidence of iron-smithing such as
iron slag, hammer scales, hearths and tuyeres have been uncovered. Installations and artifacts related to cultic activity have been
identified near these industrial areas. This mid-first millennium smithy, the only known large-scale iron working facility in the Levant
dating to the Persian period, provides an unparalleled opportunity to explore iron production at a Phoenician maritime center in its
broader Near Eastern context.
Skipton, Tara [18] see Hollingshead, Analise
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     519
Skowronek, Russell (University of Texas, Rio Grande Valley) and Juan Gonzalez (University of Texas, Rio Grande Valley)
[126]
From Miocene Volcanoes to Spanish Colonial Missions: Ron Bishop’s Contributions to the Prehistoric Archaeology of Texas and the
Historical Archaeology of California
How does research happen? It can present itself or we can seek it. Either way it will succeed or fail based more often on serendipity
and personality of those involved. More than twenty years ago Ron Bishop returned to his childhood home in California and initiated
a research project examining ceramic production in Hispanic California. That work led to the study of a 27-million-year-old, twenty-
meter-thick volcanic ash deposit on the Texas-Mexico border, and a unique chert that formed from it, and was quarried and used by
native Americans for ~10,000 years. This two-part presentation will tell a little-known aspect of Bishop’s important role in research
beyond the periphery of Mesoamerica.
Skowronek, Russell [6] see Gonzalez, Juan
Slade, Alan [198] see Taylor, Ian
Slane, Brittany (Idaho State University), Samantha Blatt (Idaho State University) and Mary Thompson (Idaho Museum of
Natural History)
[76]
Dogs by Number: Geomorphometric Differentiation of Canid Species
The relationship between humans and canids is temporally deep and complex. Canid species from prehistoric contexts are often
identified using subjective macroscopic observations of morphological traits. However, accurate species identification from skeletal
elements is challenging as remains are often incomplete, highly fragmentary, and absent of diagnostic features. Misidentification of
species from prehistoric contexts can inhibit interpretations of canid evolution, behavior, and human-canid interaction in the past.
Therefore, objective and statistical methods of identification are needed. This project analyzes co-variance matrices of size and
shape of radii, femora, mandibles, and carnassials (N=327) from adult specimens of four canid species (Canis lupus, Canis latrans,
Canis familiaris, and Vulpes vulpes) from Pleistocene-Holocene, Idaho. Size variance is assessed from principle component
analysis (PCA) of 15 measurements. Shape variance is assessed from landmark analysis, MANOVA, and PCA of 16 reproducible,
digital 2D geomorphometric points of the same elements. Results of PCA indicate distinct clustering of elements by species.
(M)ANOVA validated the difference in metrics and morphometrics between species. Applying metric and morphometric analyses as
vectors using these skeletal elements is useful for identification of canid species from archaeological and paleontological contexts in
the Intermountain West.
Slatowski, Jenna and Lori Lee (Flagler College)
[3]
Low-Fired Ceramic Chronologies at Fort Mose
Fort Mose was the first free black settlement in the United States, built in Spanish territory on land previously occupied by the
Eastern Timucuan. This paper explores the ceramics of Fort Mose and delves into the chronology of site use based on ceramic
types. Indigenous ceramics and colonoware provide insight into the presence and cultural interaction of different cultural groups at
Fort Mose. By considering the prehistory and history of the indigenous peoples in the area and free African Americans who lived at
the Fort, we can piece together the social and economic contexts of ceramic producers and users.
Slaughter, Michelle (Alpine Archaeological Consulting) and Kevin Gilmore (HDR)
[78]
Grandpa’s Little People: Two Prehistoric Ceramic Figurines from Atascosa County, Texas.
In 2011 the lead author inherited a portion of her grandfather’s collection of prehistoric artifacts he acquired from cultivated fields
surrounding his home in Pleasanton, south of San Antonio. Although the provenience of these artifacts cannot be determined
conclusively, we believe they represent collection from a relatively limited geographic area, and the culturally diagnostic artifacts are
consistent with a south central Texas provenience. Among the artifacts in this box were two small anthropomorphic ceramic
figurines. One of these is mostly complete and is 9cm in size, while the other is broken with only the head present. These two
objects are stylistically very similar, and both are depicted with vertical headdresses, large ear spools, and prognathous faces (or
snouts) with somewhat cursorily rendered facial features. A literature search of a broad geographic region did not find any analogs,
and no similar artifacts were found in the literature of Texas archaeology. Superficially they are stylistically similar to some
Mississippian figurines. This poster and the actual artifacts are being brought to the SAA meeting to provide an opportunity for the
Texas archaeological Hive Mind to examine them and provide insight as to the origin, function, cultural and temporal association of
these artifacts.
Slaughter, Michelle (Alpine Archaeological Consulting)
[154]
Discussant
Slaughter, Michelle [214] see Larkin, Karin
Sload, Rebecca
[137]
Beyond Chicomoztocs: Are Hill Sign Toponyms Actually Mountain-Caves?
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     520
Among the ancient central Mexican highland cultures of the Aztec, Mixtec, and Zapotec, the hill sign toponym was an important
standardized definition of place. The hill sign itself was a constant, that was embellished with one or more glyphs characterizing the
place. Chicomoztocs, one type of hill sign toponym, have been recognized for decades as mountain-caves. Referring to the seven
caves from which emerged the seven major central Mexican groups, Chicomoztocs are hill signs embellished with seven caves.
This presentation raises the question of whether many, perhaps all, hill sign toponyms are in fact mountain-caves. I illustrate the
possibility with examples of non-Chicomoztoc hill sign toponyms that are clearly mountain-caves. The argument is bolstered by the
eternalness and centrality of the mountain-cave in ancient Mesoamerican cosmology. The analysis suggests that hill sign toponyms
may be more accurately labeled mountain-cave toponyms.
Sloan, Anna (University of Oregon) and Annie Caruso (University of Oregon)
[160]
Using Ethnographic Methods in Decolonizing Archaeological Practice: Two Examples from Community-Based Projects in the
Americas
Recent archaeological scholarship has explored the long and often fraught relationship between archaeology and ethnography while
also assessing the productivity of their continued intersections. In this paper, we propose that ethnography, when used critically and
carefully, is still relevant to archaeology and can in fact contribute to decolonizing practice. To demonstrate, we present two
examples of community-based archaeological research that utilize ethnographic methods to unsettle colonial paradigms. First,
Sloan discusses ethnoarchaeological modeling of gendered and social materialities in an Alaska Native community. Here,
ethnographic field work provides information about Indigenous philosophies of gender, sociality, and materiality that then inform
interpretations of ancestral social life at a pre-contact village, while also helping ground the research in community priorities. In our
second example, Caruso presents research from the transdisciplinary field of ethnocritical archaeology, which serves to develop in-
situ ethical engagement with source communities by critically evaluating the research process itself. Such methods are applied to a
Euro-American-operated excavation of Indigenous settlements in the Eastern Caribbean, wherein Afro-Antillean source community
input are utilized to construct recommendations for archaeological reforms and forge a model of cultural competency for visiting
researchers.
Slotten, Venicia (University of California, Berkeley)
[157]
Prehispanic Life and Foodways in the Arenal Region, Costa Rica: Resilience at La Chiripa
Arenal has been the most active volcano is Costa Rica in recent history. Archaeological studies show that people have been living
within the Arenal region for several thousand years, demonstrating their impressive ability to adapt to life in a volcanically active
landscape. Paleoethnobotanical work on household contexts within this region reveals what subsistence strategies prehispanic
peoples incorporated into their daily lives in order to thrive in an ever-changing environment. Macrobotanical samples collected from
La Chiripa, a site buried by multiple Arenal eruptions over a span of 3,000 years, records the human-environmental interactions that
contributed toward the longevity of cultural practices in this region. Analysis of the preserved botanical remains at this site suggest
the roles that plants occupied in ancient Costa Rica, whether that was for food, medicine, fuel, tools, clothing, or construction
material. Identified macrobotanical remains from La Chiripa include maize, beans, tubers, various Asteraceae achenes, many wild
seeds, and abundant wood charcoal remains.
Smallwood, Ashley (University of Louisville), Thomas Jennings (University of Louisville), Heather Smith (Eastern New
Mexico University) and Charlotte Pevny (SEARCH Inc.)
[17]
Geometric Morphometric Analyses of Beveled and Serrated Late Paleoindian Dalton Points from the Heartland
In eastern North America, the Late Paleoindian Dalton period marks an important transition in projectile point technology. For the
first time, hunter-gatherers modified point blade margins with serrations and beveling, techniques that persist in the record into the
early Holocene. Recent advancements in geometric morphometrics analyses offer new methods to help understand the functional
and evolutionary implications of these changes. In this paper, we briefly review recent approaches to studying variation in shape and
form in Paleoindian projectile points and highlight technological and morphological traits that might serve as useful variables for
understanding functional and historical relationships. We then apply geometric morphometrics to a sample of points from the Dalton
Heartland to characterize aspects of Dalton point technology.
Smallwood, Ashley [232] see Jones, KC
Smeeks, Jessica (Binghamton University)
[105]
Enemies and Allies: GIS Analyses of Late Intermediate Period Defensibility and Settlement Patterns in the Huamanga Province of
Peru
Warfare theorists argue that scholars must move beyond social evolutionary theories and realize that warfare and sociopolitical
organization are not autonomous and self-regulating; one cannot be understood in isolation from the other. Instead, scholars need
to focus on the interrelationships between and interdependency of military infrastructure and societal structure. Only through the
analysis of this interrelationship can scholars begin to understand warring societies across time and space. The Peruvian Late
Intermediate Period (LIP) (AD 1000–1450), the period between the collapse of the Tiwanaku and Wari States and the rise of the
Inca Empire, is an ideal time period to study this relationship, as it has often been characterized as a time of violent conflict and
social strife. This paper uses Geographic Information Systems (GIS) analyses to consider how defensive practices and regional site
organization changed throughout the LIP in the former core of the Middle Horizon (MH) (AD 600–1000) Wari Empire—the
Huamanga Province of Ayacucho, Peru. GIS analyses at the regional level evaluate the relationship between hilltop sites, examining
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      521
spatial distribution, ceramic distributions, and intervisibility. Meanwhile, site level analyses assess defensibility at 12 LIP sites,
focusing on movement analysis (accessibility) and visibility analysis (visual range and invisibility to outsiders).
Smit, Douglas (University of Pennsylvania)
[32]
Discussant
Smit, Douglas (University of Pennsylvania) and Charlotte Williams (University of Pennsylvania)
[57]
Digital Storytelling and Dark Heritage: Presenting Photovoice in Huancavelica, Peru
This paper discusses a recent Photovoice project that examined cultural landscapes of colonial-period mercury mining at
Huancavelica, Peru in collaboration with the descendent community of Santa Bárbara. The Peruvian Ministry of Culture recently
placed Huancavelica on the UNESCO tentative list, rapidly expanding discussions of cultural heritage among local officials, tourism
operators, and the Santa Bárbara community. This interplay between local, national, and global scales contains multiple narratives
of colonial-period heritage, ranging from discourses of progress and technological advances in metallurgy to darker histories of
colonial violence and environmental catastrophe. Beginning in 2018, we initiated a Photovoice project to understand how the people
of Santa Bárbara engaged with different heritage narratives, culminating with a photography exhibit and community heritage event in
2019. In this paper, we critically analyze how our presentations of Photovoice engaged with community and local heritage
institutions, and discuss ongoing collaborations to develop a website that combines digital storytelling with oral histories and
archaeological research.
Smith, Alexander (College at Brockport, SUNY), Linda Gosner (University of Michigan), Jessica Nowlin (University of
Texas, San Antonio), Seth Price (University of Arkansas) and Catalina Mas-Florit (Universitat de Barcelona)
[35]
Multi-Scalar Survey in Agrarian Sardinia: Results from the 2019 Season of the Sinis Archaeological Project (Sardinia, Italy)
The Sinis Archaeological Project (SAP) investigates the landscapes of the Sinis Peninsula and portions of the Campidano di Milis in
West-Central Sardinia, focusing on understanding the areas surrounding such famous archaeological sites as Nuraghe S’Urachi,
Tharros, and Monte Prama. The region is known for its rich archaeological landscape, but excavation has been more common than
landscape survey. Striving to fill this gap, SAP is dedicated to understanding and documenting occupation and use of these dynamic
landscapes from antiquity to the modern era. Since 2018, SAP used multi-scalar survey to investigate the area immediately
surrounding the Bronze Age site of S’Urachi (Zone A), a low-lying plain used for agriculture and pastoralism, the first of four planned
zones of intensive survey in the wider region. These methods included pedestrian fieldwalking and features recording,
complemented by satellite-based Normalized Differential Vegetation Indices (NDVI), drone-based landscape imagery, and
photogrammetry. Our survey has provided a wealth of high-resolution data that clarify the diachronic occupation of the landscape
around S’Urachi and its use for agrarian purposes. This poster presents the preliminary results of survey in Zone A and plans for
expanding SAP in 2020 to Zone B, located in the northwestern coast of the Sinis Peninsula.
Smith, Benjamin (University of Western Australia)
[111]
Chair
Smith, Byron (University of Texas, Austin), Stanton Morse (Humboldt State University), Marisol Cortes-Rincon (Humboldt
State University), Timothy Beach (University of Texas, Austin) and Sheryl Luzzadder-Beach (University of Texas, Austin)
[230]
Exploring Soil and Nutrient Distribution at the Hinterland site of Yax Ch’am in Northwestern Belize
Previous studies at Yax Ch’am in the hinterlands of northwestern Belize suggests the site represents a Late Classic, collaboratively
organized, specialized community, centered around terraced-based agronomy. While those studies have indicated a complex network
of cultivation and water management systems, little attention has been focused on the distribution of soils and nutrients across the
landscape. The recent availability of high-resolution digital elevation models based on light detection and ranging (lidar) have renewed
interest in the landscape surrounding the site. As a result, this project sought to delineate soil and nutrient distributions around Yax
Ch’am through an analysis of the terrain’s natural and anthropogenic features, as well as its soil hydrology. The methodology for this
project involved both field and laboratory analysis, which included geographical information system (GIS)-based terrain modeling,
pedestrian survey, excavation, and a systemized soil sampling strategy, as well as a multi-elemental analysis of soil samples based on
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). While laboratory analysis is still ongoing, early results indicate limited
permeability of anthropogenic features which may suggest the reliability of terrace retaining wall features.
Smith, Byron [230] see Morse, Stanton
Smith, Charles
[132]
How One Archaeologist Went from Fieldwork to Collections Management, the Iraq War, and Vietnam to Preserve, Protect, and
Educate
The 48 year career of Dr. Michael K. (Sonny) Trimble is a sterling example of how an archaeologist, who began his career doing
fieldwork, museum and archives work, and lithic analysis, became a leader and innovator. He has had a significant impact on the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps), other Federal agencies, the archaeological profession, and our Nation’s community of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    522
veterans. The first half of his career provided Dr. Trimble with the “dirt and publications” kind of experience he would go on to apply
to developing and implementing new ideas and programs for the management of the massive archaeological collections and
documents held by the Corps and Department of Defense services. He established a Center of Expertise for the Management of
Archaeological Collections, conducted fieldwork on mass graves in Iraq 2004–2007, excavated and brought home the remains of
POW/MIAs from overseas missions, and made tremendous strides meeting the Corps’ NAGPRA responsibilities. This paper
describes how Dr. Trimble’s dedication, tenacity, and creativity at key points in his career resulted in the many unique
accomplishments described in this session that preserved, protected, and educated in unparalleled fashion.
Smith, Derek [271] see Ojeda Rodriguez, Elizabeth
Smith, Donald [60] see Hayward, Michele
Smith, Emily (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[254]
Twisted Lines: K-12 Diversity Education and the Role of Archaeology in Teaching the Past
As educators, archaeologists must confront the problematic ways in which the general public addresses the history and
development of the human race. Diverse experiences and alternative pathways of development that appear intuitive to
archaeologists are not reflected in public discourse. Uncritical group-think mentality and modernist views of progress are deeply
embedded within the general public and go unchallenged in current primary and secondary education models. Racial intolerance in
the United States can be attributed in part to the failure of the education system in challenging students to critically engage with the
full scope of human diversity. Archaeology is uniquely situated to confront attitudes of value based on false ideas of progress, to
introduce students to unfamiliar regions of the world, and to readdress the way the subject of human history is approached in the
classroom. The aim of this paper is to spark conversation among archaeologists about the effect of history education on the
development of social, political, and cultural attitudes. The situation of groups outside of their regional context in educational
programs will be discussed using the framework of Egyptian history, and a consideration of the ramifications of the absence of
subaltern histories will be presented.
Smith, Geoffrey (University of Nevada, Reno)
[195]
Discussant
Smith, Geoffrey [195] see Sturtz, Sara
Smith, Gerad (University of Alaska, Fairbanks)
[82]
Insights from Prehistoric House Construction: Change through Time in the Middle Tanana Valley, Alaska
The study focuses on the construction types of two prehistoric housepits dating ~1000 and ~2000 cal BP along Shaw Creek, in the
Alaskan Interior. House types can be culturally indicative of subsistence stability, resource intensity, and social structure. While
house types of the proto-historic period have been often described, the earlier shift to their adoption and change in the Alaskan
interior during the past 2000 years has largely been understudied. House size dramatically increases in the region around 1000 BP,
suggesting that the concept of the household familial unit shifts. This shift in household size may correlate with, and be a proxy of,
the diffusion of the Dene dual kinship-based socio-political system into the area.
[82]
Chair
Smith, Heather (Eastern New Mexico University), Taylor McCoy (Eastern New Mexico University), Fanxiu Meng (Eastern
New Mexico University), Laura Evans (Eastern New Mexico University) and Brendon Asher (Eastern New Mexico
University)
[77]
3D Digital Curation of the Blackwater Draw Stone Tool Assemblage: Uniting Materials from the Clovis Type Site
Blackwater Draw Locality 1 is foundational in the study of Paleoindian adaptation in North America. Since its discovery in the 1920s,
more than 20 different institutions have excavated various components of the site. As a result, parts of the lithic assemblage,
including the projectile-point collections, reside in different facilities across the country. Thus, the biface assemblage has never been
united under one roof and thorough analysis of the assemblage is incomplete. Faculty, Staff, and students from Eastern New
Mexico University launched an endeavor to compile an exhaustive dataset of lithic bifacial artifacts from Blackwater Draw. Beginning
with those artifacts curated at ENMU and the Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory, this research team set out to scan the
entire bifacial collection using a structured light 3D scanner. Here we present an update on this multi-year project to digitally curate
the Blackwater Draw lithic tool collection in three dimensions. Our goal is to scan artifacts housed at institutions across North
America and unite the lithic tool assemblage in a digital venue. Discussion will focus on our own geometric morphometric analyses
of the collection in 3D and the future digital accessibility of the collection to researchers from around the world.
Smith, Heather [148] see Baker, Caitlin
Smith, Heather [66] see McCoy, Taylor
Smith, Heather [17] see Smallwood, Ashley
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   523
Smith, Jaye and Jeffrey Clark (Archaeology Southwest)
[142]
Citizen Science in Action: Preserving the Ray Robinson Collection from the Safford Basin, Arizona
In 2015, centenarian Ray Robinson wanted to find a permanent home for thousands of artifacts he collected from numerous sites in
the Safford Basin, Arizona during the late 1950s and 1960s, including items from the famous Bonito Creek Cave Cache. Through a
collaborative effort between Archaeology Southwest, Northern Arizona University and the Arizona State Museum, Ray’s desire was
realized shortly before his death. In 2018, Archaeology Southwest assembled a team of over 30 citizen scientists to prepare the
collection and process the artifacts to a “repository-ready” state for permanent storage at ASM. During 2018/2019 lab sessions, the
Robinson Collection Team, with the assistance of Archaeology Southwest’s Preservation Archaeologists, inventoried and identified
artifacts from the “Cork Site”, a previously undocumented Salado site in the Safford Basin. The Safford Basin was a vibrant cultural
crossroads in the late prehispanic era (1200–1450 C.E) and there are few documented collections from this region. Collections from
this site and others represented in the Robinson Collection fill an important gap in Salado knowledge. This paper will give a brief
overview of the history of the Ray Robinson Collection, the importance of citizen scientist participation, and the preliminary results of
artifact processing of the “Cork Site” assemblage.
Smith, Jessica [37] see Way, Phylicia
Smith, Jolene
[95]
Moderator
[95]
Discussant
Smith, Jolene
[217]
Discussant
Smith, Karen (South Carolina Department of Natural Resources)
[56]
Celebrating the Design Work of Bettye J. Broyles
Like many archaeologists, the late Bettye J. Broyles discovered what she wanted to do in her twenties while enrolled in college. It
was there where Broyles’s archaeological career began to take shape, and by summer of 1954 she had embarked on her first field
school. Broyles went on to do archaeology in Georgia, North Carolina, West Virginia, Mississippi, and Alabama, eventually returning
to her Tennessee roots in the 1980s. Indeed, the details of much of her life were penned by Hester A. Davis and featured in the
aptly named book “Grit-Tempered: Early Women Archaeologists in the Southeastern United States.” My interests concern Broyles’s
pottery design work, only briefly described in Grit Tempered. Though only one publication resulted from her efforts to reconstruct
Southeastern paddle stamped designs—an article that appeared in a Southeastern Archaeological Conference Bulletin—Broyles’s
design work has served as a legacy and inspiration to those who have followed. In this paper, I discuss Broyles’s approach to
design reconstruction, and some of the insights she gleaned from it. I then describe recent work on a software program that seeks to
reveal the design patterns that Broyles so carefully documented.
Smith, Kevin (Haffenreffer Museum, Brown University) and Guðmundur Ólafsson (National Museum of Iceland)
[50]
Of Monsters and Men: Using Material Culture to Track Movement and Symbolism inside Surtshellir, a Western Icelandic Viking Age
Ritual Site
Over the course of 850 years Surtshellir—a massive lava cave in western Iceland’s rugged interior—has been variously described
as a geological wonder, a shelter for outlaws, an abode of ghosts and spirits, a tourist’s dream, a place of torture, the wilderness, an
archaeological site, and the home of Surtur—destroyer of gods and men. Focusing on data gained from work inside the cave in
2001, 2012, and 2013, this paper will consider how the site’s material culture assemblage affects its (re)interpretation and, in turn,
what Surtshellir’s archaeological record suggests about Norse mythology, ritual practice, and the roles of Norse elites in early
Icelandic society. I will focus, in particular, on evidence gained from pXRF analyses about the movement of objects into, and within,
the cave as proxies for the social status of those who gathered there and as indicators of how far they traveled and how often they
gathered deep within the cave’s dark zone. Turning to the places of origin, colors, and symbolism of the objects left within the cave I
will consider what was chosen and what was avoided when objects were selected for use and sequestration inside this
subterranean Viking Age ritual site.
[50]
Chair
Smith, Kevin [50] see Marengère, Véronique
Smith, Laura [56] see Harle, Michaelyn
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      524
Smith, Maria (Syracuse University) and Alex Garcia-Putnam (University of Wyoming)
[239]
Weavers of “Pro and Profit” Weaving an Imperial City from a Rural Obraje
During the early Colonial period in Peru Antonio de Oré, a native of the Canary Islands, moved to Peru in hopes of finding fame and
fortune. In the 1570s Oré established the obraje (textile mill) de San Marcos de Chincheros (AD C. 1570-C.1823) outside of
Huamanga (Ayacucho). At the obraje the mainly indigenous workforce was forced to produce large quantities of textiles for little
compensation. Through his exploitative business practices Oré was able to make substantial financial contributions to the growing
city of Huamanga, through which he gained a reputation as a man “of pro and profit” (Salas 1979). Pro, because of his charitable
contributions to the foundation and support of Catholic convents and churches in the city; profit, because of the wealth he amassed
through his unacknowledged exploitation of indigenous communities, wildlife, and natural resources. In 2019 excavations were
undertaken at the obraje de San Marcos de Chincheros. Through the preliminary analysis of artifacts from the Obraje’s workshops,
dormitories, and cemetery, this paper examines the ways in which rural indigenous laborers, wildlife, and natural resources
contributed to the growth of urban colonial communities
Smith, Maria [119] see Garcia-Putnam, Alex
Smith, Mark and Susan Malin-Boyce (USACE)
[132]
The Iraq Mass Graves Project
Between 2004 and 2007, under the Direction of Dr. Michael “Sonny” Trimble the Mandatory Center of Expertise for the Curation and
Management of Archaeological Collections (MCX CMAC) directed the systematic excavation, documentation, forensic analysis and
reporting of multiple mass graves in Iraq. The work was undertaken at the request of the U.S. Department of Justice, Regime Crimes
Liaison Office, to provide evidence to be used in the prosecution of the high ranking members of the former Iraqi regime. Dr. Trimble
testified to the Iraqi High Tribunal in the trial of Saddam Hussein and six co-defendants for their responsibly for the Al-Anfal campaigns
carried out against the Kurdish people in the late 1980s. He subsequently oversaw the repatriation of the exhumed victims to their
homeland. The Iraq efforts built on many years of forensic experience previously gained by the MCX CMAC under Dr. Trimble.
Smith, Mark [132] see Brannan, Stefan
Smith, Michael (Arizona State University), Qitian Hu (University of Chicago), Timothy Dennehy (Arizona State University),
Angela Huster (Arizona State University) and Luis Bettencourt (University of Chicago)
[26]
Spatial Clustering, Wealth, and Neighborhoods at Teotihuacan: A Complexity Approach
We reconstruct the neighborhood organization of the ancient city of Teotihuacan by examining spatial clustering of residential
architecture through a variety of methods. These include several spatial clustering algorithms (k-means, DBSCAN, mean shift),
Thiessen polygons centered on civic features (3-temple groups and large plazas), and neighborhood boundaries as proposed by
archaeologists. We explore alternative configurations for large- and small-neighborhood models. We find differences between inner
neighborhoods (i.e., those closer to the Avenue of the Dead) that were likely based on civic features, and outer neighborhoods that
lacked such features. These distinctions probably have both a chronological and functional origin. Based on data compiled by the
Teotihuacan Mapping Project, we calculate the wealth/status distribution of each neighborhood and summarize neighborhood
wealth inequality using the Gini index. The spatial distribution of these data illuminates the level of clustering of wealthy and poor
neighborhoods. We also compare each neighborhood’s wealth/status profile with that of the entire city. Our study contributes to the
development of a framework for examining the local heterogeneity of a complex system (i.e., the city) across differing spatial scales.
Smith, Michael (Arizona State University)
[102]
Discussant
Smith, Michael [26] see Ortman, Scott
Smith, Morgan (University of Tennessee, Chattanooga), Shawn Joy (Archaeological Research Cooperative) and Andrew
Van Slyke (University of West Florida)
[18]
Clint’s Scallop Hole (8JE1796): A Newly Discovered Prehistoric Quarried Landscape in Apalachee Bay, Florida
In 2017, a newly discovered pre-contact archaeological site in Apalachee Bay, Florida, was reported to the authors by the Florida
Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. Subsequent studies have found that the site is actually part of a much larger
submerged landscape inundated ~5,000 years ago. In 2019, archaeologists with the Florida Submerged Prehistoric Landscapes
Archaeological Survey and Heritage Project (SPLASH) conducted an initial survey of the site with undergraduate and graduate
students from Florida State University, Texas A&M Univesity, and the Universidad de la República in Uruguay. Our results found a
series of pre-contact sites in 3–6 m of saltwater ~10 km offshore. This presentation discusses geophysical and archaeological data
obtained from the site and surrounding area over the past two years. This paper also presents the results of lithic analyses at the
site, which demonstrate that Clint’s Scallop Hole represents an inundated bedrock quarry of Suwannee-type chert. A lack of formal
tools and the extensive amounts of debitage indicate that this area served as an important lithic resource to prehistoric groups, who
reduced the bedrock chert material for transport.
Smith, Morgan [238] see de Smet, Timothy
Smith, Morgan [147] see Newell, Zachary
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   525
Smith, Rachel (University of Oxford)
[64]
The Overview Effect: Outer Space Perspectives of the Archaeological Landscape, a Case of Coastal Erosion, Quinhagak, Alaska
Space science and archaeology specialize in vertically opposite realms, yet contain the surprising potential for overlap. The
theoretical nuances space science can lend to archaeology are invaluable for how archaeologists might approach representing and
analyzing the past. Experiences such as the Overview Effect have enabled a shift in previously Earth-bound perspectives of
humanity’s place, not only in the cosmos but also within planet Earth. The use of satellites and remote sensing is not new in
archaeology. However, archaeological work has yet to focus on a from space, overview perspective of past landscapes. Digital
technologies, including GIS, 3D modeling, and various platforms enable for recreation of the overview effect for particular
archaeological areas of interest. This research utilizes space science perspectives to re-create an overview effect visualization of
Quinhagak, Alaska. Quinhagak, a region increasingly battered by coastal erosion due to the effects of climate change, is home to a
rich cultural history. Proxy data is used to re-create the landscape from the perspective of space to enable a comprehensive
understanding of the archaeological landscape of Quinhagak. It is the goal of this research to showcase the importance of the
overview perspective in an archaeological context for archaeological analysis and cultural education.
Smith, Ryan (University of Pittsburgh)
[224]
Now You See ‘Em, Now You Don’t: A Comparative Approach to Understanding the Realities of Inka Imperialism in the Eastern
Andes of Southern Peru
Recognizing when, where, and how the Inka exercised power over local populations is crucial for understanding one of the world’s
largest and most powerful prehistoric empires. Yet so too must we seek to explain those circumstances where the exercise of Inka
power and control was weak or altogether absent. Recognizing that Inka imperialism was multifaceted, this research offers a
comparative approach to Inka imperial realities in the eastern Andean piedmont of southern Peru. Here, results from full-coverage
pedestrian survey, intensive site mapping, and systematic surface collections in two separate yet neighboring valley systems of the
Carabaya province are used to reconstruct demographics, land use, settlement patterns, and socio-political divisions along an
important transitional border between the Andean altiplano and the eastern slopes. In particular, a comparison of pre-Inka and post-
conquest patterns is used to assess regional continuities and changes, highlighting interesting discrepancies in the overall impact of
conquest and administration. Ultimately, the mixed realities of imperialism in these separate valleys offers interesting clues to Inka
administrative strategies at the eastern edge of the empire as well as the role local communities had in influencing the final measure
of imperial power.
Smyth, Heather (Arizona State University) and Christopher Carr (Arizona State University)
[99]
Scioto Hopewell Ideas about Multiple Soul-Like Essences in Humans: Mortuary Expressions in View of Postcolonial Woodland and
Plains Soul Concepts
Scioto Hopewell conceptions of soul-like essences in humans are evident in the systematic placements of grave goods of particular
kinds at particular bodily locations of inhumations, and with insights from comparative information on historic Woodland and Plains
Native Americans. Analysis of 284 burials from 11 Scioto Hopewell cemeteries indicates a recognition of one “free” journeying soul
and multiple “body” souls; their bodily residences, locations of exit upon death, and likely directions taken; differing functions of
different souls; and different “medicines” placed with different souls. Whether souls of individuals of different ages, sexes, and
communities were thought to vary is explored.
Snider, Joseph (Ohio Valley Archaeology Inc.) and Jarrod Burks (Ohio Valley Archaeology Inc.)
[176]
Recovering Data from the Trace Rockshelter in Jackson County, Ohio: A Successfully Litigated NAGPRA Case
In late 2012 the Trace Rockshelter site in Jackson County, Ohio, was looted by three individuals. They later sold what they had
found to a fourth individual, including the skeletal remains from eight burials and many artifacts recovered from a dense midden.
DNA evidence was used to confirm the human remains were Native American and two of the excavators and the buyer of the
artifacts pleaded guilty in U.S. District Court under NAGPRA. Ultimately, the remains and objects were repatriated for reburial. In
this poster we present details related to the many hundreds of artifacts related to this case. Projectile points from across nearly
every time period were recovered, as well as a large Late Archaic/Early Woodland period ceramic assemblage and bone tools, two
of which were radiocarbon dated to the Late Archaic and Middle Woodland periods. Though this robust artifact assemblage comes
from an unfortunate situation, the data derived from it compares well with other rockshelter excavation results in southern Ohio.
Snitker, Grant (University of Georgia), Sean Bergin (Center for Social Dynamics & Complexity, Arizona S) and Pete Cadena
(U.S. Forest Service, Okanogan-Wenatchee National For)
[77]
R-Based Solutions for Synthesizing Archaeological Survey Data to Assess Changing Land-Use Patterns in the Okanagan-
Wenatchee National Forest, WA
Archaeological research has benefited from decades of site-specific projects, regional comparisons, and theory building from case
studies. However, recent research themes concerning the emergence of complex social-ecological systems, such as long-term
land-use legacies and the emergence of the Anthropocene, require a new approach to archaeological data. Large-scale syntheses
of archaeological, paleoenvironmental, and geographical information provide an effective way forward in order to address new
research themes. In more concise terms— ‘big questions’ require ‘big data’ to help answer them. The archaeological information
collected by the USFS is one such ‘big dataset’ and represents an incredible investment in time, resources, and expertise. This
poster presents the initial results of a pilot study to develop an R-based workflow to digitize, extract, and synthesize archaeological
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  526
information across the entirety of the Cle Elum Ranger District, within Central Washington’s Okanogan-Wenatchee National Forest.
Our results indicate that synthesizing district-level archaeological data reveals patterns of land-use that were otherwise not
recognizable. This work has the potential to not only strengthen this dataset’s role in forest-wide cultural resource management, but
also reposition cultural resources as a valuable tool in creating knowledge and policy with direct influences on the health of human-
environmental relationships in the future.
Snitker, Grant (University of Georgia)
[117]
Moderator
Snow, Meradeth (University of Montana) and Michael Searcy (Brigham Young University)
[173]
Migrating Genes: Using aDNA and Archaeological Data to Explain Migration in the Casas Grandes Region of Northern Mexico
Migration as an archaeological topic has addressed huge distances, such as the colonization of the Americas, as well as smaller
regions, such as the peopling of specific sites. The use of genetics as a medium to enhance our understanding of population
movement can be an asset. There are potential pitfalls, however, such as the misrepresentation of DNA ranging across the
landscape without human vectors or motivations. Genomic data must be interpreted through the lens of all available data from the
site and surrounding region in order to understand how the data fit into the potential for human migration. These ideas will be
discussed with mitogenome data accumulated from the site of Paquimé in Casas Grandes, Mexico, which has long been tied to
hypotheses of migration from the south and north. How such migrations could be identified genetically and fit into the larger
understanding of the site will be discussed, particularly in respect to the cultural transformation and fluorescence that marks the
transition from the Viejo to Medio periods. While mitogenome data points to in situ population growth, there is genetic evidence that
aligns with the archaeological record that individuals were migrating into the region from both the north and south.
Snow, Meradeth [173] see Plattner, Paige
Snow, Meradeth [244] see Rizzolo, Alexis
Snow, Meradeth [169] see Summers-Wilson, Rachel
Sobel, Elizabeth [213] see Worman, F. Scott
Soe, Naing [28] see Macrae, Scott
Soe, Nyein Chan [28] see Macrae, Scott
Soficaru, Andrei [169] see Wright, Sterling
Soler-Arechalde, Ana (UNAM), Laura Beramendi-Orosco (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México) and Galia González-
Hernández (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México)
[10]
Archaeomagnetic Studies in Xalla: Contributions to the Chronology of Teotihuacan
The results of three sampling stages carried out in Xalla, a neighborhood with the Teotihuacan government offices under the
direction of Dr. Manzanilla in 2001, 2003, and 2012 are presented. A total of 28 archaeomagnetic samples were taken and
processed in the Laboratory of Paleomagnetism of the UNAM. Secular variation curves of the geomagnetic field for that area of the
country were constructed with data from Wolfman (1990), Hueda et al. (2004), and Soler et al. (2006), Hernandez-Avila (2005),
Romero (2008) and Terán (2013). The new data used in the curves have been corroborated by radiocarbon dating. Bayesian
statistics were employed for archaeomagnetic dating. Ten dates have been obtained, one Miccaotli, one Tlalmimilolpa, and eight
Xolalpan, two of which correspond to the great fire that caused the abandonment of the city. The data is compared with the
chronology proposed by Beramendi et al. (2009) with data from Teopancazco and other chronological series from the central
neighborhoods of Teotihuacan.
Soler-Arechalde, Ana [10] see Beramendi-Orosco, Laura
Solis, Kristina (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[179]
An Analysis of Hunter-Gatherer Mobility and Territoriality in the Late Archaic Texas Coastal Plain Using Strontium Radiogenic
Isotopes
The development of territoriality in human groups is a significant cultural process tied to concepts of private ownership and is often
the foundation for the development of land tenure, trade networks, socioeconomic inequalities, and warfare. Hunter-gatherer
mortuary sites found in the Texas Coastal Plain (TCP) have been assumed to be indicators of territoriality; however, there are few
direct archaeological evaluations of this hypothesis. During the Late Archaic (4000–1200 BP), there is a marked increase in the size
and number of mortuary sites that correlates with a peak in population density. This increase in population density would have had a
large effect on social dynamics in the TCP, including the possible formation of territoriality. This project will utilize strontium
radiogenic isotopes (87Sr/86Sr) to explore mobility and territoriality of Late Archaic hunter-gatherers in the TCP focusing on the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    527
mortuary site of Loma Sandia (41LK28) in Live Oak County Texas. 87Sr/86Sr of 54 individuals from the site will be compared to
each other and to bioavailable 87Sr/86Sr from several locations throughout the TCP. By comparing individuals to bioavailable
87Sr/86Sr from surrounding landscapes, a better understanding of mobility patterns will be developed and also allow for the
interpretation of territorial behavior.
[179]
Chair
Solís, Reyna [10] see Melgar, Emiliano
Solometo, Julie (James Madison University), Wesley Bernardini (University of Redlands) and Gregson Schachner
(University of California, Los Angeles)
[98]
Western Pueblo Social Organization Revisited
Steve Plog’s undergraduate senior seminar “Western Pueblo Social Organization” launched the careers of a number of
archaeologists, including our own. This class introduced students to many of the themes that he has pursued over the course of his
career, including the co-evolution of social organization, economy, and religion; the ownership and transmission of ritual knowledge
by social groups; and the construction and maintenance of village solidarity. In this paper, we discuss how our current work
conducted in collaboration with the Hopi Cultural Preservation Office explores these themes. This project has generated significant
new insights into the time depth and scale of settlement on the Hopi Mesas, and especially the complexity of the formation of post-
AD 1200 villages during an era of extensive regional migrations. For this paper, we examine the latter process through the lens of
newly gathered architectural, demographic, and rock art data.
Somerville, Andrew (Iowa State University)
[153]
Discussant
Somerville, Andrew (Iowa State University), Isabel Casar (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México), Daniel Dalmas (Iowa
State University) and Pedro Morales (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México)
[233]
Investigating the Pleistocene-Holocene Transition in the Tehuacan Valley of Mexico: New Dates and Isotopic Data
The dry caves and floodplain archaeological sites of the Tehuacan Valley in Puebla, Mexico, excavated by Richard S. MacNeish and his
team in the 1960s, contained some of the earliest macrobotanical evidence for domesticated New World plants, including maize,
avocados and chili peppers. While many studies have focused on the levels associated with these domesticated cultigens, less
attention has been paid to the earliest deposits of the caves, which according to the excavators, spanned the Pleistocene-Holocene
boundary. Here we present new AMS radiocarbon dates from the lowest levels of Coxcatlan cave (Ajuereado and Riego Phases) and
stable isotope data from faunal bones (N=200) from nine site locations within the valley to document the timing of human occupation
and to reconstruct the ecological contexts in which the early inhabitants lived. The AMS dates give us a new early date for the cultural
sequence in Tehuacan and the stable isotope results allow us to reconstruct environmental changes over time. These data increase our
ability to model human adaptations to the post-Pleistocene environments in Mexico and help us understand how such adaptations may
have led to increases in sedentary lifeways and ultimately to the development of farming communities.
[233]
Chair
Somerville, Andrew [133] see Forest, Marion
Somerville, Andrew [78] see Waterman, Anna
Sommer, Christian [11] see Bader, Gregor
Son, Pham Thanh [17] see Marwick, Ben
Sonderman, Elanor
[172]
Are We Adequately Training the Next Generation? Ethics in Curation Education
Dilemmas of law and ethics in archaeology and archaeological curation are interconnected and codependent. In a system where
explicit laws and regulations are largely lacking for curation and collections management, it becomes more difficult to require people
to care about those things. The skill sets required for collections management and curation are, unfortunately, usually considered
less important than the skill sets required for archaeological analysis or fieldwork. Thus, university collections are sometimes
managed by archaeologists with no curation training, and no ability to teach those skills to students. We must also consider that an
archaeologist who is only partly trained, will still have those skill gaps whether they are based in a university, a private museum, or a
federal/other government position. One of the major ethical dilemmas facing modern archaeology, particularly curatorial practice, is
the severe lack of educational opportunities, especially at the graduate level, for curation and collections management. This paper
presents research conducted as part of my dissertation, with recent updates, quantifying how widespread this issue is. Until
universities adequately train the next generation of archaeologists, museum professionals, and academics, we will not be able to
move the discipline forward.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     528
Song, Jixiang [35] see Sun, Yufeng
Song, Jixiang [36] see Wei, Tianxu
Sorrell, Daniel [255] see McNamee, Calla
Sorresso, Domenique (University of Florida), C. Trevor Duke (University of Florida), Gifford Waters (Florida Museum of
Natural History) and Charles Cobb (Florida Museum of Natural History)
[123]
From Missions to Markets: Petrographic Analysis of Indigenous Ceramic Manufacture and Spanish Colonial Influence on San
Marcos Pottery
Following the collapse of the Spanish mission system of Florida in the early eighteenth century, many Native mission populations
were relocated into “refugee” mission settlements on the outskirts of the colonial city of St. Augustine. Archaeological evidence
suggests that while traditional ceramic practices were maintained to some degree, all local Native groups also began producing San
Marcos pottery, a type traditionally made only by a few coastal indigenous groups. During this time period approximately 90% of all
ceramics in colonial households in St. Augustine are Native American, with the vast majority being San Marcos. Possible
explanations for these unusually high quantities of Native ceramics include the presence of Native women in colonial households,
either as wives or domestic helpers, or the mass production of San Marcos pottery for public markets based on a Spanish
preference for the type. This study investigates potential differences between San Marcos pottery from the eighteenth-century
colonial households to San Marcos pottery from eighteenth-century mission sites using petrographic analysis. These data are used
to evaluate the production of San Marcos as a potential market ware and identify variation in San Marcos pottery between different
cultural groups in the missions.
Soza, Danielle (University of Arizona)
[23]
The Archaic U.S. Southwest: Reconsidering the Archaeological Narrative
The Archaic period in North America has received mixed attention depending on the region. In the U.S. Southwest, attention to the
Archaic period is most often focused on its end, marked by increased sedentism and reliance on agricultural subsistence practices.
Although archaeologists studying the Archaic in the U.S. Southwest understand and acknowledge the cultural diversity during the
Archaic in the region, discussions often orient this period to the advent of agriculture. In other words, Archaic research in the
Southwest primarily remains a time period that is used to understand the beginnings of the large-scale agricultural societies that
follow. Few scholars have attempted to look beyond subsistence based research and cultigen studies to consider the social
implications of movement and place. This paper looks at the Archaic period in the U.S. Southwest as a culturally dynamic period of
innovation and complex social interactions using a landscape approach. Although often lacking archaeological materials, especially
in the Early and Middle Archaic, when we apply a landscape approach to discussing concepts of place and memory we can tap into
the complex interactions these early mobile communities had with each other and their cultural landscapes.
Soza, Danielle [23] see Zedeño, María Nieves
Spain, Emman (Muscogee Creek Nation)
[113]
Discussant
Sparks, Shane [252] see Bryne, Stephen
Sparrow, Tom [107] see Gaffney, Chris
Spaulding, Britta (University at Buffalo)
[159]
The Girl (from the Marsh Croft) I Left Behind? Gender Archaeology and Industrialization in Early Modern Sweden
While “but where were the women?” was the very base question for the establishment of the study of gender in archaeology, it is not
actually a simple question. While knowledge about women’s roles and lives in Western societies is not unknown in archaeological
and historical data, it still does not often feature in the “big questions” or in the scales of study beyond the household, even in the
archaeology of early modern or modern periods. I discuss how we can look at and look for women’s roles in industrializing Sweden.
Even up to the twentieth century, Sweden was mainly an agrarian society, even during the post-medieval, militarizing, empire-
building, nation-state in the early modern period. However, this society had occupational pluralism and inherent creativity within that.
During the wars with Denmark, and the battle for control of the Baltic Sea, which necessitated increasing the acquisition of natural
resources, and required different kinds of production from the populace and burgeoning early factories, women were there: but what
were they doing? This is understudied territory and archaeology has the potential to divulge more understanding about “the other
half” of society in times of long economic and technological change and upheaval.
Speakman, Robert [231] see Napora, Katharine
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  529
Speller, Camilla [129] see Fladeboe, Randee
Spenard, Jon (Cal State University San Marcos)
[137]
A Long-Overdue Return to the Cold River: Archaeology of the Rio Frio Caves, Cayo District, Belize
The Rio Frio caves in western Belize have long been recognized as significant landmarks in the emergence of contemporary Maya
cave archaeology theory and practice. Yet, given their place in the history of the discipline they remain poorly understood and
understudied. In 2018, they became a primary focus of the Rio Frio Regional Archaeological Project (RiFRAP), the first multiyear
project dedicated to their archaeological investigation. Among the goals of the RiFRAP are (1) establishing individual cave and
regional chronologies, (2) determining who was using the caves, and (3) why, (4) mapping the caverns to contemporary
archaeological standards, (5) employment of digital recordation in those efforts, and (6) reconnaissance for all known and
unrecorded cave sites in the study area. This presentation reviews the history of research in the area and discusses the results of
our first two field seasons. In short, all known sites were used during the Late to Terminal Classic periods (AD 700–900/1000) by
Maya people strongly affiliated with the Belize Valley. As well, our reconnaissance efforts resulted in the rediscovery of a primary
center unknown to archaeology, the people from which were likely who were using the caverns.
Spence Morrow, Giles (University of Toronto)
[32]
Discussant
Spencer, Charles [17] see Covey, R. Alan
Spencer, Kaylee [164] see Werness-Rude, Maline
Spicola, Erin [254] see Kassabaum, Megan
Spiess, Arthur [9] see Kelley, Alice
Spitzer, Megan [129] see Wellman, Hannah
Spivak, Deborah [243] see Berry, Nora
Spivey, S. Margaret [166] see Mueller, Natalie
Splitstoser, Jeffrey (George Washington University) and Jon Clindaniel (University of Chicago)
[164]
Color Conventions in Wari and Inka Khipus
The colors of pre-conquest Andean khipus have long been thought to have played an important role in the encoding of information.
Spanish chronicler testimony, for example, tells us that Inka khipu colors had specific, conventionalized meanings. However, pre-
conquest khipu color signs remain undeciphered and poorly understood. In this presentation, we approach the problem
diachronically, exploring how color signs were used in both Middle Horizon and Late Horizon khipus. We then compare and contrast
the colors and color “schemes” found in these khipus from different periods and interpret why similarities and differences in semiotic
strategies existed over time. Finally, we discuss how our diachronic findings can be used as a starting point for beginning to
decipher the meanings of khipu color signs.
Sponheimer, Mathew [189] see Joyce, Arthur
Sportman, Sarah (AHS Inc.; University of Connecticut) and Scott Brady (Office of State Archaeology, Connecticut)
[13]
“Remote from the Other English Plantations”: Reflections on Current Seventeenth-Century Research in Connecticut
Recently, work by several Connecticut archaeologists has focused on the seventeenth century with great success. Extensive
investigations at sites such as Lt. John Hollister Site, the Webb-Deane-Stevens Site, and a number of Pequot battlefield and
domestic sites, are beginning to shed new light on the tumultuous early period of the Connecticut Colony. Many of these sites
contain incredibly well-preserved archaeological deposits with the potential to expand our understanding of the economic
relationships, social milieu, military struggles, and environment of seventeenth-century Connecticut, and they provide a rich source
of information about the daily lives of the Native American and English people living there. Documentary research demonstrates that
in the microcosm of early Connecticut, many of the people associated with these sites were tied together through their economic
and social relationships; they traded, intermarried, fought, and worked together, although not always in harmony. This paper reflects
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    530
on the developing wealth of new information and calls for a holistic approach to ongoing research. In the spirit of the late
Connecticut State Archaeologist Brian Jones, we should work together, integrating this data to tell the rich stories of early
Connecticut and find innovative ways to share those stories with the public.
Sportman, Sarah [13] see Leslie, David
Spring, Ryan (Historic Preservation Dept.)
[116]
Discussant
Springer, Corinne (Natural History Museum of Utah) and Shannon Boomgarden (Natural History Museum of Utah)
[245]
Archaeological Investigations in Range Creek Canyon: Emery and Carbon Counties, Utah
Archaeological investigations in Range Creek Canyon, located in east central Utah, have led to the identification of approximately
500 prehistoric sites. The vast majority of sites that can be culturally affiliated are Fremont, semi-sedentary horticulturalists that
occupied the region AD 300–1175. Broadly speaking, sites range from relatively long-term habitation sites, short-term use artifact
scatters, rock art and granaries. Examples of each site type can be found from the valley floor to the towering cliff tops Some site
types are found clustered, particularly multi-structural sites thought to be small village sites. Research at the Range Creek Field
Station operated by the Natural History Museum of Utah at the University of Utah has been focused on experimental archaeology in
an attempt to understand the costs and benefits of subsistence strategies employed by the Fremont as a means to understand the
observed patterning of these sites. These experiments include growing plots of heritage maize, monitoring water levels in the creek
and harvesting wild resources. Data collected in the course of these experiments may be applied to questions of settlement
patterning in the canyon.
St. Amand, Frankie (University of Maine Climate Change Institute)
[59]
Comparing El Nino Proxies from the Archaeological Record
El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is a coupled atmospheric and oceanic climate system with global impacts at sub-decadal
timescales relevant to humans. The core El Nino (EN) warming impact area is the hyperarid North Coast of Peru. Here common
high-resolution proxies are largely absent, but the archaeological record provides evidence of past climate change and enables
reconstruction of ENSO over time. Tracking EN changes since the terminal Pleistocene elucidates human behavior and adaptation
to climatic occurrences from Pleistocene through modern ENSO events. This study seeks to use isotopic analyses of mollusks
harvested during 2019 to improve understanding of a variety of species as paleooceanographic proxies and to address conflicting
evidence of regional EN frequency and intensity since the terminal Pleistocene inferred from local datasets. The question to be
addressed is: Are differing interpretations due to changes in ENSO manifestations south of 10–12° S (a known climatic transition
zone), or due to misinterpretations of local paleoenvironmental datasets used to infer regional EN events? As species of bivalves
react differently to environmental conditions (e.g, temperature-dependent fractionation of stable isotopes) analyses may not produce
uniform results, affecting interpretations of past events. This work with modern mollusks can help refine interpretations of
archeological specimens.
Stabenow, Ashley
[202]
Lines in the Sand: Investigation of an Enclosing Feature at Pueblo Colorado, New Mexico
Boundaries divide spaces and define social interactions between people in a myriad of ways. Finding new examples of boundary
creation in the archaeological record informs the larger conversation regarding the construction and maintenance of physical
boundaries as a strategy for navigating and informing complex relationships between people. In the Salinas Province in central New
Mexico, recent lidar survey revealed the presence of an earthen ditch-like feature, 2 km in diameter, encircling and enclosing a late
precontact Pueblo community. Other Pueblo sites within this region have identified defensive walls encircling the main occupation
area, but as of yet no other ditch-like features similar to the enclosing feature at Pueblo Colorado have been documented in the
archaeological record. This feature was explored utilizing a combination of surficial mapping techniques and targeted test
excavations to reveal new data regarding feature morphology and construction, as well as decommissioning procedures. These
lines of evidence, taken together, shed light on the potential function of the enclosing feature.
Stacey, Rebecca (The British Museum)
[258]
Gum Paint Binders from Precolumbian Cave Art at Mona Island
Research on gum-derived paint binding media has largely focused on characterization of media from Western art materials and Old
World gum sources, for example, Acacia spp. The compositions of exudates from native Caribbean sources have not received the
same attention. This paper presents the results of recent research at the British Museum on binding media from precolumbian cave
art on the island of Mona in the northern Caribbean. The results of GC/MS analysis of the paints will be discussed in terms of the
challenges of achieving secure botanical identifications based on sugar compositions, with reference to gum binding media studies
we have undertaken on other material. The significance of the gum binding media to the interpretation of the cave art at Mona will
be considered as well as the prospects for future study.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  531
Stadler, Harald [188] see Gray, D. Ryan
Stafford, Thomas [19] see Sun, Nan
Stafford, Thomas, Jr. (Stafford Research Inc.), Ernest Lundelius (University of Texas, Austin) and Michael Waters (Texas
A&M University)
[19]
Geochronology of Hall’s Cave, Texas
Hall’s Cave exemplifies how rapidly chronological and paleoecological sciences have advanced in 30 years since excavations
began. In 1986, both aDNA and accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) 14C dating were in their infancy. The cave’s first 14C
measurements used conventional (β-decay) techniques requiring > 100 g of rodent bones and tens of grams of sediment. Starting in
1990, AMS 14C dates have been made on single bones and teeth weighing < 100 mg, 1 cm cubes of sediment, and any purified
sample type yielding 100 µg of graphitized carbon. These field and laboratory advances have enabled Hall’s Cave’s geochronology
to be measured at unprecedented accuracy and stratigraphic precision, thus providing never-before achieved temporal control for
paleontological, aDNA, biogeochemical, and archaeological studies. The cave strata span Modern, ongoing deposition of guano,
vegetation, and animal carcasses to at least 20.6–20.0 ka cal BP at the base (3.7 m) of known deposits. A sedimentation rate of
1cm/32 yr. between 20–13 ka cal BP decreased to 1 cm/87 yr. afterward. Megafauna extinctions, including Equus, Smilodon, B.
antiquus, and Platygonus, occurred by ca. 11,200 RC yr. BP, ~300 calendar years before the Younger Dryas onset at 10,900 RC yr.
BP.
[19]
Chair
Stafford, Thomas, Jr. [66] see Battillo, Jenna
Stafford, Thomas, Jr. [19] see Waters, Michael
Stagg, Sarah (University of Wyoming) and Jason Toohey (University of Wyoming)
[243]
Domestic Space and Residential Organization at the Early Intermediate Period Cajamarca Site of Callacpuma, Peru.
Callacpuma is a multicomponent archaeological site in the Cajamarca Basin of the northern highlands of Peru. The site was
occupied for approximately 2500 years, throughout the Formative and Cajamarca Periods (1000 BC–AD 1532). Our research
focuses on Platform 2, the largest of nine human-made platform mounds located on the summit of the site. Platform 2 was occupied
during the Initial and Early Cajamarca periods (100BC- AD 600) and is covered with domestic architecture. Initial excavations as
well as mapping and surface collections are used to examine residential organization through analysis of architectural patterns of
rooms, plazas, and corridors located on Platform 2. We consider room size and location as well as quality of construction and
associated features and artifacts (found in both surface collection and test excavations) to expand our understanding of Initial and
Early Cajamarca domestic architecture and spatial organization.
Stainton, Adrienne (Texas State University), Ashley McKeown (Texas State University) and Nicholas Herrmann (Texas
State University)
[215]
Analysis of Cultural Retention in an Eighteenth-Century Enslaved African Cemetery in the Dutch Caribbean
The island of Sint Eustatius, once the world’s wealthiest free trade port, played an important role during exploitation and
globalization of the New World. This research project addresses the retention and/or loss of traditional cultural practices of enslaved
Africans in the wake of European presence and influence by assessing burial practices at an eighteenth-century cemetery used by
enslaved Africans. Artifacts and mortuary data from excavations of the cemetery between 2012 and 2019 were analyzed. Spatial
attributes of the burials were documented using photogrammetry from the 2019 excavations. Comparative samples used to assess
cultural retention are from roughly contemporaneous West African and/or African burial grounds in the New World. The relevant
frequency of mortuary and funerary attributes at the cemeteries as well as results from the Fisher Exact test of independence
between sites suggest both loss and retention of African cultural mortuary practices compared to other enslaved and/or freed
African burial grounds.
Staller, John (Field Museum)
[197]
Incahuasi de Caranqui, the Palace Complex of Atahualpa, the Last Inca Emperor, Imbabura Province, Ecuador
The “house of the Inca” or Incahuasi de Caranqui in Imbabura Province is located in the indigenous town of Caranqui south of the
provincial capital of Ibarra. Incahuasi de Caranqui was a palace estate constructed by Huayna Capac in the context of expansion
into northernmost Ecuador and birthplace of his son Atahualpa, the last Inca emperor. Spanish chroniclers state it was the birthplace
of Princesa Pacha, the favorite wife of the Inca emperor and mother of Atahualpa. Incahuasi is situated directly beside the Inca
highway or Camino Real at the foot of the Imbabura volcano. It was buried several times by landslides related to earthquakes and
volcanic eruptions. Archaeological research of a rectangular cut stone pool uncovered in the course of field research and fed by
stone canals that maintained a constant depth in the pool. Lunar and solar reflections on the surface of the water were related to
calculating different points in the annual cycle.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      532
Stanish, Charles (University of South Florida)
[152]
Discussant
Stanish, Charles (University of South Florida)
[181]
Discussant
Staniuk, Robert (Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel)
[263]
Long-Term Cultural Change and Short-Term Cultural Choices: A Practice-Based Quantitative Analysis of Bronze Age Ceramics
from a Multilayered Settlement in Kakucs-Turján (Hungary)
Early and Middle Bronze Age settlements in the Carpathian Basin (2300–1450 BC) are primarily characterized by the re-emergence
of the tell building practice. This particular form of occupation, due to its similarity to the one practiced in the Middle East, has been
used as an argument for considering such sites as central places controlling long-distance trade networks reaching from the Baltic
Sea to the Mediterranean. However, such models are based on top-down perspectives of social formation implying that the Bronze
Age saw the formation of the first states in continental Europe. In this paper it is argued that the archaeological record of these
settlements actually provides evidence of how diachronic occupational shifts of subsequent generations can be linked to continuous,
small scale changes of social practices. By focusing on such diachronic changes it is possible to investigate whether often implied
large scale processes affected the everyday life of the communities. To that end, ceramic material from a multilayered settlement is
used to answer questions regarding processes of long-term cultural change and short-term cultural choices. The provided historical
trajectory serves as a counter-argument to traditional narratives by shifting the focus toward acknowledging the significance of
small-scale processes.
Stanley, Harrison [63] see Zedaker, Dylan
Stanton, Travis (University of California Riverside), Traci Ardren (University of Miami), Nicolas Barth (University of
California Riverside), Juan Carlos Fernandez-Diaz (NCALM) and José Osorio León (INAH)
[102]
People, Pixels, and Points per Square Meter: The Challenges of Using Lidar to Estimate Populations in the Northern Maya
Lowlands
Despite the fact that lidar technology has revolutionized the way in which Maya archaeologists collect and interpret regional
settlement data, many challenges remain. In regards to estimating regional populations the lack of good chronological data serves
as a serious impediment for trusting population estimates. However, the fact that we can now see a large percentage of past
settlement systems in the datasets we work with gives us new, and sometimes surprising, insights into the broader trends of
population histories that we should not ignore due to our reservations concerning the lack of chronology. Further, in some cases we
do have some chronological data from which to extrapolate. In this paper we discuss the challenges we have faced in attempting to
estimate populations in a roughly 450 km2 area of the northern Maya lowlands that includes the ancient cities of Chichen Itza, Coba,
and Yaxuna as well as large swaths of rural areas.
Stanton, Travis [225] see Coltman, Jeremy
Stanton, Travis [5] see Waite, Danielle
Stanyard, Zachary (University of Texas, Austin), Phoebe Fairbairn (University of Texas, San Antonio), Lauren Sullivan
(University of Massachusetts, Boston) and Fred Valdez Jr. (University of Texas, Austin)
[53]
Ritual Assumptions and Practical Implications of Problematic Deposit NC-1 at the Site of Las Abejas, Belize
Ancient Maya problematic deposits have often been interpreted a priori as representing ritual activity. In many cases, these deposits
have been analyzed as singular datums rather than a conglomerate of information confined to a small spatial extent. Rather than
lean on ritual interpretations of what may have been occurring, we propose that insights into social and political economy can be
ascertained by the careful analysis of these complex features. Las Abejas is a medium sized community located in the Three Rivers
Region of Northwest Belize in the Rio Bravo Conservation area. Excavations in the North Courtyard of Las Abejas in the summer of
2019 revealed a deposit (PD NC-1) of roughly 5,300 ceramic sherds, several stone tools, greenstone, and other elite goods. This
paper will discuss this new find and also provide a comparative analysis of previous interpretations of similar deposits in the region.
Stark, Barbara (Arizona State Univ)
[227]
Discussant
Stark, Miriam, Peter Grave (University of New England), Lisa Kealhofer (Santa Clara University), Piphal Heng (University of
Hawai’i, Manoa) and Darith Ea (APSARA National Authority)
[168]
Large-Scale NAA Provenancing of Angkorian Khmer Stonewares, Cambodia
Ron Bishop has led archaeologists in NAA applications for more than 30 years and made important contributions to New World
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    533
studies of political economy. More recent applications of NAA in Southeast Asia have begun to rewrite our understandings of ninth-
to fifteenth-century CE economic networks. From 2014–2017, our international collaboration involved a large-scale NAA
geochemical provenancing study of stoneware ceramics from Angkorian production and consumption contexts. Khmer stonewares
served both as ritual temple furnishings and household goods within the Angkorian Empire; these stonewares offer a unique
opportunity to study the Angkorian economy. Unlike stoneware manufacture in neighboring regions, Khmer stoneware production
was almost entirely for ‘domestic’ consumption, closely mapping the Khmer political footprint. Thai and Vietnamese, but not Khmer,
stonewares are recovered from historic shipwrecks throughout the South China Sea and its environs. A long-term goal of the Khmer
Stoneware Production and Exchange Project (KPX) is to articulate patterns of stoneware production, consumption, and distribution
as proxies for internal dynamics of the Angkorian world. Here, we present and discuss some results from our ongoing work,
including the compositional distinctiveness of stonewares from different kiln complexes and implications for understanding
consumption patterning for the Middle Mekong River area of Cambodia.
Starkovich, Britt [162] see Wong, Gillian
Stasiek, Artur [213] see Meierhoff, James
Stasiek, Artur [160] see Porubcan, Paula
Stauffer, John (Washington University, St. Louis)
[47]
The Disintegration of Style and Memory: Mound 3 Assemblages at the Lake Jackson Site, Florida
At the 75th meeting of the Society of American Archaeology, Claudine Payne proposed that Lake Jackson’s Mound 3 served as a
repository for ritual heirlooms that could no longer be used in the manners their creators intended. This paper revives her hypothesis
to examine the role of this archaeological context at the geographic and temporal periphery of the Braden Style horizon. As this
symposium’s participants agree that artworks in this style transform objects used for ritual into political resources, I entertain the
notion that a loss of essential ancestral knowledge for their use is accompanied by risks associated with their misuse. Consequently,
Mound 3’s construction could be interpreted as a preventative measure that secured these potent heirlooms with the deceased
individuals whose voices could no longer be heard by the living. From the author’s perspective, Lake Jackson thus provides an
important bookend in discussions about the communicative qualities of Native North American iconography.
Stauffer, John (Washington University, St. Louis)
[166]
Chair
Stauffer, John [166] see Heep, Nathan
Stauffer, John [166] see Mersmann, Joy
Steadman, David [27] see LeFebvre, Michelle
Steelman, Karen (Shumla Archaeological Research & Education Center)
[16]
New Rock Art Dates for the Lower Pecos Canyonlands
The Shumla Archaeological Chemistry Laboratory has obtained new radiocarbon dates for Pecos River, Bold Line Geometric, Red
Linear, Red Monochrome, and historic period styles of rock art. Using two independent methods, we provide reliable age estimates.
For direct dates on paintings, we employed plasma oxidation to extract organic binders in the paint layer followed by accelerator
mass spectrometry. For minimum and maximum ages, we treated overlying and underneath accretion layers with acid to isolate
calcium oxalate for combustion and C-14 measurement to determine when the mineral coatings formed. Radiocarbon results are
calibrated using the OxCal computer program to produce calendar age ranges. Overlying accretion layers are younger and
underlying accretion layers are older. This correctly ordered, chronological stratigraphy of the accretion and paint layers supports
the validity of both dating methods. These new results provide context for the significant, but lesser studied pictographs within the
region.
Steere, Benjamin (Western Carolina University)
[160]
Preserving the Nikwasi Mound: Archaeology, Controversy, and Tribal Sovereignty in the Cherokee Heartland of Western North
Carolina
The Nikwasi Mound (31MA2) in Franklin, Macon County, North Carolina is paradoxically one of the best preserved but least
understood mounds in the Cherokee heartland of western North Carolina. The mound was likely first constructed during the
Mississippian period and later served as the platform for a historically documented townhouse marking the location of an important
Cherokee “mother town.” The mound itself was preserved in 1946, but the area surrounding it was filled, graded, and developed. In
July 2019, ownership of the mound was transferred from the Town of Franklin to the Nikwasi Initiative, a non-profit organization with
representatives from the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, local county and city governments, and a conservation organization.
Heated debates about the preservation of the mound played out in news reports, town hall meetings, and social media, and in some
cases, speculative or inaccurate claims about the archaeology of the mound were disseminated to the public. In this paper I
summarize archaeological and historical information about Nikwasi and draw on theoretical insights from indigenous archaeology to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   534
consider how the past and future preservation of the mound relates to broader issues of cultural heritage management and tribal
sovereignty.
[160]
Chair
Steere, Benjamin (Western Carolina University)
[208]
Discussant
Steffen, Anastasia (Valles Caldera National Preserve), Nicholas Jarman (Valles Caldera National Preserve) and Stephanie
Bergman (Valles Caldera National Preserve)
[9]
First Came the Fires: Valles Caldera Landscape Futures in a Changing Climate
In the last two decades, the Jemez Mountains in north-central New Mexico have experienced devastating wildfires due to the
intersection of climate change and twentieth-century forest management practices. Over 60% of the Valles Caldera National
Preserve (VCNP) has burned since 2011. Here, climate change impacts are not a question of if, or when, but what now and what
next? This poster addresses “lessons learned” in the wake of historically-aberrant wildland fires and the resulting damage to an
archaeological record rich in information about human uses and ecological contexts over the past nine millennia. Managing this
landscape at risk requires preparing both for uncontrolled impacts from wildfire and for effects of landscape-scale restoration
projects designed to proactively decrease the risk of catastrophic wildfire. We present the VCNP’s due diligence in preparing for
prioritization: applying National Park Service tools for vulnerability assessment and adaptation planning; evaluating costs and
benefits of our forest restoration program; and respectfully considering the relative value of this archaeological record in the context
of myriad and monumental challenges facing archaeologists at continental and global scales.
Stein, Kristoffer
[221]
The Past’s Identity: A Study of Heritage Construction by Communities in Tucson through Archaeology
My research focuses on Tucson, Arizona, where for over a century extensive archaeological research has positioned the region as a
prominent location for scholarship and heritage-based projects. Local government strives to build the region’s heritage through
community engagement and serves as a prime location for the focus of my research. I aim to explore how communities in Tucson
construct narratives about the past. More specifically, I will interrogate how identity mediates concepts of heritage such as
authenticity, continuity, and relevance. In what ways do communities engage with concepts of the past and how is this influenced by
political, ethnic, and socio-economic identity? The methodology of the research is organized around a questionnaire survey
administered to a neighborhood in proximity to archaeology sites and the Santa Cruz River where there is evidence for long-term
human activity, and serves as the epicenter for heritage programs today. I will use quantitative measurements of association, and
statistical significance to test the hypothesis that there is a measurable relationship between identity and constructions of the past.
Moreover, I will argue that archaeologists have the responsibility to explore strategies where community diversity demands a
diversity of approaches in order to facilitate productive engagement.
Steinbach, Erik [79] see Phillips, Bruce
Steinbrenner, Larry (Red Deer College), Carrie Dennett (Red Deer College) and Silvia Salgado (University of Costa Rica)
[168]
Perspectives on the GNCP and Ceramic Production in Greater Nicoya
The Greater Nicoya Ceramic Project (GNCP), a program that is in no small part synonymous with the work of Ron Bishop, has
informed and guided archaeological research in Nicaragua and Costa Rica for more than 40 years. In this paper, we explore the role
of this program in our own attempts to make sense of Greater Nicoya’s celebrated (yet frequently misunderstood) ceramic traditions
and their origins. Drawing particularly on two decades of research in the western littoral region of Lake Nicaragua, we will discuss
how the GNCP has contributed to the identification of well-defined ceramic production zones in Pacific Nicaragua and outline how
we plan to build on the project’s work at the Palo Verde National Park in Costa Rica’s Lower Tempisque Valley.
Steinman, Charles [50] see Bielenberg, Aliosha
Stelle, Lenville (Illinois State Archaeological Survey)
[60]
Chair
Stelson, Laura (Penn State University)
[64]
Predicting Prehistoric Routes for Long-Distance Trade across the Alaska Peninsula
This poster demonstrates the results of a multivariate network analysis performed in GIS that identifies potential preferred routes for
long-distance travel and exchange across the Alaska Peninsula in prehistory, with the objective of identifying archaeological sites
potentially positioned to facilitate the trade of localized raw materials from the Bristol Bay coast to communities along the Pacific
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    535
coast of the Alaska Peninsula, Kodiak Island, and Prince William Sound. Important variables in addressing this question include the
direction and means of travel, topography, landscape cover, potential barriers to travel such as waterways and glaciers, seasonal
conditions, and the load to be transported. Based on these factors, I identify least-cost paths of travel across the Peninsula under
various conditions and rank their relative importance over time according to the chronology of nearby archaeological sites that were
potential stopovers during travel. This method holds great potential for highlighting which corridors within this region require
additional archaeological survey and identifying which sites functioned as interim or end destinations along the route. Ultimately, my
goal with this project will be to assess the role that was played by now abandoned settlements within Katmai National Park in
facilitating the transport of goods through this larger network.
Stemp, W. James (Keene State College) and Jaime Awe (Northern Arizona University)
[23]
Better Late Than Never: A Reassessment of the Preceramic in Western and Central Belize
Despite lagging behind the discoveries of Palaeoindian and Archaic people in Northern Belize, evidence for a preceramic presence
in Western and Central Belize has increased significantly in the last two decades. Until recently, there was no known Palaeoindian
lithic technology in these regions. However, the re-dating of Lowe Complex points indicates hunter-gatherers were there at least as
early as the Late Palaeoindian (beginning ca. 10,500 BCE). There is ambiguous evidence for an Early Archaic human presence, but
by the Late Archaic (3400–900 BCE) the use of plants, including early domesticates, is documented and stone tools for land
clearance and/or early horticulture appear. Together, lithic technology, faunal remains, and plant pollen provide clues about
subsistence practices and other resource use. The lithic raw materials from which tools were made offer insight into both local
procurement strategies and the use of chert from outcrops in Northern Belize. The locations of recovery of these artifacts and
ecofacts emphasize the importance of both caves/rockshelters and waterways in preceramic times. Archaeological evidence from
Western and Central Belize is compared to that from other regions in Belize to better contextualize what we know about the
preceramic overall.
Stempfle, Sabrina (Universität Hamburg), Jörg Linstädter (German Archaeological Institute) and Décio Muianga (Eduardo
Mondlane University)
[250]
Bantu Arrival in Southern Mozambique: Ceramic Analysis as a Source of Information for Dating, Diversity, Technology Transfer, and
Nutrition
In 2016, a research cooperation between the Eduardo Mondlane University and the German Archaeological Institute was started.
Since then, this cooperation performed various surveys and geomagnetic prospection and developed a dedicated research project
which this contribution introduces. The introduction of pottery to southern Africa is associated with the immigration of early farmers
about 2,000 years ago, which are called the Bantu speakers. Recent research challenges this model, since distinct pottery was
found in archaeological contexts of hunter-gatherer communities. Furthermore, the Bantu pottery in Mozambique, called Matola
pottery, has been dated a few hundred years earlier, challenging the previous attribution to Early Farming Communities. The current
research project aims to study the Matola pottery from old excavations as well as from current fieldwork in southern Mozambique
using archeometric approaches to test the Bantu model and to investigate the beginning of pottery production in southern Africa
regarding dating, the process and the diversity in raw material, techniques and use. The absolute ages will be reevaluated by
radiocarbon dating, thermoluminescence dating and compound specific lipid dating. The diversity in raw material, technique and use
within the classified pottery unit will be determined using polarized light microscopy, lipid analysis, X-ray fluorescence, and infrared
spectroscopy.
Stenstrom, Sydney [148] see Baker, Caitlin
Stephan, Robert (University of Arizona)
[210]
Embodied Inequality: Skeletal Evidence of Colonization in Roman Britain
This case study on Roman Britain provides a reproducible methodology for analyzing the relationship between coercion and
inequality in a variety of chronological and geographic contexts. In the recent past, scholars have investigated the dynamics of
“Romanization” in Britain, focusing primarily on the manner of incorporation and the cultural results of this synthesis. This paper
seeks to shift the conversation toward the socioeconomic effects of colonization by examining human stature and skeletal
pathologies in order to assess the impact of Roman rule on populations in Britain. Driven in part by external factors such as diet,
stress, and disease, human stature serves as a reliable proxy for the biological and economic well-being of a population. An
increase in average stature within a closed population would be indicative of people eating more, working less, or living an overall
healthier lifestyle. Statistical analysis of the distribution of skeletal heights during this transitional period suggests that Roman
hegemony was accompanied by a significant increase in socioeconomic inequality. Comparing this skeletal evidence to the types
and frequencies of pathologies within the same sample of skeletal remains suggests that Roman imperialism played a significant
role in restructuring the daily lives of colonized populations through coercion.
Stephen, Jesse (DPAA) and Joshua Toney (Henry Jackson Foundation)
[188]
The Power of Partners: Accomplishments and Challenges of DPAA’s Terrestrial Archaeology Partnership Program in 2019
The Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency (DPAA)—not unlike many other entities—must strive to do more with less. As a federal
government agency a key avenue for maximizing resources is to partner with other organizations that possess or engage in
complementary interests, activities, and sensibilities. During 2019 the DPAA, through the Partnerships and Innovations Directorate,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     536
grew its partnership efforts appreciably. This poster focuses on the Terrestrial Archaeology Program and presents information
related to efforts undertaken during the course of the year. This includes a variety of metrics and insights into the scale of
operations, the sum result(s) of all activities, and the partnership outlook for the future. Most importantly, we present this information
alongside a selection of posters from our partners themselves. Overall, we aim to not only capture the successes and challenges of
the year past but to also spark conversations and collaborations concerning how to best accomplish the mission of bringing home
America’s Missing in Action in the years to come.
[188]
Chair
Stephens Reed, Lori (Aztec Ruins National Monument), Aron Adams (Aztec Ruins National Monument) and Jeffery
Wharton (Aztec Ruins National Monument)
[229]
A Closer Look at the Big Picture: Great House Community Dynamics at Aztec Ruins National Monument, Northwest New Mexico
Three Chacoan great houses (Aztec North, West, and East) comprise the focal point of the Ancestral Pueblo community at Aztec
Ruins National Monument in the Animas Valley of northwestern New Mexico. The well-known occupational history of Aztec West
and East, established through decades of tree-ring dating, includes over 4000 tree ring dates taken from structural timbers. Aztec
North and the associated community of habitation sites contained within the monument are less well known, but integral to the
establishment of the great house settlement. With completion of an archaeological inventory for all property within the monument
boundary, the story of the Aztec great houses and the people who built these grand structures has expanded. Utilizing a number of
analytical tools, such as ceramic mean dating, tree ring dating, architectural attributes, and GIS on the data resulting from inventory
and past excavation projects, we propose a settlement history for the Aztec great houses and community. Our goal in this
presentation is to offer a cohesive story of a great house community with its founding during the late AD 1000s, Chacoan heyday in
the early AD 1100s, revitalization movement in the post-Chaco era, and final migration and depopulation by AD 1290.
Steponaitis, Vincas (UNC-Chapel Hill)
[96]
Discussant
Steponaitis, Vincas [202] see Boudreaux, Edmond
Sterling, Kathleen (Binghamton University)
[1]
Beyond Leaky Pipelines and Glass Ceilings: Equity Issues on the Academic Track
Achieving equity in academia is framed as a process of shattering a glass ceiling, letting everyone to climb as high as their abilities
allow. Alternately, the leaky pipeline metaphor relies on a future in which enough diversity that some of it will make it through. These
metaphors give the impression that no one is acting badly, and all we can do is wait. Archaeology has an image that may contribute
to making this situation worse—our colonialist history and masculinist image impacts the power structures of the discipline. This is
only one facet of the problem. Looking at the people in power and not seeing themselves reflected is not enough to discourage
students and early-career scholars. However, seeing patterns of harassment and bullying, tenure denials, extra service that is less
valued, lower pay, and other indignities, and being on the receiving end does a great deal of damage. What do we know about the
current state of the gaps in academic archaeology, so we might determine where the most urgent work is needed? What concrete
actions might we consider that will promote equity in archaeology?
Sterner, Katherine (University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee)
[232]
Formal Divergence and Functional Concordance: Use-Wear on Late Archaic Cache Bifaces from the Great Lakes
During the Late Archaic to Early Woodland transition, caches of blue gray chert bifaces were deposited throughout the Midwest,
often in association with burials. Despite a large degree of variation in their formal expression, these bifaces are usually all grouped
together as one artifact type in cache contexts. Their utility between manufacture and deposition has long been the subject of
speculation. In 2017, comprehensive use-wear analysis of a sample of bipointed bifaces from the Riverside site, often considered to
be blanks for Turkey Tail projectile points, demonstrated that they were, in fact, used prior to deposition. These data are compared
to use-wear on a cache of finished Turkey Tail points from the Altenburg View site, located approximately 120 miles southwest of
the Riverside site. Use-wear analysis comparing two different formal expressions of these bifaces allows us to expand the
conversation about their significance to include not only information about their depositional and formal characteristics but their
active social and economic characteristics as well.
Stevens, Jamie [129] see Cordero, Robin
Stevenson, Christopher
[35]
Early Bronze Age Site Location in the Republic of Armenia: A Predictive Model
Archaeological investigations of the Early Bronze Age in the South Caucasus region have raised many anthropological questions
concerning early complex societies and human movement across the landscape, especially the organization of small-scale domestic
settlements often referred to as the Kura-Araxes Culture. Until recently, Early Bronze sites in the Republic of Armenia had primarily
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     537
been located opportunistically, without the support of systematic survey. Using a predictive model, this study recruits documented
geospatial data on the known Early Bronze settlement patterns including environmental and geographical factors to develop a
system of predicting the probability of additional sites throughout the physical landscape. By integrating GIS mapping technology
with archaeological theory on human behavior, this study can help develop hypotheses about Kura-Araxes social organization. It
also can contribute to expanding and strengthening ongoing pedestrian and aerial survey projects across Armenia.
Stewart, Benjamin
[78]
Where Did the Meat Go? A Zooarchaeological Analysis and Household Assessment on the Fewkes Site (40WM1)
A Phase III data recovery project on the Fewkes site (40WM1) for the Tennessee Department of Transportation in 1998 recovered a
large fauna assemblage, uncovered numerous features, and several structures. Fewkes is a multicomponent site consisting of a 5-
mound complex with a plaza, stone-box graves, burial mound, and houses made out of wattle and daub situated on a ridge nose at
the confluence of the Little Harpeth River and Boiling Spring located in Williamson County, Tennessee. Data recovered to provide a
unique glimpse into Mississippian village life and foodways in the Middle Cumberland River region of Middle Tennessee. An
assessment of household archaeology using secondary fauna data and spatial analyses was conducted to determine if there are
discernable patterns and evidence of household diet, food preference, socio-political status, ritual, identity, provisioning, feasting,
and meat sharing.
Stewart, Brian [76] see Feak, Angela
Stewart, Caitlin (HDR, Inc), Mark Brodbeck (HDR, Inc), Emily Engan (Logan Simpson), William Gulley (HDR, Inc) and Caitlin
Stewart
[142]
Life in the Northern Margins of the Prescott Cultural Tradition: a GIS-based Approach for Modeling and Interpreting Local Settlement
Systems and Regional Social Networks in the Northern Reaches of Big Chino Valley, Arizona
In 2018, HDR performed an archaeological survey of approximately 5,000 acres in the northern reaches of Big Chino Valley along
the southern margin of the Colorado Plateau. This broad valley is a natural travel corridor and is surrounded by mountainous terrain,
which provided its prehistoric occupants access to a diversity of ecozones and opportunities for regional interaction. The survey
generated an extensive settlement database that includes functional and temporal assessments for over 100 sites. Prior to the
survey, few large studies had been conducted in the area and consequently patterns of human adaption to this unique environment
are not well defined. The survey identified mostly Prescott Culture sites, but with many containing an unanticipated abundance and
diversity of extralocal ceramic wares and lithic tools. This paper presents the results of a GIS-based settlement pattern analysis
focused on understanding how prehistoric people took advantage of the opportunities the Big Chino Valley had to offer while
exploring patterns of interaction and integration within a larger regional social network.
Stewart, Caitlin [142] see Stewart, Caitlin
Stewart, Carlyn (University of New Mexico) and Alison Livesay (Los Alamos National Laboratory)
[184]
Why Public Archaeology Is Important: Artifacts, Ancestors, and Apricots (and Still No Dinosaurs)
Public and community archaeology can take many different forms and can involve a multitude of people and methodologies. In this
poster I offer three case studies located in Northern New Mexico that investigate how Public Archaeology not only answers the
question, “is archaeology useful?” but demonstrates that it must be. From the depths of a room at Giusewa Pueblo in Northern New
Mexico, to the remnants of a homestead up on the Pajarito Plateau, and down to a railroad embankment along the Rio Grande,
involving the public and descendant communities in archaeology leads to an archaeology more relevant to, and representative of, a
wider assortment of people. This poster demonstrates three examples of how research can be enriched through community
involvement while highlighting the mutual benefits of meaningful collaboration
Stewart, Carolyn (NextEra Energy)
[44]
Discussant
Stinchcomb, Gary [8] see Ferraro, Joseph
Stine, Linda (University of North Carolina Greensboro)
[259]
Hidden Lives
Archaeological Investigations in the backyard of Bloodwood Mansion State Historic Site uncovered an older brick wall that did not
align with any recorded structures. This locus was rich in ceramic, bone, and other artifacts and it was interpreted as a possible
cabin feature. The U.S. 1850 Slave Schedules listed 37 men, women, and children in residence and two cabins were recorded as
slave housing on Hannah and John Motley Morehead’s property. Fortunately, Greensboro, North Carolina’s Register of Deeds had
partially transcribed and digitize old county property deeds. These data provided information about historic Morehead household
occupants, both enslaved and free. Examination of the other Picturesque town estates encircling the small city core, using maps,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    538
photographs, and the digitized property deeds, indicated an expanded pattern of urban slavery in the city. The databases such as
People Not Property or the Digital Library on American Slavery now available for archaeologists, historians, and genealogists has
grown since this 2008–2010 reseach. As a result, city residents are admitting that Greensboro once housed numerous enslaved
African Americans. For archaeologists, the next research step is to continue to map and test the likely location of past estates,
including evidence for cabins, outbuildings, and activity areas.
[259]
Chair
Stinson, Susan [1] see Herr, Sarah
Stock, Janet [16] see Perez, Gary
Stock, Jay [38] see Hanson, Annalys
Stocker, Terry
[2]
The Diamond Dotted Grid among Toltec Figurines
The initial impetus in this paper is figurines from Tula, Hidalgo, Mexico, where the “diamond dotted grid” is associated with the
goddess Xochiquetzal, a patroness of weavers. Among the Tula examples, some figurines have enhanced motifs with two-lined
diamonds and more than one dot inside the diamonds. Indeed, some skirts are entirely embellished with one large diamond and
many dots inside and outside the diamond’s lines. However, Tula’s Xochiquetzal figurines have other body type decorations, maybe
indicating a workshop signature. It is also suggested that during Early Postclassic times, the “diamond dotted grid” is an ethnic
identifier of Otomi speakers/culture. The design association with this goddess continues into the Late Postclassic. Certain examples
of Xochiquetzal figurines hold very small children, conveying another of her spiritual/occupational domains: childbirth. Finally, the
link between design and deity is supported by a survey of codices where Xochiquetzal sometimes wears the “diamond dotted grid”
as decoration on clothing. Because Xochiquetzal is a deity of flowers and fertility, it is suggested that the “diamond dotted grid”
might be a semiotic sign of fertility.
Stöckli, Matthias (Universidad del Valle de Guatemala)
[266]
Some More Thoughts on the Study of Prehispanic Soundmakers
The study of prehispanic musical instruments or soundmakers stored in museum collections was certainly foundational to the history
of music archaeology. Due to the fact that they were most often decontextualized, those studies used to concentrate on one of two
aspects of many of these artifacts, namely, their iconography or their acoustics, more rarely also on both. The holistic interpretation
of this double nature continues to be a major concern of organological studies within music archaeology. That such an interpretation
of their representational and sonic aspects would call for a thorough spatial, social and cultural contextualization of these artifacts is
a claim easy to make, but often difficult to implement on the basis of the archaeological evidence. Another topic of this paper is the
tendency in recent music archaeology to prefer the supposedly more neutral term “soundmakers” over “musical instruments” when
talking about those artifacts. The underlying concepts of these two terms are also worth to be discussed in some length.
Stokes, Robert (Eastern New Mexico University) and Joseph McConnell (Eastern New Mexico University)
[136]
A Mimbres Mogollon Sacred Landscape as Seen from an Early Classic Period Communal Structure at City of Rocks State Park,
Southwestern New Mexico
In this paper, we discuss elements of what we argue were components of a sacred landscape imbued with meaning as seen from a
Mimbres Mogollon communal structure at City of Rocks State Park in southwestern New Mexico. The structure dates to the early
Classic period and falls into the poorly understood period of time marking the evolution of Mimbres communal spaces from the
burning of Late Pithouse period great kivas (AD 950) to the use of oversized surface rooms and plazas at pueblos after AD 1000.
We explore why this rare isolated communal structure is where it is and what its role may have been with regard to the adoption of
elements of Mesoamerican mythology during the early Classic period. The dramatic near and far landscape elements that encircle
the site create a unique viewshed that we argue has clear connections to elements of Mesoamerican mythology and iconography,
such as Mimbres-style depictions of the feathered/horned serpent and naturally occurring fertility/regeneration imagery. We suggest
that this early adoption and syncretization of elements of Mesoamerican mythology set the stage for the subsequent Mimbres use of
the Hero Twins mythology previously discussed by others (e.g., Patricia Gilman and Marc Thompson).
Stokes, Robert (Eastern New Mexico University)
[156]
Chair
Stoll, Anne
[60]
San Rock Art at Diana’s Vow, Zimbabwe: Appreciation, Appropriation, and New Information
Diana’s Vow is a small but celebrated San Bushman rock art site located near Rusape, Manicaland province, Zimbabwe. Known to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       539
European colonists since the early twentieth century, the remarkable figures painted at Diana’s Vow caught the imagination of the
wider public after the main figures were copied and published in 1931 in Madsimu Dsangara by Leo Frobenius. International exhibits
that followed spawned a succession of copies, take-offs and fanciful interpretations, culminating in a cameo appearance in Erich von
Daniken’s 1968 book Chariots of the Gods. In June 2019, after an intense four-day “dig” among the archaeological collections and
archives of the National Museum in Harare, Zimbabwe, several discoveries concerning Diana’s Vow came to light particularly
relevant to Cooke’s 1976 excavation at the site. Connecting the archaeological data with the more abundant, but somewhat more
whimsical, published material has proved daunting but rewarding. Results point to a more rational assessment of painted sites in the
Rusape area, many of which may contain evidence of interaction with or subsequent use by non-Bushman occupiers, as does
Diana’s Vow.
Stone, Abigail (Illinois State University)
[216]
Who Made Mali’s Terra Cotta Statuettes? Speculations on Their Creation and Use
Mali’s Inland Niger Delta is well-known for its archaeological urban centers, like Jenné-jeno and Dia, and for the terra cotta
statuettes produced by their inhabitants. Despite decades of excavations at archaeological sites in the region, very few statuettes
have been recovered from secure archaeological contexts. The vast majority of these pieces come from looted sites and are thus
divorced from their associated objects and archaeological contexts. This paper reports on a terra cotta statuette recovered during
excavations in 2011 at a site called Thièl, located roughly 7 km northwest of Jenné-jeno. The Thièl statuette depicts a woman
covered in incised affliction marks giving birth to five snakes. In discussing this statue, I revisit Barbara Frank’s 2002 paper to ask
again “Who made the Jenné Terra-Cottas” and why? Given the dearth of concrete data, can we speculate on the importance and
social role of these figurines? This paper links this rare statuette to the existing art historical discourse on inland delta terra cotta
statuettes and uses its archaeological context and ethnographic insights to tie it to the people who made, used, and interred it.
[216]
Chair
Stone, Jane [52] see Nelson, Shaun
Stone, Jessica (University of Oregon), Caroline Kisielinski (University of Kansas), Justin Tackney (University of Kansas),
Scott Fitzpatrick (University of Oregon) and Dennis O’Rourke (University of Kansas)
[100]
Tracking Human Dispersals to Palau Using Ancient DNA: Results from the Chelechol ra Orrak Site
Initial settlement of Remote Oceania represents the world’s last major wave of human dispersal. While transdisciplinary models
involving linguistic, archaeological, and biological data have been utilized in the Pacific to develop basic chronologies and
trajectories of initial settlement, a number of elusive gaps remain in our understanding of the region’s colonization history. This is
especially true in Micronesia where a paucity of human skeletal material dating to the earliest periods of settlement have hindered
biological contributions to colonization models. The Chelechol ra Orrak site in Palau, contains the oldest known human remains in
Micronesia (3000–1800 cal BP), and therefore provides an excellent opportunity for direct study of initial population dispersals into
the region via ancient DNA (aDNA). Here, we present results from research involving the recovery of aDNA from individuals interred
at the site. Targeted sequencing of the mitochondrial control region has yielded evidence of haplotypes consistent with Island
Southeast Asian origins, while hybridization capture and sequencing of full mitochondrial genomes is further refining population
affinities. Together, current results demonstrate genetic distinctiveness between other ancient Pacific Island and modern Palauan
data, but still support archaeological and linguistic models suggestive of an Island Southeast Asian origin.
Stone, Jessica [135] see Hanna, Jonathan
Stone, Pamela (Hampshire College)
[131]
Skeletal Transcripts as Ancestral Voices, a Legacy of Interdisciplinary Work: Recognizing the Contributions of Dr. Debra L. Martin to
American Archaeology and Beyond
Using the skeleton as a transcript of past experiences is not new, but over the last forty years our ability to develop more nuanced
interpretations, and humanistic and scientific models has been impacted by the many exceptional contributions of Dr. Debra Martin.
She has guided our professional development and invested decades ensuring that we continue to move the discipline forward,
engage in four-field, multidisciplinary research, and to follow best practices while promoting ethical standards. My own work, which
considers larger systemic issues that impact and influence how bodies on the margins are understood, has, and continues to be
influenced by her support, mentorship, and friendship. I examine how anthropology has constructed the “normal” and the “deviant”
body. From the Native American Graves and Repatriation Act, to rethinking the reproductive body, to embodiment and structural
violence theory, to my current work on critical White feminism, I pursue research that reevaluates and disrupts “race” and gender
science. My intertwining of skeletal analyses within these larger discourses aims to understand the biocultural marginalization of
individuals in the past and present, and is emblematic of the way I was mentored to do anthropology; not just from a reductionist
lens, but through an intersectional prism.
[131]
Chair
Stone, Pamela [131] see Ralston, Claira
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 540
Stone, Sam [195] see Burns, Samuel
Stone, Tammy (University of Colorado Denver)
[156]
Changes in the Use of Communal Space in the Pine Lawn/Reserve Branch of the Mogollon
The diversity of communal spaces and places and their changes through time have been long studied in the southern branches of
the Mogollon. Previous studies touching on the communal structures in the mountain branches of the Mogollon (Dugan 2015;
Gilman and Stone 2013; Stone 2002) indicate they vary considerably from those to the south but the exact nature of this variation is
not well understood. This paper concentrates on changes in the use of communal space (great kivas and plazas) in the Pine
Lawn/Reserve area of central New Mexico and how it changes through time to better understand this variability. Specifically, great
kivas continue to be used during the masonry period, and plazas become more defined by architectural enclosures. Concentration
will be placed on the location of the communal space within the community through time as well as changes in size and internal
features.
Stoner, Wesley (University of Arkansas)
[196]
Discussant
Stoner, Wesley (University of Arkansas)
[237]
Costly Signaling and the Transmission of Formative Pottery Styles in Mesoamerica
I explore Hector Neff’s ideas about costly signaling to investigate the spread of Olmec-style pottery with emphasis on Central
Mexico, where Deborah Nichols and I have analyzed a large sample of Formative pottery via neutron activation and petrography.
During the Ayotla phase (1400–1150 cal BC) potters in the Basin of Mexico replicated Olmec vessel styles that were developed in
the Southern Gulf Lowlands. Import of a small percentage of vessels from the Gulf Lowlands, and other locations, provided a
template for the horizontal transmission of the style. Potters in the Basin of Mexico quickly copied the style which threatened the
signaling status of trade pots and the heavy costs of procuring foreign over long distances was no longer justified. Olmec-style
pottery import quickly ceased during the Ayotla phase, with some exceptions. By the Manantial phase (1150–900 cal BC), Basin of
Mexico potters experimented with earlier Ayotla phase techniques and combined double-line-break motifs with a white slipping
technique to create a new pottery style that came to dominate Mesoamerica during the early Middle Formative. I argue that a similar
process of costly signaling drove the initial adoption and subsequent copying of this new style in regions outside Central Mexico.
Stoner, Wesley [168] see Marino, Marc
Storey, Rebecca (University of Houston)
[152]
Discussant
Storey, Rebecca (University of Houston)
[181]
Discussant
Straight, Kirk
[126]
Once Upon a Time in the West: Pottery Consumption at Palenque, a Compositional Perspective
The ceramic sequence for the Lowland Maya center of Palenque, in modern-day Chiapas, Mexico, is reviewed. Compositional
analyses, including Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA), reveal pottery consumption patterns through time. The
presentation focus is the Carbondale Collection, assembled by the late Dr. Robert L. Rands and curated by Dr. Ronald L. Bishop
(Smithsonian Institution). Pottery specimens were initially retrieved from excavations into the major architectural complexes at
Palenque during the heyday of exploration at the site—through the 1950s and early 1960s—complimented by samples from regional
centers in the settlement hierarchy. The sample size, geographic coverage, and battery of compositional analyses facilitate
discussion of intraregional pottery procurement patterns from the perspective of a first-order center.
Strait, Madeleine (Field Museum)
[218]
Discussant
Strasser, Thomas (Providence College)
[175]
The Asphendou Cave Petroglyphs: Paleolithic Art on Crete
The petroglyphs at Asphendou Cave (southwest Crete) were first published in the early 1970s. Determining the absolute chronology
of the engravings has proven problematic. Scholars have posited Paleolithic to Iron Age dates. Recently a team has documented
the engravings using up-to-date scientific methods of photography, and to reevaluated the likely date of the engravings. Using
photogrammetry, the project produced a detailed 3D model of the flowstone where the engravings are carved. Photogrammetry
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    541
reveals four carving events, with different tools for various levels. The engravings are similar to a palimpsest in stone. Analysis of 3D
models shows that the herd of quadrupeds are the oldest element. Comparison of the iconography to recently discovered fossil data
demonstrate that the quadrupeds represent a dwarf endemic deer (Candiacervus ropalophorus) that went extinct at the end of the
Upper Palaeolithic. These animals therefore represent the earliest figural art yet discovered in Greece as well as provide the first
evidence that places the humans and the extinct deer together.
Stratford, Dominic [11] see Val, Aurore
Strauss, André [244] see Ferraz da Silva, Tiago
Strauss, Stephanie (Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection)
[191]
Epi-Olmec Narrative Art: Sculpture and Script at a Crossroads
In the study of Mesoamerican art and epigraphy, Epi-Olmec narrative sculpture stands at both a geographic and temporal
crossroads. Situated between more widely studied visual culture programs to the west and east, and concentrated in the Late to
Terminal Formative eras, Epi-Olmec sculpture serves as a unique case study for Mesoamerican narrative art. This paper outlines
the guiding visual precepts and compositional principles that unify Epi-Olmec sculptural narratives and addresses both pictorial
monuments and those that incorporate hieroglyphic annotation. Widening the lens to include the sculptural corpus from Cerro de las
Mesas, furthermore, highlights the perhaps surprising longevity of this visual culture program and indicates that Epi-Olmec narrative
art may have been more influential than once imagined.
Strawhacker, Colleen [125] see Fertelmes, Craig
Strawn, James [180] see Miller, D. Shane
Strickland, Scott (St. Mary’s College of Maryland)
[251]
Indigenous Viewsheds in the Chesapeake
Broad analysis of settlement patterns often use proximity to environmental resources as the primary means of explaining the spatial
relationships among known archaeological sites. What is often overlooked is the role of the human experience within that
landscape, including the visual experience. By taking advantage of and engineering certain vantage points, Native people may have
enhanced the physical presence of certain sites for cultural/social reasons as well as for possible communication and defense.
Using examples in the Potomac, Rappahannock, and York River valleys, viewsheds are examined as an additional research avenue
for centers of cultural importance. This analysis is made possible by employing publicly available lidar data and terrain models using
GIS and 3D modeling software.
Striker, Sarah [98] see Hegmon, Michelle
Stroebel, Kelsi [38] see Fahey, Brian
Stroth, Luke (University of California, San Diego), Mario Borrero (University of California, San Diego) and Geoffrey
Braswell (University of California, San Diego)
[197]
Late and Terminal Classic Lapses in Architectural Standards and Practices at Nim li Punit (AD 150–830), a Maya Site in Southern
Belize
There was great variation in ancient Maya architecture, from Preclassic megalithic architecture to the gaudy Puuc Mosaic of the
Terminal Classic northern lowlands. The southern Belize region is host to a unique Classic period architectural tradition
characterized by masonry tombs, ball courts enclosed within walled structures, covering natural hills in a façade of stones to create
the appearance of grand temples, and the superstructure of most buildings made of perishable materials. Nim li Punit (AD 150 to
830/850) exhibits these features, but recent excavations by the Toledo Regional Interaction Project have yielded examples of an
apparent lapse in architectural standards during the Late and Terminal classic periods. These include closing plazas from public
view, the construction of redundant, improvised buttress walls, the deliberate deconstruction of structures, and looting of tombs and
caches. These instances occurred throughout the site, although some occurred after the end of elite occupation of the site. In this
paper, we make comparisons to other examples of architectural modifications, such as Postclassic shantytowns in Calakmul,
cannibalized defensive structures in the Petexbatun, and evidence of earthquakes at the nearby site of Lubaantun, to try and explain
changes in architectural standards and practices at Nim li Punit.
Stroth, Luke [130] see Borrero, Mario
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  542
Stuart, David (University of Texas, Austin), Tomás Barrientos Q. (Universidad del Valle de Guatemala) and Marcello Canuto
(Tulane University)
[223]
The Kaanul Dynasty and the Early History of the Northwest Petén
Over the past two decades it has become increasingly clear that the ancient Maya political landscape was permeated by regional
systems of political asymmetry. These hegemonic networks fluctuated through time, but the steady presence of a few especially
dominant polities shows that they were a persistent feature with very real socio-political effects. Based on research carried out at the
sites of Achiotal and La Corona, we offer a general interpretation of the historical and socio-political development of one of these
regional polities allied with the powerful Kaanul dynasty. We suggest that archaeological and epigraphic data from the northwestern
Petén dating to before 600 CE demonstrates this region’s strategic role in Kaanul’s early expansion and influence, when its court
was based at Dzibanché. The evidence illuminates how its regional hegemony over much of the southern Maya Lowlands was
achieved.
Stuart, David [138] see Hurst, Heather
Stubing, Michael [79] see Ryden, Ronald
Stueber, Daniel (University of Victoria) and Richard Rosencrance (University of Oregon)
[236]
An Updated View from Redfish Overhang: Western Stemmed Technology and Chronology in Custer, County Idaho.
B. Robert Butler, Kathryn Sargeant, and a crew from Idaho State University excavated Redfish Overhang, a small rockshelter in
central Idaho, in 1971. They recovered a Western Stemmed Tradition (WST) biface cache and recorded an associated hearth
feature that dated to between 12,500 and 10,500 cal BP. Using 2D qualitative comparisons with projectile points from the
Intermountain West, Sargeant and Butler posited the cache was most similar to the Haskett type. We engaged in a reassessment of
Redfish Overhang for three reasons: (1) Sargeant provides vague descriptions of the spatial relationship of the hearth and the
cache; (2) the radiocarbon dates were obtained on composite charcoal samples using conventional radiocarbon dating methods;
and (3) knowledge of Haskett reduction technology has grown considerably since Sargeant’s investigation. Our analysis indicates
that there is indeed a close relationship of the hearth and cache and that they more precisely date to ~11,320–11,235 cal BP.
Technologically, the reduction techniques present in the early and late stage bifaces, as well as the finished point are not consistent
with “classic” Haskett technology from neighboring regions.
Sturtz, Sara, Geoffrey Smith (University of Nevada, Reno), Nicole George (University of Nevada, Reno), Derek Reaux
(University of Nevada, Reno) and Richard Rosencrance (University of Oregon)
[195]
Renewed Investigations at Leonard Rockshelter
Leonard Rockshelter is located in Pershing County, Nevada. Initially mined for bat guano, workers discovered artifacts in 1938,
prompting a visit by Robert Heizer. Heizer returned to excavate the site in 1950 and reported more than 2 m of stratified deposits
from which he recovered a modest assemblage of perishable and lithic artifacts. Of interest to the University of Nevada Reno’s
Great Basin Paleoindian Research Unit (GBPRU) was Heizer’s find of obsidian flakes in association with guano that returned a
radiocarbon date of 11,200 14C BP. This Clovis-era date prompted the GBPRU to return to the site in 2018 and 2019 to evaluate
Heizer’s claim of a potential Clovis-era occupation and gain a better understanding of the site’s stratigraphy. We discuss our 2018
and 2019 excavations with a focus on understanding the age of the deposits and Leonard Rockshelter’s importance in the western
Great Basin.
Su, Kai (Washington University, St. Louis)
[34]
A Chronology for Moat Construction and Sedimentation at Chengziya, a Late Neolithic Urban Settlement in Eastern China
As the site that defines the Longshan Cultural Phase in China, Chengziya has produced few absolute dates over decades of
research. The excavation of moat structures in the northwestern corner of the site in 2017 provided a new opportunity to collect
materials for dating from secure archaeological contexts. Thirteen radiocarbon dates and twenty-two OSL (optical stimulated
luminescence) dates were obtained from a stratigraphic sequence and evaluated within a Bayesian interpretive framework to assess
the timing and temporality of occupation at the site, from the Longshan through Zhou periods. Two models consistently show that
the Longshan occupation at Chengziya started in 2510–2415 cal BC (68.2%) and ended in 2245–2085 cal BC (68.2%). The Yueshi
occupation started in 2155–2030 cal BC (68.2%), supporting the argument for continuous occupation from the Longshan to Yueshi
period at Chengziya. The early transitional period between the Longshan and Yueshi contradicts the understanding of local
archaeologists, which can be explained in terms of new way of thinking archaeological cultures in this region, dating materials and
new findings at the site.
Suárez, Rafael (Universidad de la República, Uruguay)
[73]
Bruce Bradley: His Important Legacy and Contribution to Advance in Paleoamerican Lithic Technology in Uruguay
When I was still a grade student, I read Bruce Bradley’s works with great enthusiasm, his work on lithic technology, projectile points
and specialized bifaces, left a strong influence on my academic background. Later I met Bruce, with whom we shared several
adventures, I learned a lot during the time we collaborated and he left us an invaluable legacy for archeology in Uruguay. We shared
the discovery and excavation in rockshelters and caves, the recognition of outcrops of raw materials, as well as the analysis of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  543
materials in museums and laboratories, conferences, postgraduate courses and replication of the “Fishtail and” Tigre “ technology.
Bruce has always been an extremely generous person who shares his knowledge and teaches, from the academic but also from the
human point of view. During many of our adventures in Uruguay we have gone through adverse conditions, however Bruce never
complained. Regarding lithic technology and experimental archeology, his teachings always have something special. Bruce has left
a strong mark on archeology in Uruguay, here I present some of the advances he has developed in relation to lithic technology and
experimental archeology
Sugiura, Yoko (Instituto de Investigaciones Antropologicas, UNAM) and Gustavo Jaimes Vences
[133]
Vida cotidiana y relaciones interregionales en Santa Cruz Atizapan, México Central: Del Clásico al Epiclásico
La cotidianidad nunca puede concebirse como prácticas autocontenidas. A partir de la suposición de que la autarquía no existe aún
en el nivel más elemental de los quehaceres diarios y de que la relación con otras regiones constituye una parte fundamental en la
conducción de la vida cotidiana, se considera pertinente profundizar en la problemática en torno a las interacciones intra e
interregionales. Esta ponencia se enfoca en las redes de intercambio de larga distancia que se establecen, en el Clásico Tardío al
Epiclásico, con diversas regiones del Altiplano Central. Se centra en la región del valle de Toluca y como un estudio casuístico, se
refiere al sitio arqueológico de Santa Cruz Atizapan, Estado de México. Los productos obtenidos a través de dichos mecanismos
tuvieron un papel preponderante en el contexto de la vida cotidiana como los artefactos líticos y cerámicos, así como los
ingredientes necesarios para la práctica culinaria como la sal. La importancia y el significado de dichos materiales en la vida
cotidiana se abordan mediante los resultados de los análisis macroscópicos, así como los de diversas técnicas arqueométricas.
Sugiyama, Nawa [244] see Singleton, Robin
Sullivan, Alan (University of Cincinnati)
[117]
Discussant
Sullivan, Alan (University of Cincinnati)
[255]
Discussant
Sullivan, Julia [234] see Becker, Hilary
Sullivan, Kelsey (University of California, Riverside), Kenichiro Tsukamoto (University of California, Riverside) and Jaime
Awe (Northern Arizona University)
[232]
Specialization in the Hinterland: Lithic Production and the Urban Landscape at the Took’ Witz Group, El Palmar, Campeche,
Mexico, and across the Maya Lowlands
Dispersed urban landscapes are mosaics of individual interactions through many social and economic processes. Large scale lithic
production provides a lens for understanding the interconnected nature of economies in hinterland communities and central polities,
yet it remains relatively understudied in Classic period Maya society (AD 250–850). Growing evidence, however, suggests that
patterns exist in ancient Maya lithic production, which is useful in understanding the cultural practices related to this important
economic activity. In this paper, we will explore a hinterland community, Took’ Witz, located in the periphery of El Palmar, a large
Classic Maya site in southeastern Campeche. The site has evidence of several large-scale biface production areas. We will discuss
the results of recent excavations of a lithic workshop at the site and the subsequent debitage analysis, as well as the relationship
between independent producers and polity-wide complex economic systems. These data will be juxtaposed to other known lithic
production communities in the Maya lowlands, with a particular focus on central Belize, to advance the understanding of ancient
Maya economies related to stone tools.
Sullivan, Lauren [168] see Awe, Jaime
Sullivan, Lauren [53] see Stanyard, Zachary
Sullivan, Timothy [168] see López Bravo, Roberto
Summers-Wilson, Rachel (University of Montana), Meradeth Snow (University of Montana) and Michael Searcy (Brigham
Young University)
[169]
Mitogenome Analysis of the Elite Individuals Interred in the House of the Dead Complex at Paquimé (Casas Grandes), Mexico
This research project investigates the elite population interred in The House of the Dead at the archaeological site known as
Paquimé (Casas Grandes), Mexico during the Medio Period (1200–1450 AD). The subfloor tomb contains the remains of at least 12
individuals, as well as possibly two high ranking individuals. The nature of some of the burials suggests they may be sacrifices of
non-locals. Population genetics can be applied to archaeological data in order to test hypotheses on the social complexity of any
society (Gamble et al. 2001). The combination of mortuary treatment, archaeological and whole mitogenome analyses of this rich
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  544
and elaborate burial not only provides a means of looking at the maternal relationship that exist between the different interments, but
it will also give us a better understanding of various elements of past social organizations, and may mark inequality including
prestige, rank and power, and how this was expressed in Mesoamerican and Southwestern elites.
Sun, Nan (University of Houston), Alan Brandon (University of Houston), Steven Forman (Baylor University), Michael
Waters (Texas A&M University) and Thomas Stafford (Stafford Research Laboratories)
[19]
A Volcanic Origin for Younger Dryas Geochemical 1 Anomalies ca. 12,900 cal BP
The Younger Dryas (YD) cooling event at 12.9±0.1 ka is proposed to have resulted from a bollide impact or airburst. Purported
impact markers peak at/near the YD basal boundary layer. However, there is a lack of marker reproducibility and chronological
control for many YD sites. Here, we report 187Os/188Os ratios and highly siderophile element abundances in a well-dated sediment
section at Hall’s Cave, Texas. Unradiogenic 187Os/188Os was obtained in five horizons spanning across the section. Previously
surface films on spherules from the Younger Dryas site in Melrose, Pennsylvania have low 187Os/188Os ratios of ~0.113. Two-
endmember mixing between the spherule surface films and Hall’s Cave sediments successfully reproduce the Hall’s Cave
unradiogenic 187Os/188Os ratios, indicating Melrose and Hall’s Cave were modified by the same event(s). Mixing between
chondrites or iron meteorites with upper continental crust do not duplicate the HSE abundances of the Hall’s Cave unradiogenic Os
samples. Instead, volcano gas condensates have HSE abundance patterns and ratios that overlap with these Hall’s Cave samples.
Therefore, the most likely explanation for the HSE and Os isotope systematics of the unradiogenic Os samples is episodic, distant
volcanic emissions in the Northern Hemisphere being preserved in Hall’s Cave sediments.
Sun, Yufeng (Washington University, St. Louis), Xinyi Liu (Washington University, St. Louis), Rachel Reid (Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State Universit), Zhijun Zhao (Institute of Archaeology, China Academy of Social) and Jixiang
Song (Sichuan University)
[35]
Plant Stable Isotopic Analysis Reveals the Water Management Strategies of Wheat and Barley Cultivation in the Bronze Age China
There has been a growing interest in the process of the eastern expansion of the ‘Neolithic founder crops’ from southwest Asia to
China. By c. 1,500 cal BC, the geographical distribution of free-threshing wheat and naked barley, stretched from the Atlantic to the
Pacific. In this paper we consider the environment challenge for the cultivation of southwestern Asian originating cereals in the
monsoonal East Asia. Carbon isotopic ratios obtained from macro-botanical remains provide us with insights to understand water
management strategies in the past, as δ13C values measured from charred grain can be employed as a direct proxy to learn the
water status when the grain was forming. In this study, 50 wheat and 22 barley grains recovered from archaeological sites across
China were analyzed. Our results indicate that wheat and barley cultivated in western China during the Bronze Age were well
watered. In eastern China, however, while wheat fields were well watered, barley was grown in stressed water conditions.
Sundstrom, Linea (Day Star Research)
[103]
Lame Bull Speaks: The Lukin Ledger and Pikuni Blackfoot History
A Pikuni Blackfoot notebook created sometime between 1904 and 1911 and linked to the descendants of Lame Bull contains a
winter count, a record of two treaty conferences, and a list of the leaders of various nations comprising the Blackfoot Alliance,
recorded as pictographs. An unknown person, perhaps Peter Lukin, has annotated some of the pictographs in English. The record
provides a Blackfoot perspective on contact-era history. In addition, the specifics of the pictographic system provide a key to
interpreting some northern Great Plains rock art.
Sunell, Scott (Statistical Research Inc.)
[247]
Spatial and Temporal Trends in Medicine Use among Immigrant Communities in Historic Downtown Redlands, California
Located in the historic center of Redlands, California, the Downtown Redlands Archaeological Project investigated the use and
deposition of household goods among Chinese and Mexican immigrant communities from the 1880s through the middle of the
twentieth century. The rich assemblage from this project includes a large quantity of complete medicine bottles and diagnostic glass
shards spanning the period of occupation. We present an analysis of the types of medicines in use in both communities in the
context of ethnographic and historic data about socioeconomic status and ethnic identity. We identify changes in this assemblage
over time, tracking the use of both patent medicines and the products of professional pharmacies during a period of rapid
professionalization in the pharmaceutical industry. We also identify differences in the distribution of medicines across the project
area, because the diversity and the richness of the medicine bottle assemblage varies substantially between Chinese and Mexican
households. We evaluate both types of variation in the use of medical products. We address this topic within and across these
communities through time, and connect it to the effectiveness of the medicines themselves, linked to their cost and availability, as
well as to household preferences and ethnic identity.
Sunell, Scott [247] see Grenda, Robert
Supernant, Kisha (University of Alberta, Department of Anthropology) and William Wadsworth (wwadswor@ualberta.ca)
[202]
Sensing Layered Histories: Applications of Multiple Remote Sensing Techniques to Métis Archaeology in Canada
Remote sensing is increasingly in demand by Indigenous communities to help detect and preserve the material remains of the past
with non-destructive methods. Applications of remote sensing in the post-contact period, however, have typically been surveys
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    545
designed for the prospection of large colonial structures with less focus on more ephemeral and short-term occupation Indigenous
sites. The Métis, an Indigenous nation, emerged alongside the North American fur trade during the seventeenth century and
became a distinct people. During the nineteenth century, the Métis adopted a highly mobile lifestyle, centered around bison hunting,
where they would form temporary villages to overwinter on the northern plains. Our research used remote sensing methods,
specifically ground-penetrating radar (GPR), magnetic gradiometry, multi-spectral, thermal, and orthographic drone imagery to
survey the mid-nineteenth-century Métis wintering site of Chimney Coulee (DjOe-6), near Eastend, Saskatchewan, Canada. The
multi-component survey delineated wood wall remains and chimneys that were determined to be the ephemeral remains of Métis
cabins, with the features corroborated through archaeological excavations. Refining the methods of remote sensing can help protect
Indigenous histories and can contribute to modern groups sense of identity, homelands, and Indigenous rights.
[202]
Chair
Supernant, Kisha [1] see Hodgetts, Lisa
Surovell, Todd [270] see Herron, Molly
Surovell, Todd [82] see Holt, Evan
Surovell, Todd [180] see Mackie, Madeline
Surovell, Todd,[244] see Ricketts, Macy
Šušnjic, Dalibor [35] see Zavodny, Emily
Sutherland, Kenneth (Louisiana State University) and David Chicoine (Louisiana State University)
[182]
Early Horizon Plant and Animal Use in Ancient Peru: Insights from Soil Sample Analyses from Caylán (600–200 BCE), Nepeña
Valley
This paper discusses results of analysis of soil samples excavated during fieldwork at the Early Horizon settlement of Caylán (600–
200 BCE) in the Nepeña Valley, Peru during the 2010 field season. Over 18 L from 40 dry-sieved samples was recovered from over
460 m2 of excavated area at Caylán. The analysis details the ecofacts and artifacts which were recovered from four different
excavation areas at the settlement. These areas include both public and private contexts, both within enclosure-walled compounds
and in the avenues and passages between compounds. The distribution of these macrofloral and macrofaunal remains, including
variations in the presence or frequency of ecofacts at different contexts, provide insight into the foodways, material culture, and lived
experiences of those who originally deposited them as well as the social functions of the different areas. Previous research has
discussed shellfish resources, macrofloral ecofacts, and human fecal ecofacts recovered at the settlement. This research
complements the previous research by looking at new data obtained using a different method, and expands the discussion of the
social and political relevance of the macrofloral and macrofaunal remains discovered at Caylán.
[182]
Chair
Sutter, Richard (Purdue University, Fort Wayne), Gabriel Prieto (University of Florida), Jordi Rivera (University of Florida)
and Celeste Gagnon (Wagner College)
[174]
The Biological Relatedness between the Salinar (400 BC–AD 100) and Other Prehistoric Populations of the North Coast of Perú: A
First Approximation Using Nonmetric Dental Traits
Following the demise of the Early Horizon (800–400 BC) and Chavín influence in the Central Andes, archaeologists—historically—
have hypothesized that cultural changes on the north coast of Perú, such as the “White-on-Red” cultural traditions, as well as the
Salinar, were due to an influx of highland peoples. We test this hypothesis through biodistance comparisons of Salinar skeletal
populations from the Moche Valley to other populations from the region using genetically influenced tooth trait frequencies.
Preliminary results support the hypothesis that there was an influx of people into the region sometime leading up to the terminal
Early Horizon Salinar era (400–100 BC), who interbred with pre-existing Late Preceramic (2100–1800 BC) and Initial Period (1500–
800 BC) coastal peoples. The implications of these results attests to the possibility of more dynamic coastal populations than
previously thought, including the study of the impact of ancient highland migrations into ancient maritime communities along the
North Coast of Peru.
Sutton, Mark [258] see Burnell, Taylor
Sutton, Wendy (USDA Forest Service)
[92]
Moderator
[92]
Discussant
Suyuc, Edgar [163] see Hansen, Richard
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        546
Swanson, Steve [229] see Arp, Ryan
Swedlund, Alan (University of Massachusetts Amherst)
[131]
In Recognition of Prof. Debra Martin
I have been very fortunate to be a teacher, mentor, colleague, collaborator and friend of Dr. Martin for over30 years. Role reversals do
happen over such an extended period of time, so now I find myself also becoming a student of Dr. Martin’s, learning and re-learning
from her on the topics of Southwestern and Pueblo topics in bioarchaeology and the history of violence. In this paper I recount some of
our many connections over the long and continuing arc of her career, illustrate her importance to my own work and the intersections of
our research interests, and give praise to her many accomplishments and richly deserved recognition by this award.
Swenson, Edward (University of Toronto)
[32]
Discussant
Swenson, Edward (University of Toronto)
[210]
The Aesthetics of Violence and the Creation of Place and Political Subjects in the Ancient Americas
The inherent physicality of violence as actions that inhibit, harm, and destroy can explain the central role played by architecture in
political domination. Theorists tend to focus on how violence saturates everyday spaces as hegemonic instruments in social
reproduction or stress instead of how violence creates distinctive places removed from normative space-time. Farmer’s notion of
structural violence, Bourdieu’s theories on symbolic violence, or Rodger’s concept of “infrastructural violence” exemplify the first
perspective, while Agamben’s spaces of exception and Foucault’s writings on heterotopia explore how violence creates intense
states of difference. I explore how built environments perpetuated political inequality and ideologies of alterity in non-capitalist
societies. I focus on the aesthetics of violence that informed the design of religious architecture in the ancient Americas and explain
why “sanctuaries” often doubled as spectacular arenas of violence. I argue that religious ideologies that explicitly aesthetized
sacrificial forms of violence as a positive force in the reproduction of cosmos, life, and society spatialized a “politics of affect” that
conditioned the deep structural forms of violence more commonly studied by geographers. Although affording different experiences
than a concentration camp or anti-immigrant wall, religious architecture equally shaped political subjectivities and legitimized
structures of inequality in past societies.
Swogger, John (Archaeological Illustrator)
[100]
A Different Way to View the World: Comics, Outreach, and Cultural Heritage in the Islands of Yap and Palau, Micronesia
Comics can not only be an engaging and accessible medium for public outreach in archaeology, they can also help strengthen
connections between such outreach and other aspects of cultural heritage. Applied comics utilise specific kinds of visual storytelling
devices such as explicitly identified narrators, visual contextualization and a constructivist approach to information to communicate
archaeological data, process and interpretation. Using the same approaches to communicate other kinds of related stories about the
past can place archaeological outreach within a much wider conceptual milleau—one that embraces ecological, cultural, historical
and biographical storytelling about the past. This has significant implications within both the broad context of community-based
outreach in the Pacific, and specifically with reference to highly sensitive issues such as development, climate crisis and shifts in
regional geopolitics. Such an approach offers the opportunity to develop a different kind of public voice and visibility for archaeology,
while simultaneously promoting a more networked place for archaeology within community-based heritage working. This paper will
draw on recent comics projects in the Pacific dealing with archaeological excavation and research, traditional culture and
educational practices, government cultural heritage policy and ongoing post-WWII reconciliation.
Swope, Karen (Statistical Research Inc.)
[247]
Chair
Swope, Karen [247] see Grenda, Donn
Szpak, Paul (Trent University), Michael Westbury (University of Copenhagen), Øystein Wiig (University of Oslo), Arthur
Dyke (McGill University) and Eline Lorenzen (University of Copenhagen)
[64]
Holocene Environmental Changes Recorded in Bowhead Whale Bone Collagen Isotopic Compositions
This poster presents stable isotope measurements from the bone collagen of bowhead whales collected in the Canadian Arctic (NW
Atlantic) and Svalbard (NE Atlantic) dating from the Early Holocene to the present day. Both populations are characterized by
declining δ13C values throughout the Holocene, with stronger trends in the NW Atlantic. The δ15N values are stable in the NW
Atlantic, but markedly decline through the Holocene in the NE Atlantic. We discuss these changes with respect to changing
environmental conditions in the two regions.
Szpak, Paul [243] see Hyland, Corrie
Szpak, Paul [76] see Routledge, Jennifer
Szpak, Paul [64] see Scott, Michael
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   547
Szumilewicz, Amy (Southern Illinois University, Carbondale)
[242]
Middle Sicán Canvas, Cloth and Woven Textiles: The Media, Aesthetics, and Roles of Textile Painting in the Andes
The primacy of textile arts and their utility as a communicative device is well documented in ancient Andean contexts. To augment
this body of knowledge, this poster presents unpublished examples of three types of textiles associated with the Lambayeque region
of the north coast of Peru during the Middle Sicán period (900–1100 CE): painted cloth, woven patches, and mixed-media
“canvases.” It compares context, style and iconography of painted cloth and woven textiles housed at the Ethnographic Museum in
Berlin to cross-crafted textile funerary furnishings found in situ in elite tombs at the site of Sicán. The iconographic and thematic
subject matter of the former are remarkably variable, portraying anything from mundane scenes of everyday life to a wide repertoire
of representational flora and fauna. This contradicts the more typical characterization of Sicán as having repetitive, religiously-
centered art focused on a single, front-facing deity. Finally, the attribution of the Berlin collection, with original provenance in
Pachacamac, an important pilgrimage site 750–800km south of the Lambayeque valley, to Sicán offers important insight into the
breadth and extent of the Sicán religious-political sphere of influence.
Szumilewicz, Amy [105] see Shimada, Izumi
Szymanski, Ryan (Petrichor Research)
[234]
Population History and Economic Change through the Iron Age in Western Kenya: Paleoenvironmental and Archaeological
Evidence
The last several millennia of cultural history in the western Kenyan highlands have been marked both by punctuated periods of
considerable demographic and economic change, and by continuous in-situ processes of genetic, linguistic, and economic
interaction and admixture. Historical linguistic and archaeological models of the peopling of this region have, among other
contributions, offered a rough timeline for the “arrival” and incorporation of various food production and landscape management
practices into the economic repertoire of western highland populations. Archaeobotanical and mycological evidence is presented
here which, in concert with a review of existing archaeological and historical-linguistic knowledge, broadly supports previously
advanced narratives of the development of this region’s economic lifeways over the last ca. 1500 years. Greater reliance on mixed
farming/pastoralism and plant cultivation are argued to have characterized the period ca. 700 BP to the present, replacing earlier
strategies emphasizing tuber cultivation, herding of domestic stock, and hunting-gathering and/or exchange with foraging groups. A
centuries-long period of landscape change (ca. 500–900 BP), during which fire-based land management practices were increasingly
employed, is posited to be a key timeframe for the development of landscape management strategies enabling what became
traditional lifeways during the late Iron Age.
Tackney, Justin [244] see Potter, Bethany
Tackney, Justin [100] see Stone, Jessica
Taivalkoski, Ariel (University at Buffalo)
[270]
Puffin Heads and Albatross Limbs: An Examination of Avifaunal Usage from the Rat Islands, Alaska
Human groups have used birds in a variety of ways, from food, to raw material for tools, to clothing. In addition to their more
practical usages, birds often play a significant role in cosmologies and myths. However, due to poor preservation and excavation
bias bird remains have only recently begun to be studied in depth. The archaeological sites of the Aleutian Islands have very large
avian bone assemblages due to excellent taphonomic conditions which allows rigorous study from which we can study not only local
relationships with birds but also develop models for other times and places. Comparing the patterns of archaeological skeletal part
representation with oral histories and ethnographies reveals the interplay of the symbolic and ‘material’ aspects of the relationship
between birds and the residents of the Aleutian Islands. This presentation will examine a case study from KIS-050 and RAT-31 to
examine how skeletal part representation can vary greatly even within island groupings and can reveal cultural and environmental
changes. Specifically, the presence of puffin heads at KIS-050 versus the abundance of albatross head/parts at RAT-31 illustrates
how avian use varied between the islands due to cultural factors and site usage.
Takatsuchi, Ryohei
[248]
The Huastec Collection at the National Museum of Anthropology
Building and modeling natural resources for aesthetic or utilitarian value, Pre-Columbian artifacts encapsulate the Mesoamerican
past. However, the afterlife of these objects would have not been perceived to be in museums. Observing decontextualized material
and visual culture, the challenge is to re-create and rethink the object’s life and value. The National Museum of Anthropology
(Museo Nacional de Antropologia) in Mexico City houses one of the largest Pre-Columbian collections in Mexico and the world. As
diverse and grand the collection is, it is not well known beyond the museum itself. Documenting and registering the Huastec
collection, under the supervision of Dr. Rebecca Gonzalez-Lauck (Curator of the Gulf Coast), the provenience and provenance of
the material is slowly being determined. Cross referencing the inventory and registration numbers with the identity cards of the
individual pieces has uncovered the complexity of understanding an uncharted collection of artifacts. In the process of creating a
new home for the artifacts the museum is also taking the objects out of context. In this paper, I explicate and explore the process of
documenting and registering the artifacts for further study of the Huastec culture and the collection at the National Museum of
Anthropology.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       548
Tamberino, Anthony [147] see Liss, Brady
Taliaferro, Matthew [77] see Morgan, Robert
Tanasi, Davide (University of South Florida), Robert Brown (Australian National University), David Cardona (Heritage Malta)
and Benedict Lowe (University of North Alabama)
[104]
The Virtualization of the Archaeological Site and Museum of the Roman Domus of Rabat (Malta)
In 1881, the remains of a large peristyle house containing rooms adorned with very fine mosaic floors in a late Hellenistic style were
uncovered at Rabat in Malta. Further excavation carried out in 1920–1925 pointed out that such ‘Domus’, toward the mid-first
century CE, must have been occupied by a a high rank individual likely close to the court of emperor Claudius. In early summer
2019, a long term international collaborative interdisciplinary research project (Melite Civitas Romana Project) aimed at reassessing
the site of the Domus of Rabat started out with an overall remote sensing campaign in preparation for the excavation resuming in
2020. Part of that campaign was the Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) of the entire archaeological site of the Domus and digital
micro-photogrammetry (DP) to create high quality 3D models of the mosaic floors of rooms C, D, E and F. The 3D models obtained
will be used to update the existing technical documentation of the site and create a system of reference for the future investigation
but also for a systematic reappraisal of all built stratigraphic units, contributing to the reinterpretation of the function and chronology
of important sections of the villa.
[104]
Chair
Tanasi, Davide [104] see Bonacini, Elisa
Tang, Guitao [45] see Zhai, Shaodong
Tankersley, Kenneth (University of Cincinnati), Maria Saniel-Banrey (University of Cincinnati) and Stephen Meyers
(University of Cincinnati)
[63]
The Hopewell Comet Airburst Event
This paper provides the first direct positive evidence of a comet airburst event, which occurred during the Middle Woodland cultural
period. Using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) elemental analysis, scanning electron microscopy (SEM),
and energy dispersive analysis of X-rays (EDAX), we found positive Pt and Ir anomalies, micro-meteorites, micro-tektites, and
macro-meteorites in archaeological strata from across the northern Western Hemisphere, which date just prior to the CE 535–536
extreme weather event. These independent proxies suggest a time-correlative atmospheric deposition of meteoric debris. The
greatest concentration of Pt, Ir, and meteoric debris occur in the Ohio River valley and likely resulted from a high altitude (i.e., > 5
km) airburst. This airburst event would have had both a short-term and long-term impact on the Indigenous population of this region.
Additionally, the airburst debris-rich stratum provides a new chronostratigraphic marker for late Holocene archaeological strata with
limited chronometric control.
Tankersley, Kenneth [258] see Lentz, David L.
Tankersley, Kenneth [63] see Zedaker, Dylan
Tankosic, Zarko [199] see Psoma, Aikaterini
Tardio, Katie (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill)
[27]
Fauna, Food, and Factories: Zooarchaeology at Roman Tarraco, NE Spain
This paper presents my ongoing dissertation research on zooarchaeological assemblages from the ancient Roman city of Tarraco
and its outlying rural villas in northeastern Spain, from the third century BCE to the third century CE. Through a contextual analysis
of animal remains, I test models of continuity and change in the Iberian animal economy associated with the Roman conquest of
northern Spain. My research targets evidence for the reconstruction of systems of production, distribution, and consumption from
this important urban center to better assess how the urban animal economy functioned, as well as how all classes of society
responded to Roman influence. Specifically, I focus on evidence for husbandry methods, continuity or disruption of specialization in
production, processing, and provisioning, as well as shifts in food preferences. The analysis of archaeofaunal material from the
northeast of Iberia provides an ideal laboratory for examining the ways in which food procurement adapted to changing economic
and political environments as the region became increasingly connected with the wider Mediterranean world.
Tarleton, Matthew [197] see Powis, Terry
Tatem, Joy
[177]
Use-Wear Insight into the Chipped Stone Plant-Processing Tool Kit in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands
My current research is analyzing potential plant-processing chipped stone tools from several rockshelter and terrace sites in Eagle
Nest Canyon within the Lower Pecos Canyonlands of southwest Texas excavated by Texas State University from 2013–2017. The
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     549
chipped stone tool assemblages evidence heavy plant polish on both informal and formal tools. Archaeological evidence and
ethnographic accounts from the greater Southwest and Mexico show that sotol and agave lechuguilla were important plant
resources, processed in intensive earth oven facilities and used as a major fiber resource. However the Lower Pecos lacks a
formalized identification and analysis of the chipped stone tool assemblages associated with these plant-processing activities. Is
there a correlation between informal or formal tool type and tool function? Were tool types used for singular or multiple activities?
This poster will present a use-wear analysis of these plant-polished tools, analyzing wear patterns from experimental and
archaeological assemblages in order to provide insight into the prehistoric chipped stone plant-processing tool kit.
Taube, Karl [225] see Coltman, Jeremy
Taube, Karl [164] see Houston, Stephen
Taube, Karl [138] see Hurst, Heather
Taylor, Christine [53] see Walling, Stanley
Taylor, Corinne (East Carolina University), Megan Perry (East Carolina University) and Robert Tykot (University of South
Florida)
[80]
Reconstructing the Childhood Diet of an Eighteenth- to Nineteenth-Century North Carolina Land-Owning Family
Breastfeeding and weaning practices can impact a child’s immune system development and nutritional status and cause long-term
health effects. Here we explore the potential relationship between the weaning process and childhood frailty in a late eighteenth and
early nineteenth-century land-owning family in coastal North Carolina. The 10 individuals recovered from the Gause family cemetery
in 2017 and 2018 include six children under the age of eight. Incremental δ13C and δ15N of dentin collagen of 13 teeth along with 10
bone samples provide a record of dietary and trophic level shifts that occurred during the weaning and post-weaning periods. The
timing of weaning in addition to the composition of solid foods used to supplement breastmilk will be compared between subadult
and adult individuals to identify whether particular childhood diets or weaning practices link with childhood mortality. These data are
supplemented by macroscopic, radiographic, and histological evidence for metabolic deficiencies that may also impact childhood
morbidity and mortality. Overall, this evidence will identify the weaning practices and dietary supplementation of “elite” land-owning
families in the Lower Cape Fear region and their potential impact on population frailty.
Taylor, Ian and Alan Slade (University of Texas, Austin)
[198]
Early Paleoindian Fluted Points in London: Two Collections of North American Stone Tools Revisited in the British Museum
In reserve storage the British Museum holds two collections of North American stone tools. The Thomas C. Kelly collection of stone
implements in the Department of Britain Europe and Prehistory contains a number of Clovis fluted points from the south and mid-
west USA. The Department of Africa, Oceania, and the Americas holds a geographically and culturally wide-ranging collection of
pre-contact archaeology acquired for the most part during the nineteenth century. Within these collections a number of Paleoindian
artifacts, closely matching technological characteristics of Clovis points, were identified. This paper presents a brief history of the
collections, the background of acquisition and a detailed analysis of the Clovis points. The authors believe that the current study of
these collections outside North America is an important addition to the knowledge of Clovis fluted point occurrences, their
distribution, and also provides scholars outside the United States the opportunity to research the collection.
Taylor, Kelley [129] see Schwartz, Christopher
Taylor, William (University of Colorado, Boulder), Isaac Hart (University of Utah), Julia Clark (Flinders University/NOMAD
Science) and Jamsranjav Bayarsaikhan (National Museum of Mongolia)
[62]
Understanding Pastoral Prehistory and High Mountain Subsistence through Ice Patch Archaeology in the Mongolian Altai
In high latitude and high altitude environments around the globe, warming temperatures are melting previously permanent
concentrations of alpine ice—revealing organic artifacts and ecofacts that provide newfound insights into human use of mountain
regions. Although the Altai Mountains of western Mongolia appear to have played a key role in the transition from hunting to pastoral
societies, the challenging geomorphological and climate conditions have left very little archaeological record with which to
understand the region’s prehistory. Ice patch archaeological survey conducted in 2019 reveals a rich archaeological record of
human use of Altai mountain zones for both hunting and pastoral purposes—including household objects made of leather and horse
hair as well as hunting tools and projectiles, sometimes exceedingly well preserved. Archaeological and biomolecular study of these
objects reveals important choices in the selection of materials such as bone, antler, and sinew used for arrow construction, along
with insights into the hunting strategies used by mountain occupants across several millennia of Altai prehistory. Archaeological
results and interviews with area residents indicate that this rich archaeological record is urgently threatened by summer melting, with
drastic impacts likely for both contemporary pastoralism and for the region’s fragile archaeological record.
Taylor, William [119] see Bethke, Brandi
Tazza, Alejandra [260] see Muñoz, Lizette
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    550
Teeman, Diane [97] see Cowie, Sarah
Tegtmeyer, Caryn (Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency)
[131]
A Moment of Mentorship, an Impact that Lasts a Lifetime
Mentorship may last but a moment in the grand scheme of things, but the impact a mentor has on a student can last a lifetime. Dr.
Debra Martin has been a truly inspiring and committed mentor, both in terms of helping her students make their way through their
degree programs, but also as they make their way into the world of professional anthropology. During my time as her student we
collaborated on many research projects, including an examination of injury recidivism and homicide in Clark County, Nevada.
Without her mentorship, my fundamental understanding of social violence would be lacking and the connections necessary to
identify and understand patterns of violence within a community would not exist. I would not be able to see the patterns develop, or
to understand the social complexities behind why these patterns exist. The research I present here takes these collaborations and
applies them to my research on the bioarchaeological context of health, trauma, and injury recidivism at Canyons del Muerto and
Canyon de Chelly. Deb’s enthusiasm and love for anthropology is instilled in her students becoming a fundamental foundation to
seeking out research, collaborating, and sharing research with the community at large.
Tellez, Joe [16] see Perez, Gary
Tembe, Enio [250] see Muianga, Décio
Temese, Seiuli [252] see Klenck, Joel
Tennie, Claudio [162] see Blessing, Matthias
Terry, Richard (Brigham Young University) and Daniel Bair (University of Puerto Rico, Mayagüez)
[163]
Soil Chemical Analysis of the Floors of Walled Enclosures within the Mirador Basin
Geochemical analyses of soils and floors have proven useful in the interpretation of ancient human activities. Lidar images of the
Mirador basin have brought to light Preclassic walled enclosures in the Mirador basin. Soil chemical analysis in combination with
lidar and excavation data helped determine the ancient uses for the enclosures. Extractable phosphorus and metallic ions were very
low suggesting that the limestone bedrock floors were kept clean. The P and metals were elevated just inside the south and north
walls of each enclosure. This is evidence that animals used those areas that might have provided some shade. The most likely
animals to have been produced for ritual and food use were domestic dog.
Tessone, Augusto [61] see Reyes, Omar
Testolini, Veronica (University of Sheffield)
[196]
Decolonizing Islamic Archaeology in Sicily: Ceramic Innovation and Tradition in Palermo (Ninth–Eleventh Century AD)
Islamic archaeology in Sicily is deeply affected by culture history, with an antiquarian and colonial tradition focusing on the collection
and study of objects, curated and appreciated largely upon aesthetic grounds. A linear and simplistic interpretation of the mobility of
the new “Islamic” settlers in Sicily is generated, overlooking their interaction with the indigenous population and underestimating the
myriad ways in which everyday life changed or remained the same on the island. A prime example is the dominance of analytical
research into glazed pottery, seen as an “Islamic technology.” Work on total ceramic assemblages of outlying rural sites have
started to change this picture, but the city of Palermo, with its rich archaeological record, presents a greater challenge. As the capital
of Islamic Sicily, it is taken to more closely represent social and political power structures. This paper represents an attempt to move
away from simplistic cultural labels and maps of technological diffusion and demographic change, through the technological
reconstruction of a ceramic assemblage from the capital of the new Islamic state. It discusses how best to reconstruct the everyday
life of the colonizer and colonized, respecting the identity of the population and providing a range of archaeological insights.
Tew-Todd, Victoria (Baylor University), Connor Mayhack (Baylor University), Liliana Marin (Baylor University) and Steven
Forman (Baylor University)
[8]
Late Quaternary Eolian Stratigraphy and Chronology by Thermal Transfer Luminescence Dating of Quartz Grains for the Monahans
Eolian System
Monahans eolian system in west Texas is studied using 15 Geoprobe cores, >5 m long, which provides new stratigraphic records
spanning ~1 mya. Stratigraphic modeling of this basin indicates that eolian sediment infills a fluvial landscape of the ancestral Pecos
River. This area hosts Folsom sites within dune sequences, with occupation during wet periods when interdune lakes abound. The
oldest part of the record > 100 ka was dated using thermal-transfer optically-stimulated luminescence (TT-OSL) protocols, yielding
ages between 130 and 600 ka. The TT-OSL ages are compared with well-vetted single aliquot regeneration ages (SAR), which
overlaps with the lower limits of TT-OSL, ~150–75 ka. The chronometric signal is 1%–2% of the corresponding SAR emissions,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   551
yielding 1000s of photons; sufficient for dating. The TT-OSL emissions show sensitivity to solar resetting, with > 90% diminution of
signal in 48 hr. OSL ages indicate that eolian accretion was modest or associated with mild pedogenesis 25–12 ka. Eolian activity
occurred preferentially during interglacials, with pedogenesis and playa lake formation during glacials. Hydrologic excess persists in
SW Texas with the Laurentide Ice Sheet at or near its southern limit, with the southward shift of Jet Stream circulation, particularly
during Stage 6 and 8 glacials.
Thacker, Paul (Wake Forest University)
[36]
Cobbles that Complicate: Sourcing Studies and Secondary Lithic Raw Material Sources
Because of the relative ease of cobble extraction, prehistoric knappers in many regions of the world more extensively utilized
secondary gravel deposits of chert and fine-grained lithic raw materials than corresponding parent geologic formations. Existing raw
material sourcing research designs in archaeology, however, are poorly developed for integrating the significant variation in cobble
morphology, texture, and geochemistry from complex gravel bed contexts. This poster presents the diverse methods used to
systematically sample and characterize the famous Rio Maior-Azinheira Ridge chert source in central Portugal. Greater than
expected geochemical variation in RMAR cherts is dynamically related to diagenesis and weathering rather than original chert
formation chemistry, and a single Upper Jurassic formation origin is falsified. Two prehistoric case studies illustrate the dramatic
interpretive errors introduced by excluding this gravel raw material source from archaeological analysis. The RMAR project results
demonstrate that nearest-source availability is the critical geographic variable for reconstructing anthropologically-valid models of
prehistoric raw material economies.
Thacker, Paul [36] see Rubinatto Serrano, Juliana
Thaher, Ahmad [199] see Barket, Theresa
Thakar, Heather (Texas A&M University)
[237]
The Foraging to Farmer Transition: Generating Novel Testable Hypotheses
Around the world, localized differences in resource availability, environmental conditions, and technological capacities resulted in
different rates and trajectories of cultural change associated with the transition to agriculture. In the Soconusco region of southern
Mexico, Archaic-period foragers living continued to rely on resource-rich estuaries and wetlands, long after the initial introduction of
productive plant domesticates, and even after the settlement of the earliest known villages. Building on expectations derived from
evolutionary ecology, this paper generates a series of novel, testable hypotheses that interrogate the role of natural hazards, risk
perception, and ecological resilience in the transition to agriculture.
Thakar, Heather [237] see Daniels, James
Thies-Sauder, Meagan (Illinois State University)
[114]
Discussant
Thimmig, Rachel (Southern Methodist University) and Kacy Hollenback (Southern Methodist University)
[119]
Rising from the Ashes: Post-smallpox Epidemic Changes in Pottery Firing Regimes on the Northern Plains
In communities recovering from disaster, especially those with high mortality rates such as epidemics, it is not uncommon for
surviving craftspeople to modify certain dimensions of technological practice. These can include raw material selection, preparation,
manufacturing technique, or intended use, this is because workloads for survivors often dramatically increase. A not yet studied
attribute for pottery production is original firing temperature. Demand for fuel is driven by cooking, heating, and other needs, and
requires labor time to be collected by individuals. It is hypothesized that we will see a reduction in original firing temperature as
potters conserve wood for other purposes. To test this, we combined the techniques of step-wise clay oxidation analysis and
magnetic susceptibility to analyze sherds from the Awatixa Hidatsa sites of Lower Hidatsa (32ME10), Sakakawea (32ME11), Taylor
Bluff (32ME366), and Like-a-Fishhook (32ML2), in North Dakota. These sites pre and postdate the 1781–1782 and 1837–1838
smallpox epidemics, culminating in the last traditional earthlodge village on the plains.
Thomas, Jayne-Leigh (Indiana University), Rebecca Hawkins and Krystiana Krupa (Indiana University)
[49]
Giving False Voice: The Far-Reaching Impacts of Closeted Data and an Erroneous “Scientific” Narrative
Trust and transparency ideally should take precedent in NAGPRA matters between institutions and tribes. It is critical for institutions
and their staff to ensure that scientific information presented about NAGPRA collections both before and after reburial is accurate
and complete. This information is critical for tribes to have an understanding of science-based interpretations about their ancestors
and may even guide reburial practices. It is just as critical for archaeologists, bioanthropologists, and other researchers who
continue to rely on claims made about NAGPRA collections long after they are removed from further scholarly access. Both
institutions and their researchers must also be clear about the scope and substance of consultation, and not claim official NAGPRA
notifications and negotiations as scholarly collaboration with a tribe. This paper presents a recent NAGPRA repatriation project
involving a collaboration between the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma and Indiana University as a vehicle to explore the impacts of data
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 552
held hostage, faulty analyses, and lapsed ethics on one tribe’s reburial plans and protocols, on greater Indian history in the Ohio
Valley, and on further uses of an erroneous “scientific” narrative.
[49]
Chair
Thomas-Oates, Jane [229] see Gaffney, Isabella
Thompsett, Neil, Sean Keef (Undergraduate Student), Dayle Bingham (Undergraduate Student) and Matthew Des Lauriers
(Supervising Professor of Anthropology)
[66]
Paleo North American Consumption of Crustaceans: The Quantitative Measurement of Crustacean remains in Precontact Shell
Middens
We here present the results of an analysis of crustacean remains excavated from Terminal Pleistocene age shell middens in Isla
Cedros, Baja California, Mexico. While in its preliminary stages, this research consists of current analysis of the species discovered,
as well as potential species which may have been used as either a food source or an early form of fishing bait. Among the most
salient discoveries is what may be the oldest direct evidence for the human harvesting of lobsters in the Americas. This research not
only has implications for understanding the human ecology of the initial migrants to the New World, but for fisheries management in
the face of dramatic climate change and human interaction with unstable environmental systems.
Thompson, Amy (University of New Mexico), Luis Pacheco-Cobos (Universidad Veracruzana), Estrella Chévez (Posgrado
en Ciencias de la Sostenibilidad, Univers) and Keith Prufer (University of New Mexico)
[29]
Social Network Analysis and Neighborhoods among the Classic Period Maya of Uxbenká and Ix Kuku’il, Southern Belize
Studies of neighborhoods and districts are growing in popularity as they provide insight into the nuanced social relationships of the
past. Archaeological sites with robust settlement data are ideal for reconstructing ancient neighborhoods and understanding smaller,
intrasite community boundaries. Previously, geospatial analyses conducted on the settlement data from two Classic Period Maya
(250–800 CE) centers, Uxbenká and Ix Kuku’il, suggested the presence of neighborhoods and districts at both sites but resulted in
different settlement structures. The application of a Social Network Analysis (SNA) can evaluate the connections between
settlement groups using both material culture and spatial data, and therefore it can enhance our understanding of past communities
and neighborhoods. In addition to spatial data, we analyze historic and material culture data, including several artifact classes and
architectural characteristics, from 250 settlement groups to identify different social networks among the residents of Uxbenká and Ix
Kuku’il.
Thompson, Amy (University of New Mexico)
[155]
Moderator
Thompson, Amy [7] see Lemly, Marina
Thompson, Amy [26] see Ortman, Scott
Thompson, Ashleigh (University of Arizona)
[41]
Nishnaabewin, Storywork, and Ojibwe Theory: A Contribution to Ojibwe and Indigenous Archaeology
One aspect of archaeology that is not often discussed is theory and the theoretical frameworks archaeologists use to structure our
research. In particular, Indigenous archaeology has been critiqued for not yet having completely defined theory. Yet, for those of us
working in Indigenous archaeology, theory can be an important tool to “decolonize” our work. In engaging in research with my
community, the Red Lake Ojibwe, using Indigenous theory has been a useful and significant part of my research process. By
framing research questions, methods, and interpretations from an Ojibwe perspective, I was able to insert Ojibwe values,
epistemology, and ontology into the research process, creating a relevant body of work for my community. Specifically, by building
on work by other Anishinaabe scholars such as Sonya Atalay, Leanne Betasamosake Simpson, and Gerald Vizenor, as well as
through the incorporation of Ojibwe storywork, I developed Ojibwe theory that has been useful in my research while also contributing
to the growing body of Indigenous archaeological theory.
Thompson, Helen (University of Sheffield), Peter Day (University of Sheffield), Jaume Buxeda i Garrigós (Universitat de
Barcelona), Gabriel Cocco (Área Arqueología, Museo Etnográfico y Colonial “Ju) and Leticia Campagnolo (Área
Arqueología, Museo Etnográfico y Colonial “Ju)
[196]
Persistent Pottery Traditions: A Petrographic Study of Ceramics Found at Santa Fe la Vieja, Argentina (1573–1660)
Established by the Spanish on Indigenous land, Santa Fe la Vieja is located in the Rio de la Plata Basin, Argentina. Hosting a very
diverse population, it has a correspondingly varied assemblage of ceramic material culture. The pottery includes indigenous wares,
locally made colonial vessels, and foreign imports. These ceramics have been the subject of a detail macroscopic study followed by
thin-section petrography to determine provenance and the production technology of the different wares. The analysis illuminates the
material conditions of life in the colony, and the relationship between Indigenous and colonial groups at the site. The interconnection
between cultural groups is evaluated from a primarily technological perspective, investigating raw material choice and manipulation,
tempering traditions, forming methods and firing conditions. This relationship is further explored through provenance, with evidence
of several samples found at Santa Fe la Vieja originating from the city of Mendoza, indicating colonial trade networks. The results
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 553
obtained build a strong case for persistent Indigenous pottery traditions, despite dominant colonial control. Overall, the analyses
highlight a range of technological choices, trajectories of change, as well as aspects of subjugations and colonialism in the early
modern period of Argentina through the study of ceramic material culture.
Thompson, Helen [196] see Iñañez, Javier
Thompson, Ian
[43]
Discussant
Thompson, Jessica [38] see Radican, Kelsey
Thompson, Josie [163] see Ensley, Ross
Thompson, Kerry [184] see Ekdahl, Amanda
Thompson, Lauri (Center for Archaeological and Tropical Studies) and David Hyde (Western Colorado University)
[53]
Evidence for Ritual Use at Two Hinterland Shrines at the Medicinal Trail Community
Based on evidence from two Late-to-Terminal Classic ancestral shrines at the Medicinal Trail Hinterland Community in
Northwestern Belize, this paper discusses the social context of ritual use within non-urban households. Structure A-4 from Group A
and Structure B-1 from Group B have been identified as ancestral shrines. Both structures have numerous burials, are monumental
in size, and are located on the eastern side of their respective group. The ritual behavior exhibited at these structures include
obsidian blades for bloodletting and on the floor burning (Str. A-4). Rituals are embedded with meaning for those that perform and
participate in them, and have both social and economic effects within the community. This paper will explore the types of rituals
practiced at non-elite rural communities, and, using archaeological, ethnographic, and ethnohistoric data from the literature,
speculate as the function and purpose of hinterland rituals.
Thompson, Lauri [53] see Drake, Stacy
Thompson, Lauri [178] see Godhardt, Ava
Thompson, Lenore
[71]
Museums as Repositories of Knowledge: Using Museum Collections to Study Colonial Impacts through the Changing Indigenous
Use of Copper Metal in the Pacific Northwest
While museum assemblages must be examined with a critical eye acknowledging the colonial beginnings of many current
collections, comprehensive and multifaceted studies that consider large study-areas, time depth, and multiple artifact types, are
enabled and supported through conservation archaeologies. Additionally, museums can work to ensure ethical research practices
by facilitating collaborative connections between researchers and Indigenous communities. The research discussed here focuses on
the specific ways that Indigenous populations on the Northwest Coast used copper to create a range of artifacts, and the way in
which traditional practices changed through the colonial period spanning from the eighteenth to twentieth century. Prior to contact
Indigenous copper resources in the region were largely restricted to local sources such as drift and native metals. Examining the
ways in which the metal was chosen and worked, and the objects created once European trade metal was introduced into
Indigenous repertoires, allows for critical discussion around how Indigenous populations navigated this colonial period. This type of
research requires the close physical examination and non-destructive chemical characterization of multiple types of objects created
using copper, which is made possible through collaboration with museums around the world that have become repositories for
historic, ethnographic, and archaeological material.
Thompson, Mary E. [76] see Slane, Brittany
Thompson, Thomas
[193]
Discussant
Thompson, Thomas and Jennifer Rovanpera (Bureau of Land Management)
[236]
Preliminary Results of the Energy Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence (EDXRF) ORA LLC Laboratory Project #190522: A Comparative
Elemental Analysis of Volcanic Lithic Materials within the Tricorner Region of California and Nevada.
This presentation shall introduce the results of a preliminary geochemical analysis of unaltered, non-archaeological, bulk solid
samples of volcanic lithic material (i.e., obsidian) utilizing a ‘benchtop’ model Energy Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence (EDXRF)
spectroscopy device. The samples analyzed represent geographically discrete collections provided by the Bureau of Land
Management Surprise Field Office and include thirty-four (34) different locations within eastern Sikiyou and western Modoc Counties
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  554
in California and northern Washoe County in Nevada. EDXRF analysis has become a more popular application for geological and
archaeological research as the technology has become cheaper to purchase, more advanced and reliable with elemental detection,
and faster in analysis processing time. This presentation will exhibit some of the first elemental analysis research conducted at the
Open Range Archaeology LLC Laboratory in Norman, Oklahoma which recently acquired this equipment. With this preliminary
research, I will discuss variance in the laboratory techniques implemented to streamline processing time and how this research
compares with previous geochemical analysis in the ‘Tricorner’ Region of the Great Basin in northeastern California and
northwestern Nevada.
Thompson, Thomas [193] see Beach, Sonya
Thompson, Victor [271] see Ardren, Traci
Thompson, Victor [140] see Cochran, Lindsey
Thompson, Victor [59] see Jorissen, Philippa
Thompson, Victor [59] see Lulewicz, Isabelle
Thompson, Victor [231] see Napora, Katharine
Thomsen, Tamara [192] see Galloway, Tori
Thornton, Erin (Washington State University), Kitty Emery (Florida Museum of Natural History), M. Charlotte Arnauld
(French National Centre for Scientific Research) and Arianne Boileau (University of Florida)
[178]
Good Things Come in Small Packages: A Unique Maya Cache from La Joyanca (Petén, Guatemala)
Excavations at the Late Classic Maya site of La Joyanca (Petén, Guatemala) uncovered a cache of animal remains deposited within
an interior construction phase of the site’s western temple (6E12-sub). The faunal cache was interred along with a small piece of
green stone in a shallow pit piercing a stucco floor in the structure’s center room. Although faunal remains are common in Maya
caches and burials, the Joyanca 6E12-sub cache is unique in its overall taxonomic diversity and emphasis on very small and/or sub-
adult animals. The symbolic connotation of the cache’s composition is considered through comparative ethnographic and
archaeological evidence. The potential season of the cache’s deposition, and the time it would have taken to collect the items found
in cache are also inferred from the life history traits of the species found within this ritual context.
Thornton, Erin [129] see Fladeboe, Randee
Thornton, Erin [233] see Fournier, Nichole
Thornton, Erin [76] see McIntosh, Brandon
Thornton, Erin [14] see Phillips, Lori
Throgmorton, Kellam (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center) and Susan Ryan (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center)
[149]
Preliminary Results from the Northern Chaco Outliers Project
In 2017, Crow Canyon Archaeological Center (CCAC) began excavations at the Haynie Site (5MT1905), in Southwestern Colorado.
The site contains two Chaco-era (1080–1140 CE) great houses that are part of the larger Lakeview group (which includes two other
great house sites). The Chaco-era structures sit atop a large, earlier aggregated settlement. Investigations by CCAC have focused
on the western portion of this settlement, which include extensive ninth, tenth, and early-eleventh century deposits in addition to the
remains of the western great house. This poster presents preliminary results on the architecture, stratigraphy, and material culture
analyses from three years of excavation efforts in that area.
Thulman, David (George Washington University)
[17]
Using Geometric Morphometrics to Identify Prehistoric “Territories”
 The distribution of subtle variation in the haft shapes of Early Archaic notched points reveals the spatial distribution of likely
territories during the earliest Holocene epoch in northern Mississippi and along the Tennessee River. By analyzing hundreds of
points from this region, we can get some sense of the scope of regular information exchange and interaction among groups of point
makers and where major breaks in interaction lay. Shape-analyses allow us to move beyond more traditional territorial inferences
based on raw material use.
Tiesler, Vera (Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán) and Virginia Miller (University of Illinois, Chicago)
[225]
Heads, Skulls, and Sacred Racks: New Studies on Ritual Body Processing in Chichen Itza and Beyond
Chichen Itza stands as a monumental landmark of late Maya religious complexes. Among the enigmatic aspects of Chichén’s
ceremonial innovations count skull racks, where the heads of sacrificed victims were exhibited in rows. It was the first
Mesoamerican city to erect a permanent, decorated stone platform for the display of impaled heads, anticipating common Late
Postclassic practice. Here we explore skulls with marks of impalement and mandibles with perimortem trauma from both the Sacred
Cenote and the Caracol complex, as well as images of skulls and bones. Our combined skeletal and iconographic data confirm
increased head processing and exhibition at Chichén when compared to Classic-period Maya centers. Nevertheless, these were not
foreign introductions, but appear to have been practiced earlier on a minor scale at Terminal Classic Puuc centers. We posit that the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 555
exhibition of heads at these sites was a response to the religious and militaristic demands of a new era, culminating in Chichen
Itza’s dramatic public displays.
[225]
Chair
Tiesler, Vera [173] see Nakatsuka, Nathan
Tiesler, Vera [225] see Olivier, Guilhem
Tiesler, Vera [225] see Ruiz, Judith
Tilden, Douglas [158] see Watkins, Tia
Tillison, Kevin (University College Dublin)
[85]
Life and Death of Wooden Vessels: Understanding Woodcraft in Early Medieval Ireland, AD 400–1100
This project investigates early medieval Irish woodcraft (AD 400–1100) to ask the questions: what is craft and what makes a
craftsperson? Over the past few decades numerous wooden items have been recovered from this period in Ireland, thus providing
an opportunity to gain an insight into the crafts represented and draw out the related themes of skill, specialization and status.
Interpretations relating to woodcraft are based on 1,607 wooden artifacts collated during this project, sourced from past
archaeological investigations of rural secular sites from across Ireland. These objects were mostly recovered from wet anaerobic
conditions that allowed for the preservation of organic materials. Specific focus has been given to wooden vessels (e.g., buckets,
kegs and bowls) of different manufacturing technologies (i.e., stave-built, carved and turned) which highlighted differences in
material selection and skills required to make these objects; even within the same manufacturing technology. This focus allowed for
the question to be asked, what is craft, but also to what extent can the material remains recovered provide a clearer perspective on
the relationship between the production of wooden objects, the people who made them and the society within which they worked.
Tincu, Sorin [159] see Turcanu-Carutiu, Daniela
Ting, Carmen [128] see Zralka, Jaroslaw
Ting, Kathryn
[213]
Container Glass Analysis: Reconstructing African American Lifeways at the Stephen and Harriet Meyers Site in Albany, NY
In 2017, a UAlbany Team excavated the Stephen and Harriet Meyers site unearthing 629 container glass fragments in a cistern, a
sealed feature with concentrated refuse. Comparing glass fragments found in lower levels and upper levels exhibits changes in the
residents’ lifeways throughout time. This study explores prior research by Corey McQuinn, into African American social identity,
affirming status signaling as a mechanism to oppose to racial injustice. This is significant because not many studies have been done
on the lives of urban, middle class African Americans in the Northeastern United States. John Johnson and Stephen and Harriet
Meyers occupied the house from the 1840–1850’s. This residence headquartered “The Vigilance Committee” and helped slaves to
freedom along the Underground Railroad. In my analysis, I determined these patterns. 1) Twenty different types of glass were
found- fifteen were container glass fragments, the rest were other objects. 2) Twelve colors of glass were present, including the
most abundant—clear glass. 3) More diversity of glass colors was present in Levels 2 and 3, indicating their access to other colors
increased. 4) Level 1 shows a decrease of glass found, suggesting glass use was diminishing. The excavation and research are
ongoing.
Tippin, Gary [254] see Bradley, Benjamin
Tizzard, Louise (Wessex Archaeology) and Claire Mellett (Wessex Archaeology)
[238]
Across and beyond Site Boundaries: Maximizing the Legacy of Submerged Landscape Assessments
The last 15 years have seen a massive increase in offshore development around the UK, which has provided archaeologists the
opportunity to find and examine new sites from areas of seafloor, in deeper waters and further from the coastline than was
previously possible. Through the interpretation of geophysical and geotechnical data within development areas, collaboration
between archaeologists, geologists, engineers and other stakeholders has significantly advanced our understanding of preservation
of inundated landscapes over large areas. However, the data and their associated reports, when available, are site-specific and
although has significant value for wider research seeking to understand the potential of “Doggerland,” this value is not necessarily
realized on a regional and national scale. Using a case study, this paper will demonstrate how the value of site-specific data can be
increased by (a) considering landscapes across and beyond their site boundaries, enabling the formulation of area-specific research
questions; (b) using these research questions to inform site-specific aims and objectives rather than simply reacting to data
availability; (c) utilizing all available data, including that collected for non-archaeological purposes, and; (d) promoting wider
engagement beyond the archaeological community.
Tizzard, Louise [238] see Evans, Amanda
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   556
Todd, Lawrence (GRSLE) and Arthur Middleton (University of California Berkeley)
[75]
Investigating the Long-Term Fidelity of Ungulates to Migration Corridors: Applied Landscape Archaeology in the Greater
Yellowstone Ecosystem, NW Wyoming
The recent revolution in GPS tracking technology has increased wildlife ecologists’ understanding of long-distance ungulate
migrations. Multi-year studies indicate that ungulates are relatively faithful to migration corridors and seasonal ranges. However,
ungulates’ longer-term fidelity to these pathways (i.e., century to millennial scale) is difficult to assess and remains generally
unknown. While regional Holocene faunal assemblages are relatively rich in bones of species such as bison and bighorn sheep,
which provide opportunities for isotopic or trace element analyses to gain insights into general movement patterns, the few
assemblages with abundant elk remains provide only limited samples for such analyses. We conducted archaeological inventories
along corridor segments used by one of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem’s largest present-day elk herds, including spatial data
on artifact types, lithic raw material source areas, temporally diagnostic artifacts, and hunting-related feature locations. Corridor
segments often have higher-than-normal projectile point and hunting features densities than adjacent areas, suggesting humans
may have made regular use of the corridors either for travel or intercept hunting. Yet we also documented a segment with little or no
associated archaeological material. Such differences in archaeological evidence may help discern whether some corridor segments
have received long-term use, and others were adopted more recently.
Todd, Lawrence [249] see Kappelman, John
Todd, Lawrence [65] see Neff, Matthew
Todd, Lawrence [236] see Rapes, John
Toffolo, Michael [162] see Bousman, Britt
Toftgaard, Casper [212] see Harvey, Virginia
Tokovinine, Alexandre (University of Alabama)
[54]
Discussant
Tokovinine, Alexandre (University of Alabama)
[265]
So Say the Gods: What Classic Maya Tell and Do Not Tell about War
Even though the literal translation of nearly every war-related expression in Classic Maya inscriptions has been known for decades,
the significance of textual and visual representations of warfare remain a highly contested domain of Maya studies. Scholarly views
on the subject are still guided by old assumptions and stereotypes refitted to various current theoretical frameworks. Yet new
archaeological and paleoenvironmental findings call for a reevaluation of epigraphic and iconographic sources. This paper offers a
survey of the available evidence to propose an updated interpretation of warfare causes, military organization, combat tactics, and
aftermaths of war-related violence. It cautions against an epistemic trap of preferring some precontact and contact period sources
as more reliable representations of warfare. Finally, it highlights changes in Classic Maya warfare practices as seen through the lens
of hieroglyphic inscriptions.
Tokovinine, Alexandre [223] see Viskanta Khokhriakova, Sandra
Tolan, Grace, Claire Rebbe (Rhodes College), Jera Davis (New South Associates, Inc), Stephen Carmody (Troy University)
and Jon Russ (Rhodes College)
[63]
GC-MS Analyses of Smoking Pipe Residues from Moundville (1TU500)
Chemical residue analysis of archaeological artifacts has become an asset for understanding prehistoric human activities. The
presence of particular compounds (biomarkers) or suites of compounds provides direct evidence for specific resources exploited in
the past. Here we report on chemical analyses of residues from smoking pipes recovered from the Moundville site (1TU500), a large
Mississippian site located in west-central Alabama. First settled in ~ AD 1120, over the next 80 years, domestic settlement sprawled
out across the landform and around several small mounds. In AD 1200, major modifications of existing mounds was followed by the
construction of the mound-and-plaza complex observed today. Population in the region centered at the site for the next 150 years
and landscape modifications correspond to changes in Moundville’s sociopolitical hierarchy and religious organizations. Because
pipes were being made and used during every phase of Moundville history, compounds in pipe residues might also reflect these
changes. We used GC-MS to identify the presence of nicotine, a biomarker for tobacco. We also analyzed various plants, both in
raw form and after being smoked, to determine whether distinct biomarkers are present that could allow the identification of plants
other than tobacco in the smoking complex.
Tolan, Grace [215] see Fields, Mara
Tolmie, Clare (Illinois State Archaeological Survey)
[213]
Over There Over Here: A WWI Landscape in Northern Illinois
Established in April 1917, the military cantonment at Camp Grant, located south of Rockford, Illinois was one of the largest WWI
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         557
training camps in the United States. Maximum strength during WWI included 1,689 officers and 48,854 enlisted personnel; over
1,000 administrative, residential, training, and support facilities; the Bell Bowl; a drill field; concrete tent platforms; a hospital; and
prisoners of war (POW) compound. Training included rifle drills, combat techniques and gunnery. An important aspect was trench
warfare. By 1917, trench warfare was well-established on the Western Front and U.S. troops required training and familiarization
with both trench construction techniques and trench layouts. As a result, an extensive network of trenches, replicating the trenches
in use in France and Belgium, developed in the eastern area of Camp Grant. This poster reports on archival research and remote
sensing undertaken to reconstruct the trench system at Camp Grant and identify areas where these features may still survive in the
modern landscape.
Tomazic, Iride (University of Michigan)
[34]
Sick in the Swamp: Societal Relations and Disease in the Middle Copper Age Cemetery of Podlokanj Nove Bašte, Serbia
Historical records report numerous ways in which societies dealt with disease in the past. Diseases with visible symptoms, such as
plague or malaria are obvious, while others, such as the vast majority of metabolic diseases, are often much less visible. This poster
aims to explore the connection between disease and social relations in a Copper Age society via an analysis of the Podlokanj Nove
bašte cemetery in Northern Serbia. Prior to drainage in the nineteenth century, the area existed as a vast marsh. These frequently
flooded areas constituted a challenging living environment in terms of subsistence, settlement, and resources procurement. The
region was also fertile ground for disease and environmental contaminants. Through an analysis of skeletal pathologies and
funerary treatment, this poster will explore social differentiation during the Middle Copper Age and examine how societal relations
were affected by life, death, and disease in the marshy lowlands of the Southern Carpathian Basin.
Tomczyk, Weronika (Stanford University) and Nathan Acebo (Stanford University)
[27]
In a Shade of Colonial Expansion: The Subsistence Strategies and Consumption Practices in Black Star Canyon, Southern
California
Puhu(CA-Ora-132), a Native American settlement located in the Santa Ana mountains of California, has been remembered as a
unique place of conflict centered around animal utilization. In 1831, Puhu was attacked and defeated by American fur trappers after
the accusations of horse-thieving for food. However, analysis of animal remains from Puhu’s excavations revealed that European
livestock had a minimal, if not a nonexistent impact on the village’s subsistence strategy. The assemblages from the Late Prehistoric
(1300–1770 CE) and Colonial period (1770–1850) were dominated by local species, mainly deer (Odocoileus hemionus) and
lagomorphs (Lepus californicus, Sylvilagus). Their remains include preserved as well as fragmented and burned bones, which
indicate elaborated food processing practices, and subsequent use of remains as fuel. We suggest that the deer were easily
accessible for the Puhu’s inhabitants, because of coastal colonization and the introduction of European-style agriculture which
caused inland migration of game herds. Furthermore, scarce remains of felines (Puma concolor, Lynx rufux) and mustelids (f.
Mephitidae) suggest taking advantage of other indigenous species. Although our findings do not preclude the occurrence of small
acts of thievery, the village’s subsistence did not depend on it, but rather thrived based on the continuous exploitation of local game.
Tomich, Kassi (Idaho State University), Alexandra Williams (Idaho State University) and Amy Commendador (Idaho
Museum of Natural History)
[177]
Changes in Small Mammal Mandible Morphology with Environmental Fluctuations over the Holocene Period in the Snake River
Plain, Southeastern Idaho
Previous research suggests that the chemical composition of bone from small mammals recovered from owl pellets tracks
environmental fluctuations over long periods of time. While these data are valuable, they do not inform on how these changes might
have directly affected the animals themselves. Here we compare morphological measurements and chemical analyses from an
assemblage spanning the last 10,000 years in southeastern Idaho to evaluate physical responses of these animals to environmental
perturbations. Morphological analyses focused on mandible diastemal and tooth row length for three species: Northern Pocket
Gophers, Pygmy Rabbits and Townsend’s Ground Squirrels. The diastemal length is an indicator for body size, found to vary with
environmental conditions in gophers, while tooth row length is genetically linked, potentially informing on turnover in animal
populations over time. Chemical data consist of carbon (δ13C) and nitrogen (δ15N) isotopes obtained from specimens in the same
levels. Preliminary results show some correspondence in trends between the morphological and chemical datasets, indicating these
species were experiencing body size changes in accordance with larger environmental fluctuations. There is no clear evidence of
population turnover, but variation is lower in tooth row length, as expected if this morphological parameter is genetically linked.
Toney, Elizabeth [77] see Morgan, Robert
Toney, Joshua
[188]
Chair
Toney, Joshua [188] see Stephen, Jesse
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      558
Toohey, Jason (University of Wyoming) and Patricia Chirinos Ogata (University of California, Santa Barbara)
[106]
A Cajamarca Basin Perspective on Northern Highland Interaction during the Middle Horizon and Late Intermediate Periods
Investigations at the Cajamarca sites of Callacpuma and Yanaorco are shedding new light on shifting patterns and intensities of
interregional interaction. Highland influence on the coast has been recognized for many years in the coastal Jequetepeque region
and the valleys to its north. The current work presents intriguing new material evidence for the presence of coastal material culture
in sites of the Cajamarca Basin indicating at least some level of contact during both the early Middle Horizon and the Late
Intermediate Period. This material takes the form of both everyday utilitarian objects and more enigmatic ceramic vessels and
figurines. All of this indicates previously unexpected levels of material contact with the north coast and hints at social and political
interaction between the two regions.
Toohey, Jason [243] see Stagg, Sarah
Toomey, Rickard (National Park Service—Mammoth Cave National Park) and Ernest Lundelius (University of Texas,
Austin)
[19]
Vertebrate Paleontology of Hall’s Cave
Excavations at Hall’s Cave from 1986 through 1994 established that the site contained a well-stratified deposit at least 3.7 m thick
which spanned at least the last 18–20,000 years. Vertebrate material is abundant throughout the sequence and provides an
unparalleled view of the evolution of the vertebrate community and environment of central Texas since the last glacial maximum. At
least 62 mammal and 48 non-mammal species were identified from analysis of the bone from the deposit, these include at least 12
extinct and 22 extralimital taxa. Recent aDNA studies have increased this diversity. Several taphonomic pathways were important in
deposition of bone including owl pellets, bone washing in, animals living in the cave, and animals dragging prey into the site.
Changes in species and their abundances in the deposit over time provides important information on climate and environmental
change in the area from the Last Glacial Maximum through the Post-glacial. This includes good resolution during the Youger Dryas,
which provides a view of this event from lower mid-latitude. Notable changes documented include significant warming and drying,
large decreases in the depth of soil, changes between savanna and grassland, extinctions, and breakup of non-analogous faunas.
Torquato, Melissa, John Rapes (Purdue University), Ben Schiery (Purdue University) and Erik Otárola-Castillo (Purdue
University)
[176]
The Effects of Regional Climate Change on the Foraging-Farming Transition in Eastern North America
For a century, scholars studying prehistoric subsistence have questioned why humans began farming. A common hypothesis is that
climate change contributed to the emergence of agriculture. One area where climate change may have influenced early agriculture
is the Interior Eastern Woodlands of North America, where the independent domestication of native plants occurred during the Late
Archaic period (4500–4000 BP). However, there has been little quantitative analyses examining the effects of climate change on the
foraging-farming transition in North America. Our previous research suggests that climate change influenced subsistence behavior
during the transition period. The present study expands on prior work by increasing the sample of archaeological sites to provide a
more complete representation of the region. This project tests the hypotheses that climate change (1) preceded the foraging-farming
transition and (2) led to the increased use of cultivated resources in the prehistoric diet. To test these hypotheses, this study utilizes
paleoenvironmental proxies and reconstructions to examine regional climatic trends and archaeological data to evaluate dietary
changes during the transition period. This analysis will advance the study of prehistoric subsistence strategies by demonstrating
how intra-regional climate change affected the development of agriculture and the use of cultivated resources in North America.
Torres, Jimena [177] see San Román, Manuel
Torres, Lourdes [257] see Ordoñez, Maria
Torres Morales, Genesis and Celeste Gagnon (Wagner College)
[169]
Exploring Stress and Diet: A Bioarchaeological Understanding of the Chimú at Huaca de la Luna
The Chimú (AD 900–1470) were the second largest Andean empire. Emerging in the Moche Valley of Peru, the Chimú extended
their reach from the northern border of Ecuador, south to the Chillón valley of Peru. They built their capital Chan Chan on an empty
beach near modern day Trujillo, however, the Chimú also interacted with the previously abandoned capital of the Southern Moche
State- the Huacas de Moche. The Chimú remodeled the religious center of the site, and interred their dead in pre-existing platforms
at Huaca de la Luna, and scattered throughout the urban sector. This research presents preliminary findings of 32 burials excavated
from Huaca de la Luna or the urban center. The objective of this presentation is to begin a conversation about the Chimú from a
bioarchaeology perspective. We analyzed cribra orbitalia, porotic hyperostosis, periosteal, and linear enamel hypoplasia to chart
stress. Caries, abscess, antemortem tooth loss, wear, and periodontal disease was analyzed in order to reconstruct diet.
Torres Porras, Alicia, Patricia Plunket Nagoda and Gabriela Uruñuela Ladrón de Guevara
[119]
Explorando la Transición del Posclásico a la Colonia en Cholula, Puebla: 1519–1540
La llegada de los hispanos a la ciudad sagrada de Cholula, donde peregrinos y gobernantes se congregaban para rendir homenaje
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  559
a Quetzalcoátl en su recinto ceremonial, trajo consigo grandes cambios debido a la literal cimentación del catolicismo sobre dicho
recinto. Para tener un acercamiento acotado a patrones de uso y consumo en una época de transición, se comparan materiales
relacionados con la destrucción del complejo prehispánico y los procedentes de los depósitos de la ocupación española inicial,
posiblemente correspondientes a la construcción del primigenio convento franciscano de San Gabriel. Este estudio examina una
pequeña muestra de cerámica, lítica y restos óseos, tanto humanos como faunísticos, recuperada en 1993, justo afuera del
convento, y sugiere que las principales diferencias producto de la presencia española se aprecian en la dieta y el tratamiento de los
restos humanos.
Torvinen, Andrea (Arizona State University) and Matt Peeples (Arizona State University)
[123]
A Monte Carlo Approach to Estimating Plausible Ceramic Similarity Values from Fabric Characterizations
Ceramic characterization studies often depend on estimates of similarities and differences in assemblages drawn from relatively
small samples to address questions regarding a range of social patterns and processes. In most cases, such characterizations do
not consider uncertainty due to sampling error nor do they consider in detail the relationship between characterized samples and
whole assemblages. We introduce a method that allows ceramicists to extrapolate plausible values and ranges for ceramic diversity
and similarity values between contexts based on limited observed data (i.e., petrographic fabrics or chemical reference groups)
using a Monte Carlo simulation. We use this method to evaluate the spatiotemporal consistency of ceramic production among
potters at the West Mexican center of La Quemada, Zacatecas. Our study relies on a relatively small petrographic sample of 297
sherds (2.86% of site assemblage) belonging to 19 pottery types, each having been assigned to one of four fabric classes. Using
these data with site-wide ceramic frequency data, we generate estimates and error ranges of the plausible similarities between
contexts across the site in terms of shared fabrics that crosscut ceramic types. We suggest that this methodology has wide-reaching
applications at various spatial scales and using different types of characterization data.
Toussaint, Mark (University of Nevada Las Vegas)
[131]
Queer Eye for the Dead Guy: The Influence of Debra Martin on a Bioarchaeological Investigation of Gender beyond the Binary
Any aspect of human social life worth studying, whether in the past or present, is a complex product of history, biology, culture, and
agency. Gender is a prime and important example of just such a topic. It requires a high degree of nuance to understand and
describe gender constructs in a contemporary society, and studies of gender in prehistory are even more fraught. This presentation
will focus on what can be learned of gender in Early Bronze Age (EBA; ~2300–1600 BCE) communities of Central Europe through
theoretically informed bioarchaeological studies. The unmistakable influence of Dr. Debra Martin will be readily apparent in the
biocultural and contextual approach to this research, which draws heavily from embodiment theory and from paleoepidemiological
models of the recursive relationships between stressors (environmental and cultural), buffering mechanisms, and health outcomes.
This holistic and multiscalar orientation toward bioarchaeological research, championed by Dr. Martin, has enabled the current study
to find evidence of a complex, plastic, and perhaps non-binary system of gender in EBA Mierzanowice Culture communities of
southern Poland.
Trabanino, Felipe [211] see Johnson, Lisa
Trachman, Rissa (Elon University), Jacob Canterbury (Texas A&M University) and Daniel Conley (University of Kentucky)
[53]
The Essentiality of Ancient Maya Ritual to the Economic and Social: Evidence from the Site of Dos Hombres, Belize
Ritual expression was by its very nature an integral part of everyday ancient Maya society. Ritual structured many aspects of daily
life. At the site of Dos Hombres in northwestern Belize, evidence is presented from multiple contexts for the manifestation of ritual
expression as it is necessarily tied to economic activity and social life. Ongoing research in the form of architectural and non-
architectural excavations, isotope data, and lidar has been focused in the northern plaza, a space of public activity. From these
recently collected data, in combination with previously excavated data in the 1990’s, an evocative picture emerges. Classic Period
material culture associated with burials, tombs, a non-architectural possible market locale, and a large deposit found inside a
monumental structure highlight the interwoven nature of ritual with economic production, social activity, and commerce.
[53]
Chair
Trachman, Rissa [233] see Canterbury, Jacob
Trachman, Rissa [53] see Valdez, Fred, Jr.
Tran, Tara [77] see Cromwell, RP
Trapani, Paolino [104] see Kingsland, Kaitlyn
Traslaviña, Abel (Vanderbilt University)
[224]
Negotiating Land and Water: Exploring the Inka Strategies of Natural Resource Management in the Lurin Valley, Central Coast of
Peru
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    560
The central coastal region of Peru is an area with great ceremonial centers and massive anthropogenic landscape modifications.
Over thousands of years of human occupation, this region has been transformed by the use of two vital resources: land and water.
The control of both resources has been and continues to be a strategic issue among human groups in this area at the economic,
social, political, and ceremonial levels. By integrating archaeological and documentary data, this paper examines the changes in the
social and political landscape that occurred with the Inka arrival in the lower and mid-Lurin Valley, centering the analysis in the
materialization of the imperial strategies to manage and use such crucial natural resources.
Tremayne, Andrew [64] see Junge, Justin
Triadan, Daniela (University of Arizona)
[93]
Discussant
Triadan, Daniela (University of Arizona)
[126]
Changes in Ceramic Production and Distribution at Ceibal, Guatemala
Ceibal was occupied from about 1000 BC until around AD 950. Our work there has resulted in a new fine-grained chronology that
allows us to trace changes in ceramic production through time at an unprecedented resolution. Based on this chronology
instrumental neutron activation analysis and petrography of ceramics from all time periods of the site show that throughout its
occupation the majority of ceramics found at Ceibal were locally produced and consumed, but paste recipes changed through time.
The analyses also indicate that in some cases clays were specifically selected to produce certain types of ceramics and that the
exploitation of these sources changed through time. Throughout Ceibal’s history only small numbers of ceramics were imported.
Interestingly, the areas from which those ceramics came shifted through time, indicating changes in interactions. In general, the
patterns seem remarkably consistent through time and persisted into the Late and Terminal Classic. They suggest that while by the
Late Middle Preclassic ideas about ceramics were widely shared throughout the Maya lowlands, actual pots were not exchanged in
large numbers.
Tribolo, Chantel [162] see Bousman, Britt
Trigg, Heather (Univ Massachusetts Boston)
[125]
Challenges of Colonizing a Marginal Environment: Risk and Failure in Early Colonial New Mexico
The American Southwest is a landscape that is marginal for agriculture, and the Pueblos, indigenous agriculturalists who inhabited
the region, have developed many ways of buffering risk. In 1598, the Spanish began the colony of New Mexico. Over the previous
60 years, there had been several exploratory expeditions into the region, but for most Spanish colonists, this was their first foray into
the lands north of the Rio Grande. On an individual basis, they set up households in a novel, unknown land, but as a group, Spanish
colonists had practices, established through years of colonialism, that encouraged successful establishment of colonies. Some of
these practices structured the ways colonists engaged the environment in their agricultural pursuits; others consisted of social
relationships among colonists and between colonists and indigenous people. In this paper, I explore the ways in which seventeenth-
century colonists in New Mexico buffered risk in this challenging landscape. It is important to recognize that while these ways of
making due helped to establish the colony, colonists were not entirely successful, and failures to manage risk may have contributed
to the Pueblo Revolt and the temporary abandonment of the colony.
Trigg, Heather [112] see Albert, Katherine
Trimble, Michael (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers)
[132]
Discussant
Trimmis, Konstantinos [36] see Kardulias, Paul Nick
Trinidad-Rivera, Gelenia (University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus)
[192]
Apprehend the Flawed! Social Disability in the Newspaper La Gaceta del Gobierno de Puerto Rico Advertisements, 1831–1833
Slavery in Puerto Rico had its various levels of abundance and scarcity during the nineteenth century. With the establishment of
open trade regulations and the continuous efforts of Spain to retain its imperialist status, chained enslaved African and ‘mulato’
populations on the island were kept as the fuel for the wealthy. If it was difficult for those who were enslaved to survive during this
period, those who had visual “defects” that stayed away from the norm of the time, suffered the worst consequences. The following
study focuses on analyzing, under the lens of social disability, the populations of enslaved individuals who presented corporal
indicators of their social status such as wounds, amputations, tattoos, scars, and scarifications, among others. The historical rescue
presented in the following investigation is carried out by consulting advertisements and announcements from the newspaper “La
Gaceta del Gobierno de Puerto Rico”, during 1831–1833, related to the sale and marketing of fugitives and captured enslaved
individuals. From the data retrieved, the aspects related to race, sex, and age are correlated. Thus, illuminating inside the darkness
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   561
where these populations are constantly nudged: the periphery of history’s official narrative.
Triplett, Taylor (The College of William and Mary)
[251]
The Hand Site Reassessment Project: Gleaning New Perspectives from Reposited Collections
This paper reviews the ongoing Hand Site (44SN22) Reassessment Project, and broadly explores the reevaluation of existing
collections as an avenue for decolonization. The Hand site is a complex, multi-component site located on the Nottoway River in
southeastern Virginia. Intensive excavations in the 1960’s revealed over 600 features, including house remains, pits, and a large
cemetery. Initial evaluation placed the site within the proto-historic period (1580–1630). However, recent reexaminations of the Hand
site archaeological collection have dramatically expanded the site’s known temporal breadth. Situated at the liminal frontier of the
Chesapeake and Albemarle worlds, the Hand site provides a critical lens for examining the deep history of ancestral Nottoway,
Meherrin, and Nansemond—peoples at the fringe of seventeenth century colonial accounts
Tritsch, Michael (Johns Hopkins University)
[263]
The Encroachment of Domestic Religion at Karnak: Preliminary Interpretation of Findings in the Precinct to the Temple of Mut
This paper explores an excavation site in the rear of the Precinct to the Temple of Mut, outside the Eighteenth Dynasty enclosure
wall, providing new insight into domestic life and religion prior to the Amarna period. The findings of interest involve sandstone
pavers and a collapsed lintel with cavetto cornice and torus roll, surrounded by collapsed painted mud brick, primarily red. The latter
may be related to architectural features, mainly jambs. The majority of the pottery recovered in situ dates to the first half of the
Eighteenth Dynasty, but this area had been cleared in 2005 when other pottery, identified as Ramesside, was reportedly found.
From a thorough literature review of other New Kingdom domestic sites, this context shares significant similarities to the “divan
room” in Deir el-Medina houses or the “central room” in Amarna houses. The sandstone feature bears a striking likeness to a divan
and the painted mud brick is consistent with a niche shrine commonly found in these rooms. At both sites, the color red appears
almost exclusively on door frames and niches. Photogrammetric analysis of objects from similar contexts at European museums has
also been performed to aid in the interpretive process of this unique find.
Trocolli, Ruth (D.C. City Archaeologist) and Christine Ames (Assistant City Archaeologist)
[193]
Gold Is in the Eye of the Beholder: Public Outreach and Education in Washington, DC
Archaeological review and compliance in Washington, DC is handled by the DC Historic Preservation Office, a unique hybrid that
operates as a local city/county agency as well as the SHPO. Typically, the DC HPO Archaeology team does not conduct compliance
activities, but we do employ federal and local compliance mandates to require—nudge, coax, cajole, and wheedle—federal and
local agencies to include public outreach and education elements in mitigation plans. We are especially pushy about projects on
District-owned property and push for consultants to give presentations to the public at local venues, and to develop educational
materials. We also encourage consulting firms to participate in outreach events or to volunteer with us. Creating effective outreach
activities and developing a cadre of volunteers to help present them to the public takes time and effort. We observed a hunger for
neighborhood-level historical and archaeological information (stories) that create a sense of place for new residents, and that
demonstrate deep-seated ties of the extant community. In a highly educated city with deep levels of income disparity and
gentrification pressure, we find that the gold standard is the good will and sense of community we generate through public outreach.
Troendle, Kimberly (University of Wyoming)
[65]
Can We Move Past the Nomenclature? Test of a Dichotomous Key for Typing Projectile Points in Wyoming
Projectile points are commonly used as temporal markers in lieu of radiocarbon dates. However, for many locations there are
multiple established point typologies resulting in debate about which typology should be used. Frequently there are multiple
seemingly appropriate typologies to choose from, but none that were made for the specific region. This begs the question, what is
the affective range of a typology? Recognizing the variability in projectile point typologies Reckin and Todd (2019, Plains
Anthropologist, p.1–29) created a dichotomous key for typing projectile points in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem. This typology
relies on metric and non-metric measures of projectile point hafting elements. I test their typology against collections of points from
well dated Archaic and Late Prehistoric kill sites from across the state of Wyoming to determine the applicability of the typology
outside of the region it was created in. This research investigates the geographic limitations of typologies and tests the effectiveness
of a quantitative measurement system for dating points compared to a purely on qualitative system as is the case for most regional
typologies.
Trombetta, Lindsey [249] see Kappelman, John
Troncoso, Andres [243] see Alfonso-Durruty, Marta
Troncoso, Andres [224] see Murphy, Beau
Trousdale, William [205] see Allen, Mitchell
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   562
Trubitt, Mary Beth (Arkansas Archeological Survey), George Sabo III (Arkansas Archeological Survey) and Teka McGlothlin
(Arkansas Archeological Survey)
[166]
Tracing Human and Animal Imagery through Caddo Effigy Vessels, Stories, and Dance
Human figures and animals such as ducks, turtles, frogs, fish, and bears were occasionally depicted on pottery in the Caddo area in
Arkansas, Louisiana, Texas, and Oklahoma in the Mississippian period (AD 1000–1700), but less often than in the Mississippi River
Valley further east. Representational imagery on effigy pottery (and, very rarely, wooden vessels) from archaeological sites in the
Caddo area is one path to iconographic analysis. Another route examines more abstracted designs on ceramics and other media.
New documentation technology such as 3D scanning augments iconographic research and provides access to collections.
Interpretations of these objects and their uses and meanings in the past can also benefit from ethnohistoric descriptions of Caddo
communities, ceremonies, and stories by outsiders (Spanish and French in the late 1600s-early 1700s, non-native anthropologists in
the early 1900s), as well as from traditional dances—such as the Bear Dance, Duck Dance, Turkey Dance, Fish Dance—still
performed by Caddo Indians in the present day.
Trusler, Kate (University of Missouri), Jessica Bernstetter (University of Missouri), Wayne Lorenz (Wright
Paleohydrological Institue) and G. Martin-Apostolatos (University of Missouri)
[159]
Around the Neighboring Watering Hole: Comparative Analysis of Fountains in Pompeii and Herculaneum
Substantial urban development is linked to the first century CE in Pompeii and Herculaneum, as well as throughout the Bay of
Naples. An important component of this development included the construction of the Aqua Augusta, or Serino Aqueduct as it is
known today. The associated lead pipe network supplied pressured water for private residential display, businesses and public
fountains. Water collected from public fountains was especially valuable as population density increased and more people came to
live in apartments that lacked traditional means of water collection (e.g., cisterns). In the summers of 2018 and 2019, the authors
conducted fieldwork in order to investigate the fountains at Pompeii and Herculaneum. Our initial research focused on the fountains
in Pompeii. However, the question remained, are all fountains in the Roman world the same? This paper expands on previous
research and focuses on the significant differences in construction and use wear of fountains between the neighboring towns.
[159]
Chair
Trusler, Kate [159] see Bernstetter, Jessica
Trusler, Kate [212] see Green, Amie
Trusler, Kate [85] see Lorenz, Wayne
Tryon, Christian [162] see Borreggine, Marisa
Tsai, Che-hsien (University of Sheffield), Elina Kardamaki (OREA Institut für Orientalische und Europäische Ar), Christos
Boulotis (Academy of Athens, Greece), Anno Hein (NCSR Demokritos, Greece) and Peter Day (University of Sheffield)
[196]
“Mycenaean” and Local Pottery Production at Koukonisi, Lemnos
The study of pottery from the Bronze Age settlement of Koukonisi, Lemnos offers new evidence for local production and
consumption of Mycenaean pottery during the fourteenth century BCE, together with imports from the heartland of the NE
Peloponnese. On Lemnos, local Mycenaean pottery reproduces shapes and motifs of the Mycenaean mainland sites, while also
belonging to a north Aegean koine that includes nearby Troy. However, in contrast to its neighbour, other standard Mycenaean
pottery, such as fine plain wares, also locally produced, are well represented at Koukonisi. Most importantly, the common local red
slipped ware seems relatively unaffected by the Mycenaean repertoire. This lies in contrast to other parts of the Eastern Aegean and
notably Troy, where hybrid shapes and decorations have been noted. This previously undocumented, substantial production of
Mycenaean pottery on Lemnos is important, as it matches chemical compositional groups usually attributed to Trojan production.
The evidence from Koukonisi, therefore, offers the potential to alter our view of the interface between Mycenaean and other
cultures. It also suggests the existence of different processes of acculturation at Troy and Koukonisi, and a diversity of interaction
with the southern Aegean and Mycenaean Greece between areas of the North Aegean.
Tsai, Howard (University of Michigan)
[106]
Espacio ritual como área de producción de la identidad étnica: El caso de Las Varas, un sitio del valle medio del Jequetepeque,
Peru
En esta presentación se discute los resultados del Proyecto Arqueológico Las Varas. Se sugiere que el proceso de formación de
identidad étnica ocurrió en el contexto ritual. Las Varas fue un sitio del Intermedio Tardío (1000–1460 d.C.) ubicado en el valle
medio del Jequetepeque con la afiliación de la cultura Cajamarca Costeña; se encuentra entre otros sitios de las culturas Chimú y
Lambayeque del mismo periodo. Se presenta evidencia de dos áreas de Las Varas: Plataforma de Recepción (Sector 1, Área A) y
Plazas de los Malquis (Sector 3, Área A). Ambas áreas están cerca la salida y entrada del sitio a la costa (Plataforma de
Recepción) y sierra (Plazas de los Malquis); los datos de excavaciones indican que ellas fueron utilizadas como espacios rituales
para recibir visitantes de otras zonas. Diferencias importantes, sin embargo, se caracterizan los dos espacios rituales. Se plantea
que estas diferencias (tamaño del espacio, presencia de etapas constructivas y asociación con estructuras mortuorias) reflejan las
decisiones de la comunidad de Las Varas en su construcción de identidad. Se sugiere que el análisis del espacio ritual puede ser
una aproximación para revelar el proceso de la producción, reproducción y transformación de las identidades sociales y étnicas.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      563
Tserndagva, Yadmaa [62] see Farquhar, Jennifer
Tsesmeli, Evangelia (NM State Land Office) and David Eck (NM State Land Office)
[186]
Challenges in Protecting Cultural Resources: Policy and Rulemaking from a New Mexico Perspective
Policies, rules, and laws for the protection of cultural resources are in place at the federal and state level. This research discusses
the challenges in instituting a workable cultural resource protection policy on New Mexico State Trust Lands and the processes that
must balance a variety of cases and needs among a diverse body of decision-makers, stakeholders and practitioners. It also
presents a culture history of competing interests of historic preservation, commercially feasible outcomes, and the effects of political
complexity in policy and rulemaking.
Tsuji, Leonard [252] see Powell, Evelyn
Tsuji, Stephen [252] see Powell, Evelyn
Tsukamoto, Kenichiro (University of California, Riverside) and Octavio Esparza Olguín (Centro de Estudios Mayas,
Instituto de Investigaci)
[130]
The Dynastic Sequence and Royal Titles at the Classic period Maya Site of El Palmar, Mexico
The sociopolitical implication of Classic Maya royal titles has been the subject of considerable debate over the past half-century. El
Palmar, which is located in southeastern Campeche, Mexico, had a long dynastic sequence beginning from the Protoclassic until
the Terminal Classic period (AD 179–884). Based on inscriptions found in and around El Palmar, this paper addresses the question
of how internal and external political organizations were articulated with El Palmar royal titles. Inscriptions carved on Stela 20, which
was discovered during the 2018 field season, also provide clues to the relationship between royal titles and regional interactions
among dynasties around AD 511, a period witnessed political interventions of the Snake dynasty in southeastern Campeche. Our
epigraphic studies suggest that the El Palmar royal titles served to symbolize a royal identity as well as an internal hierarchy.
Tsukamoto, Kenichiro [7] see Jonassen, Alexandra
Tsukamoto, Kenichiro [232] see Sullivan, Kelsey
Tsukamoto, Kenichiro [197] see Wedemeyer, Rachael
Tsurumi, Eisei [182] see Kanezaki, Yuko
Tucker, Bryan [140] see Cochran, Lindsey
Tucker, Gregory (University of Michigan)
[107]
Geophysical Survey in the Nile Valley: Changing Perceptions of Ancient Landscapes in the Jebel Barkal Region
The heartland of Napatan Kush has long been understood through the monumental structures unearthed by a tradition of
archaeological work dating back to the early twentieth century. As part of a recent project to try to expand our knowledge of
settlement in the region around Jebel Barkal, near the fourth cataract of the Nile River, we have conducted a geophysical survey of
the surrounding landscape, exploring the areas further removed from the pyramids, temples, and palaces that oft define this site and
period in history. In this paper, we present our results and interpretations, and the implications for changing our perception of this
space at a variety of levels. Our perception of the past has changed, both at a site and a regional scale, but this also has
implications for the modern perception of the surveyed areas, as they are often areas of mixed-use for the communities that live
surrounding them. This project expands our understanding of the sites and landscapes in this region, but also serves as the
foundation for future archaeological discovery and heritage management planning.
Tucker, Kaley (University of Utah Archaeological Center), Lisbeth Louderback (Department of Anthropology and
Archaeological Cent) and Erick Robinson (Department of Sociology, Social Work, and Anthropo)
[177]
Evidence for Geophyte Exploitation in the Green River Basin of Wyoming
Archaeological sites in the Green River Basin of Wyoming that date from the Early Archaic to Late Prehistoric are often found
associated with or adjacent to dense patches of Cymopterus bulbosus A. Nelson (springparsley). This nutritious geophyte would have
been an important food source for prehistoric humans living in the region. Experimental data have shown that the caloric return rates of
C. bulbosus were enough to support seasonal exploitation by foragers, yet there has been no direct evidence in the archaeological
record for use. In this study, we examine starch grains from 10 metates excavated from two archaeological sites in the Green River
Basin to determine if C. bulbosus was consumed in the past. Rootstocks of C. bulbosus were collected from three different populations
(patches) in the vicinity of the archaeological sites to develop modern starch reference material. Positive identification of Cymopterus
starch grains is based on a systematic study of those reference grains. The presence of Cymopterus starch on the ground stone
artifacts strongly suggests that prehistoric foragers were harvesting and consuming these geophytes throughout the Holocene. These
findings may also provide additional insight into subsistence and settlement decisions in the Green River Basin.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  564
Tuitavuki, Kylie (University of Hawai’i at Manoa)
[91]
Discussant
Tulchin, Jon [186] see Duarte, Trever
Tulchin, Jon [262] see Filimoehala, Darby
Tullo, Dominic, Kathryn Krasinski (Adelphi University) and Angela Wade (Chickaloon Native Village)
[184]
Ancient Trails: Community Archaeology in the Talkeetna Mountains
The Matanuska Valley in Alaska has a rich Athabaskan cultural history. Past archaeological research has primarily been conducted
adjacent to the Matanuska River along the Glenn Highway. However, little research has been conducted in the surrounding tributary
drainages that feed into the Matanuska river. It is important to test sites throughout the valley’s drainages to understand prehistoric
movement and land use of the river valley and its tributaries. Survey focused on localities documented through recent interviews
with Chickaloon Native Village community members, many of which correspond to localities with Ahtna place names. This poster
highlights methods and discoveries in the Boulder Creek drainage that expand the assumed range of Athabaskans living in the
valley. These sites have lithics representing a wide range of raw material types. Raw material survey conducted in the Boulder creek
drainage demonstrates a variety of high quality toolstone was available.
Tullo, Dominic [82] see Wygal, Brian
Tune, Jesse (Fort Lewis College)
[180]
Paleoindian Lithic Technological Organization and Evolutionary Theory
It is assumed that lithic technologies used by Paleoindian hunter-gatherers were designed to be efficient, yet flexible. Therefore, it is
expected that differences in how lithic technologies were organized may reflect optimizing behaviors made by hunter-gatherers as
they encountered different landscapes with variable resource distributions. There was likely increased pressure to behave optimally
in environments with limited resources, while those pressures would have been relaxed where greater access to resources existed.
In terms of Paleoindian hunter-gatherers, these behaviors may be reflected in the use-lives of projectile points. Where there was
greater access to high-quality toolstone, projectile points are expected to have been discarded before their total utility was
exhausted; where there was limited access to toolstone resources, projectile points are expected to be more exhausted. The
research presented here relies on evolutionary theory to bridge the gap between lithic technology and hunter-gatherer behavior as is
evident in fluted point assemblages.
Tung, Tiffiny [61] see Scaffidi, Beth
Turcanu-Carutiu, Daniela, Rodica-Mariana Ion (ICECHIM, Bucharest, Romania), Alessandro Ravotto (Institut Català
d’Argueologia Clàssica [ICAC]), Sorin Tincu (Corvin Castle, Hunedoara, Romania) and Verginica Schroder (“Ovidius”
University of Constanta, Romania)
[159]
Protecting the defenses by Preservation of Fortresses Protecting the defenses by preservation of fortresses: Barcino, Civitas
Tropaensium, and Corvin Castle
Currently, four ancient and medieval monuments (“The Roman mosaic of Constanta” (fourteenth century), “Adamclisi Tropaeum
Traiani” (109 AD), and “Castle of the Corvins of Hunedoara” (fifteenth century) in Romania, and the “Roman Wall in Barcelona” (14
AD), Spain) could be the right cases for scientific tests, due to the long European tradition of restoration, which may even offer a
new idea in the integrated synergistic diagnosis process. Nowadays, however, things have changed: on the one hand, the physical,
chemical and biological degradation of stone and fresco surfaces are amplified by pollution, demographic pressure, etc.; on the
other hand, the technology allows more detailed control over the processes and materials involved in restoration. In this sense, an
evaluation of biofilm could represent a valuable addition to the local repertoire of techniques, especially if there are symptoms
similar to those already observed in recent studies (defoliation of the structural stone of the wall, detachment of medieval frescoes,
mosaic erosion, etc.). The observations and the monitoring of these ancient and medieval monuments from Romania and Spain are
an example of how this approach becomes an opportunity to identify issues common to several types of cultural heritage
monuments around the world.
Turley, Cameron (The Graduate Center, CUNY), Aká Bendtsen (Ilisimatusarfik [University of Greenland]) and Wendi
Coleman (The Graduate Center, CUNY)
[50]
The Alluitsoq Project: Early Results from a Collaborative, Community-Based Archaeological Research Program in South Greenland
Summer 2019 was the first excavation season of the Alluitsoq Project, a community-based and collaborative research program
investigating the former Moravian mission of Lichtenau in South Greenland (established in 1774). Our efforts last summer were
rewarded with large artifact and archaeofauna collections, additional ethnographic interviews, new collaborators, a significant
expansion in public outreach, mitigation of the ongoing loss of three rapidly eroding Inuit middens, and lessons for further project
development. In this paper we build on Turley’s presentation from the 2019 SANNA forum to preview our preliminary results from
the faunal, organic residue, and ethnographic analyses. Coleman has contributed a discussion on the results of her
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  565
zooarchaeological analysis. Turley presents the first round of results from his work with organic residues, analyzing lipids from
contemporary comparative and archaeological samples using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Bendtsen and Turley then
contemplate these early results, looking through the lens of ethnographic interviews and oral histories from 10 community elders, all
former or current residents of Alluitsoq. These multiple lines of evidence combine to form a picture of how material culture plays its
role in mediating colonial interactions, in mediating cultural persistence and change, and in mediating new forms of identification in
South Greenland.
Turner, Bethany (Georgia State University), Molly Zuckerman (Mississippi State University) and Haagen Klaus (George
Mason University)
[131]
Doing Context-Specific, Anthropological Bioarchaeology: Hard Times from England to the Andes
The concept and approach of ‘bioarchaeology as anthropology’, wherein bioarchaeology is framed as interdisciplinary, hypothesis-
driven, biocultural, cross-cultural, and focused on understanding the adaptation and evolution of social systems, was pioneered by
George Armelagos and has been progressively strengthened and amplified by the work of Debra Martin. Martin’s prolific body of
work has particularly emphasized the crucial importance of operationalizing social theory, and rigorously engaging with ‘culture’ as
multi-dimensional, dynamic, and contingent. In doing so, she creates deeply contextualized interpretations of human remains that
provide emic explanations of complex biocultural phenomena in past societies, such as violence. Here, we demonstrate the
continuing power, scope, and applicability of her approach—particularly for investigations of structural violence in past societies, as
well as resistance to it—through two diverse case studies. The first uses osteological and multi-isotopic analyses in Spanish
Colonial Lambayeque, Peru to theorize indigenous foodways as avenues of cultural resilience. The second investigates skeletal
evidence of poor women’s agency in seeking treatments for syphilis infection in post-medieval England despite gendered social
inequality and misogynistic medical ideologies that historical records suggest greatly limited access to treatments. These disparate
examples help underscore Martin’s significant influence in shaping an anthropological, twenty-first-century bioarchaeology.
Turner, Michelle (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center), Karen Adams (Independent Consultant, Tucson, AZ) and Jean
Berkebile (Apache-Sitgreaves National Forests)
[235]
Domesticated Amaranth (Amaranthus) at the Aztec North Great House, New Mexico
Amaranth (Amaranthus spp.) has long been an important resource in the American Southwest, as evidenced by the archaeological
record and the traditional knowledge and practices of Indigenous communities that have used it for both food and dye. However,
archaeologists have limited evidence as to how early the domesticate appeared or how widely it ranged, due largely to the difficulty
of distinguishing charred domesticated seeds from those of the very common native wild varieties. Recent archaeological testing at
the Aztec North great house, a Chaco Canyon outlier occupied in the late eleventh to mid-twelfth century CE, has demonstrated the
presence of domesticated amaranth seeds mixed with wild amaranth seeds. This research reveals that domesticated amaranth
seeds come in four colors, white/cream, black, and dark and light tan, and in two sizes of black (large, small). We will discuss the
significance of these seeds within the context of archaeobotanical research in the Southwest and in relation to other archaeological
findings at this previously unexcavated Chacoan outlier great house.
Turner, Michelle [149] see Schleher, Kari
Turner, Michelle [147] see Schwindt, Dylan
Tushingham, Shannon (Washington State University)
[15]
Evolutionary Models of Leadership, Risk, and Decision-Making among Women
Human Behavioral Ecology (HBE) models of leadership tend to focus on elucidating the conditions under which top-down (largely
male) leadership emerges. These may include models of dominance, prestige, as well as collective action, which predict that under
certain conditions (e.g., increased population pressure), risk influences autonomous individuals into accepting leadership in
collective actions to buffer freeloading and increase payoffs. Household-level dynamics, leadership, and decision-making by women
are less explored areas of research, yet they hold particular relevance to developmental models of hunter-gatherer delayed return
economies. A critical piece of the equation is elucidating risk and differing strategies between women (risk averse) and men (risk
prone). In this paper I examine these ideas and aim to (1) review relevant HBE models that frame risk and leadership by men and
women and discuss key gaps in archaeological discourse; (2) discuss how HBE logic, particularly that which centers on childcare
opportunity costs, intensification, and decision-making revolving around the costs of storage, applies to foraging communities in
seasonal environments; and (3) propose that women’s leadership and risk averse strategies are key to understanding the evolution
and stability of small autonomous social units among foragers in much of western North America.
Tushingham, Shannon [233] see Fournier, Nichole
Tushingham, Shannon [72] see Fulkerson, Tiffany
Two Bears, Davina [41] see Campbell, Wade
Tykot, Robert (U. of South Florida) and Andrea Vianello (U. of South Florida)
[199]
Sources and Distribution of Palmarola Obsidian in the Central Mediterranean during the Neolithic
The tiny island of Palmarola, about 35 km south of Cape Circeo (between Rome and Naples, Italy), was an important source of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    566
obsidian during the Neolithic in the Central Mediterranean. While thought to have been a minor source, compared to Lipari and
Sardinia, extensive artifact analyses in recent years of museum and other collections show that Palmarola obsidian was widely
distributed, although the use of non-destructive pXRF spectrometers were not capable of distinguishing the three source subgroups
identified through geological survey and analyses by INAA and LA-ICP-MS. Analysis by pXRF has enabled testing of complete
archaeological assemblages and has led to the identification of Palmarola obsidian within lithic assemblages at more than 60
archaeological sites throughout peninsular Italy as well as in Corsica, southern France, the Adriatic, and Croatia. Very rarely,
however, was Palmarola the only obsidian source used at the archaeological sites that have been tested, and it was the major
source at only 25%. The techno-typological characteristics of each artifact were also recorded in order to assess potential
production and use patterns. When possible, the contexts and chronology of the lithic assemblages were incorporated in assessing
and enabling potential statistical comparisons over time, space, and raw material.
[199]
Chair
Tykot, Robert [80] see Taylor, Corinne
Tykot, Robert [159] see Vianello, Andrea
Tzortzopoulou-Gregory, Lita [36] see Kardulias, Paul Nick
Uchida, Junko [205] see Mizoguchi, Koji
Ugalde, Paula (University of Arizona), Virginia McRostie (Pontificia Universidad), Eugenia Gayo, Claudio Latorre (Pontificia
Universidad) and Calogero Santoro (Instituto de Alta Investigación)
[74]
Sociocultural Trends and Innovations along 13,000 Years of Plant Use in the Atacama Desert, Chile
In the Atacama Desert, plant resources are scarce and unevenly distributed due to water availability. However, by compiling all the
available archaeobotanical evidences since the late Pleistocene (ca. 13,000 BP) until the Inka epoch (ca. 450 BP) in a single
database, we demonstrate that populations ranging from mobile hunter-gatherer bands to sedentary people relying in agriculture,
managed plants from the coastal, highlands, and tropical forest ecosystems. Furthermore, we show that people established routes
of interaction to acquire plant resources from very long-distance locations (>600 km). We also demonstrate that by the Formative
period (>3,000–1,500 cal years BP), the introduction of a wide range of farming crops, water control techniques, and cultivation of
diverse plants not only ended the chronic shortage of plants characteristic of an hyperarid environment, but marked the
establishment of a set of staple foods for the Atacama Desert dwellers. Later, under the rule of centralized societies such as the
Inka, people mostly intensified the cultivation of maize. By contrasting the trends of plant utilization along this cultural sequence with
socio-cultural changes, paleodemographic and climatic fluctuations, we note that the “green revolution” of the Formative coincides
with an exponential increase in the number of people inhabiting the Atacama.
[74]
Chair
Ugras, Funda, Tamer Mertan and Müge Ergun
[83]
Comparing Technological Choices for Grain Processing at Aşıklı Höyük, an Early Neolithic Village in Turkey: Experimental Removal
of Chaff from Barley (Hordeum vulgare)
Experimental studies can make significant contributions to understanding the function of grinding stones found in archaeological
contexts. Milling technology at the early Neolithic site of Aşıklı Höyük in Turkey is dominated by querns or grinding slabs, but
mortars and pestles are not uncommon. Most of the mortars at Aşıklı Höyük are conical block mortars found in proximity to grinding
slabs. Unlike the grinding slabs, which are strongly associated with flour production, principal functions of the conical mortars are
less certain. The mortars may have expanded processing capabilities to resources like wild nuts, fruits, and herbaceous plants, or
they could have been important for dehusking grains prior to flour production. Our experiments compare the effectiveness of two
types of pestles (basalt and wood) for dehusking hulled barley (Hordeum vulgare) in a conic basalt mortar under two conditions (with
and without water). We note that the process of dehusking is more effective when water is added and that productivity is less
affected by the choice of a wood or basalt pestle. Importantly, the experiments also allowed botanical remains from the different
processing methods to be analyzed and compared to the archaeobotanical data of Aşıklı Höyük. We report on these comparisons
as well.
Ulm, Sean [238] see McCarthy, John
Umbelino, Claudia [34] see Gonçalves, Célia
Ungar, Peter [147] see Gozner, Amanda
Urban, Thomas [64] see Junge, Justin
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  567
Ure, Scott [147] see Jepsen, Jacob
Uribe, Mauricio
[105]
Las Chacras del Inka en Tarapacá:Imperio o gobernanza en el Tawantinsuyu de los Andes Centro Sur
Tras una prospección recientemente realizada en la Pampa del Tamarugal (Tarapacá, norte de Chile) nos ha proporcionado un sitio
excepcional cuyas características monumentales brindan nuevas posibilidades para abordar arqueológicamente el pasado y sus
relatos en torno al Inca. En efecto, el sitio Iluga Túmulos da cabida a las memorias materializadas a gran escala por múltiples
poblaciones que convergieron en un acotado lugar de Tarapacá y en un amplio rango temporal, desde el Formativo hasta los incas
y españoles (2000 años). Dada la escala, densidad y monumentalidad de sus túmulos funerarios, campos de cultivo y los espacios
públicos asociados a tiempos antes, durante y después del Inca, se estima que las funciones como significados de éstos a lo largo
del tiempo pudieron variar, aunque siempre en relación con la idea de un lugar congregacional de carácter ceremonial que
invocaba a los ancestros para la fertilidad agrícola, constituyendo también espacios productivos y políticos. Aprovechando el
potencial de Iluga Túmulos, desde una “perspectiva simétrica”, en este estudio nos interesa involucrar el máximo entramado de
materialidades, antecedentes y voces en las prácticas y narrativas arqueológicas; intentando alejarnos de la racionalidad cartesiana
que propicia las dicotomías gobernantes-gobernados, en mejor sintonía con la historicidad andina.
Uribe, Mauricio [61] see Santana Sagredo, Francisca
Uruñuela Ladrón de Guevara, Gabriela [119] see Torres Porras, Alicia
Usai, Alessandro [196] see Day, Peter
Utting, Benjamin
[36]
Exploring Prehistoric Technology at the Tràng An Landscape Complex, Vietnam
Palaeolithic stone tool assemblages throughout Southeast Asia are characterized by simple stone tools. Past approaches toward
identifying technological variability in these assemblages have tended to rely on cultural typological methods, which are poorly
suited for assemblages that comprise tools that are rarely curated and that exhibit limited evidence of a formal template. More
recent approaches that include attribute analysis and behavioral ecological modeling are proving more adept at identifying and
interpreting variability in these assemblages, and placing tool use into its environmental context. This poster addresses the
interaction between lithic technology and environmental change at a cluster of Terminal Pleistocene/Early Holocene cave sites in
Ninh Bình Province, Vietnam. It synthesizes lithic analysis, raw material studies, and behavioral ecology to deliver new insights into
prehistoric tropical hunter-gatherer land use in Southeast Asia.
Uzzle, Stephen (University of Arizona)
[122]
Mobility as a Land-Use Strategy in Prehispanic Southwest New Mexico
Fourteenth-century Cliff phase Salado (AD 1300–1450) villages in southwest New Mexico show interesting contrasts in architecture,
burial patterns, artifact accumulation, and other indicators of more frequent mobility in comparison with earlier villages in the same
region from the Classic Mimbres period (AD 1000–1130). Despite heavy reliance on maize agriculture in both time periods, Salado
period villagers likely employed a land-use strategy relying on more frequent mobility between villages and at larger spatial scales in
comparison to Classic Mimbres period residents of the same areas (Nelson and Anyon 1996; Nelson and LeBlanc 1986). This study
assesses evidence for changes in mobility in the Classic Mimbres and Salado periods using datasets from numerous excavations in
the Mimbres region (Upper Gila and Mimbres Valleys) and examines the implications of different mobility patterns for prehispanic
land use strategies.
Vacca, Kirsten (University of California, Berkeley)
[91]
Moderator
[91]
Discussant
Vadala, Jeffrey [175] see Hixson, David
Vagnetti, Lucia [196] see Day, Peter
Vaiglova, Petra, Gideon Hartman (University of Connecticut) and Guy Bar-Oz (University of Haifa)
[159]
Climate stability and societal decline on the margins of the Byzantine Empire in the Negev Desert
In the absence of a high-resolution climate archive in Negev Desert, southern Israel, it has been challenging to reconstruct why the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    568
Byzantine Empire built large towns in this arid region in the fourth century CE—and why it abandoned these settlements three
centuries later. In this study, we used the patterns in dietary and mobility behavior of animals discarded in three recently excavated
Byzantine Negev sites as a proxy to assess possible climatic shifts that may have led to the collapse of the Byzantine society in this
region. We measured matching isotopic sequences in tooth enamel (carbon, 𝛿13C, and oxygen, 𝛿18O) and tooth dentine (𝛿13C and
nitrogen, 𝛿15N) to trace possible changes in the region’s vegetative cover and the animal’s grazing behavior; phenomena that would
have responded to climatic fluctuations. The interpretations draw on distinction between ‘contracted’ vegetation (i.e., inside drainage
channels) and ‘expansive vegetation’, the availability of which sheds light on the micro-climatic conditions in the desert between the
fourth to the seventh centuries CE. The combined proxies contradict an earlier proposition that the region became a ‘green desert’
during the Byzantine period and that climatic deterioration caused the abandonment of these large settlements.
Vail, Gabrielle (UNC-Chapel Hill)
[2]
Earth Deities, Netted Weaves, and an Exploration of Gendered Roles in the Prehispanic Northern Maya Lowlands
Depictions of a netted weave appear frequently in garments worn by female deities in the Late Postclassic Maya codices. They are
linked specifically to deities having associations with the fertile earth, shown in both youthful and elderly aspects, who engage in
various activities; of these, weaving and the production of cloth are especially salient. In other contexts from the northern Maya
lowlands, female figures—or those wearing female-gendered clothing—are likewise portrayed in contexts suggesting links to the
female domain encompassing the earth and the region within the earth, as seen in murals from Postclassic Tulum and in sculpted
contexts at the Late/Terminal Classic site of Chichen Itza, where recumbent females represent the earth itself. These female images
of the earth can be contrasted with others featuring Itzam Kab Ayin—the male creator in his aspect as the crocodilian whose body
forms the surface of the earth. This paper seeks to address how representations of deities—in particular, those wearing garments
suggesting specific associations with the earthly domain and the creative forces of life—not only reflect prehispanic belief systems,
but also provide a glimpse into gendered female and male roles in the Late/Terminal Classic to Postclassic northern Maya lowlands.
Vail, Gabrielle (UNC-Chapel Hill)
[88]
Discussant
Vail, Gabrielle (UNC-Chapel Hill)
[138]
Chair
Vail, Gabrielle [138] see George, Amy
Val, Aurore (Universität Tübingen), Paloma de la Peña (Evolutionary Studies Institute, U. of the Witwatersrand), May
Murungi (Evolutionary Studies Institute, U. of the Witwatersrand), Frank Neumann (Evolutionary Studies Institute, U. of the
Witwatersrand) and Dominic Stratford (School of Geography, Archaeology and Environmental)
[11]
New Excavations of the Middle Stone Age Deposits at Olieboomspoort, South Africa
Olieboomspoort is one of the few rock shelters in South Africa documenting phases of use going back to the Acheulean and up until
the very end of the Later Stone Age. Previous work has focused on the recent phases, consistent with traces left by the last hunters-
gatherers present in the area. Little is known about the earlier phases of occupations of the shelter, predominantly associated with
the Middle Stone Age (MSA). For a start, the chronology of the MSA units is completely unknown. The MSA material is dominated
by lithic artifacts excavated from two test-trenches respectively in 1954 and in 1998. This was attributed to the somewhat ill-defined
Pietersburg industry and still awaits full techno-typological analysis. Finally, the depositional and postdepositional context of the
archaeological finds remains unclear. In 2018, we started a new field project, with the following aims: (1) to provide a clearer
chronological context for the MSA layers; (2) to clarify the stratigraphy and site formation processes; and (3) to technologically re-
evaluate the lithic assemblage. Here, we provide some background on the site alongside preliminary results on the archaeological
(lithic artifacts) and organic (faunal remains, pollen and phytoliths) content of the deposits and on site formation processes.
Valdes, Alejandro [173] see Punzo Díaz, José Luis
Valdez, Fred, Jr. (University of Texas, Austin) and Rissa Trachman (Elon University)
[53]
Contextualizing Maya Ritual: NW Belize and Neighbors
From their Preclassic beginnings to the historic period, ancient Maya ritual/religion was part of everyday life. All aspects of social
and political life among the Maya were conditioned by various religious beliefs and practices. It is nearly impossible to discuss the
Maya past without a consideration of “ritual” that likely influenced how one conducted daily activities. A brief review of these
particular aspects and the inseparable qualities is provided. Examples of ritual and/in daily integration are discussed from NW Belize
as well as cases from immediate neighboring regions.
[53]
Chair
Valdez, Fred, Jr. [253] see Hyde, David
Valdez, Fred, Jr. [169] see Locker, Angelina
Valdez, Fred, Jr. [53] see Stanyard, Zachary
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     569
Valentín Maldonado, Norma (Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia), Miguel Ángel Butrón Cruz (Proyecto Tamtoc-
INAH), Estela Martínez Mora (DEA-INAH) and Adrián Velázquez Castro (MTM-DEA)
[144]
La Estructura F7
En el año 2015 se delimitó la pequeña plataforma del grupo F, denominada como estructura F7. Durante dichos trabajos fueron
encontrados un “joyel del viento” y otras singulares piezas de concha características de la identidad huasteca. Ello permitía inferir
que dicho edificio tenía una importancia singular. En 2016 se realizó la excavación extensiva de la estructura, lo que permitió saber
que había sido edificada en un solo momento constructivo, durante el periodo Posclásico tardío. De la misma forma, se localizaron
tres entierros y singulares depósitos de objetos, posiblemente de carácter ritual. El propósito del presente trabajo es dar a conocer
estos hallazgos e intentar entender la intencionalidad de su enterramiento.
Valentín Maldonado, Norma [10] see Velazquez, Adrian
Valle de Tarazaga, Fran [240] see Fitzpatrick, Leslie
Vallejos, Joshua
[71]
Degrees of Change: Transition from Paleoindian to Archaic
The transition between the Paleoindian (13,000–8,000) and Archaic (8,000–1,000) Periods continues to elude North American
archaeologists. It is inferred from archaeological evidence that human populations were nomadic hunter-gatherers during both
periods. The creation of storage pits, however, provides evidence for some seasonal sedentism during the Archaic Period. This
development may have been influenced by climate change at the end of the Ice Age. Stable Isotopic Analysis of faunal remains
allows archaeologists to capture a snapshot of past climate in a given area. Water Canyon in Magdalena, New Mexico, has yielded
two overlapping bison kill sites. The older kill site dates to the late Paleoindian while the younger site dates to the Early Archaic.
Stable Isotopic Analysis can be performed on the bison remains to determine the paleoecology of the area for two different periods.
Data derived from Stable Isotopic Analysis may then provide archaeologically based evidence for the effects of climate change as a
factor contributing to cultural continuity and change in the American Southwest. The transition from nomadic lifestyles to seasonal
sedentism in the region, for example, may have been influencing by environmental agents visible within isotopic signatures.
Vallejos, Joshua
[91]
Discussant
Van Alst, Emily (Indiana University)
[41]
Chair
Van Alst, Emily (Indiana University)
[60]
Examining Interpretations of Gender in Rock Art Research on the Northwest Plains
Despite ethnographic evidence of women participating in the creation and curation of rock art on the Northwest Plains, there seems
to be an issue in regional archeologists ignoring or forgetting to include women in their interpretations of rock art sites. In this paper,
I seek to quantitatively demonstrate that this bias is present through a meta-analysis of site forms, books, articles, and chapters
detailing rock art sites in Wyoming, Montana, and western South Dakota. By analyzing both writings that have become the
academic canon of the region’s rock art scholarship as well as other works that are not widely cited, I examine this potential lacuna
in regional rock art research and make suggestions as to how best to address the issue at both the local, methodological scale and
the broader theoretical scale.
Van Alst, Emily [41] see Gover, Carlton
Van Alstyne, Benjamin (UNLV), Karen Harry (UNLV) and Daniel Perez (UNLV)
[142]
Archaeological Investigations at a Multicomponent Site on the Shivwits Plateau
During the summer of 2019, members of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas excavated two rooms within Pete’s Pocket, a Virgin
Branch Puebloan site located on the Shivwits Plateau, Arizona. The rooms, which were located about 300 m from the north rim of
the Grand Canyon, were contiguous and circular, forming an almost Figure 8 shape. An unusually large amount of architectural
rubble was associated with one of the rooms, suggesting it likely had been a tower. The second room contained numerous
handstones on its floor, and a piece of leather within its wall. The implications of these findings are discussed.
van Dommelen, Peter (Brown University)
[196]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   570
van Dongen, Bart [120] see Pal Chowdhury, Manasij
Van Dyke, Ruth (Binghamton University)
[108]
Materiality and Memory in Northwest Iberia: Water, Metal and Stone
In this paper, I explore the attractant qualities of water, metal, and stone as they have intertwined with human memory-making over
three millennia in northwest Iberia. During the Bronze and Iron Ages, the confluence of the Rios Sar and Ulla may have been an
important liminal space, as people consigned weapons and other metal implements to their depths. The rivers attracted sea traders,
connecting them with inland sources of tin and gold. Romans brought the watery cult of Neptune when they established the stopover
of Iria Flavia along the Via XIX. Centuries later, Christians transformed an altar to Neptune into El Pedrón—the stone believed to be
the anchor for the boat that brought the body of Santiago up the Rio Sar. Today, this ancient, repurposed stone and the church that
houses it is an important part of Catholic and tourist pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. Working from published archaeological
and historical investigations, I trace the role of materials in the construction of memory over time in and around Padrón, Galicia.
Van Etten, Heidi (University of Wyoming Archaeological Repository) and Marieka Arksey (Office of the Wyoming State
Archaeologist)
[193]
Public Outreach: A Child’s-Eye View
Between the ages of eleven and seventeen, children are independently exploring interests and ideas that, if nurtured, they will carry
into adulthood. At this crucial stage of development, ideas and attitudes acquired through active learning will have far-reaching
impacts. When asked, a group of respondents from this age group felt the majority of science-based outreach activities and
opportunities did not apply to them, either because activities were focused on small children, for adults only, or because they were
boring. By listening to children who should be a target audience in many outreach events and projects, archaeologists have an
opportunity to widen our audience and increase the effectiveness of our outreach endeavors. The lessons learned through larger
archaeological outreach programs can also be adapted and applied to CRM companies striving to meet new public outreach
requirements.
van Gijn, Annelou (Leiden University), Diederik Pomstra, Annemieke Verbaas (Leiden University) and Leo Wolterbeek
[199]
Life and Death of an Experimental Reconstruction of a Late Neolithic House
In 2012 an experimental reconstruction was built of a Late Neolithic house, based on a houseplan from the Vlaardingen culture
(3400–2600 BC). The entire building process was documented and quantified: materials, labor and tool use. Over the years the
house was used by students for their experiments, whereas school kids experienced how it is to live in the Stone Age. In the early
spring of 2019 we burned down the house, fully documenting the entire destruction process. A few months later the remains were
excavated. In this paper the biography of the house will be discussed, from the construction to the excavation. What could still be
told about the original construction from the excavated remains, what was left of the activity areas within the house and what kind of
taphonomical processes had already taken place? Last, the excavated postholes of the burned house are compared to those
documented for the original archaeological houseplan which formed the departure point of the reconstruction.
Van Gijseghem, Hendrik (Pointe-à-Callière, Montreal’s archaeology and history complex)
[231]
The Archaeology and History of United Canada’s First Parliament in Montreal (1844–1849)
In 2017 Montreal’s Pointe-à-Callière museum continued a program documenting the remains of a forgotten gem of Canada’s
architectural and political history: the St. Anne Market/Parliament of United Canada building. Built over the St. Pierre river in 1832 as
a massive feat of civil engineering, it was burned down in 1849, the apotheosis of unfolding antagonism in colonial political
philosophies. However, complex and unforeseen historical circumstances have led to the amazing preservation of these unique
remains. Few sites have yielded such a diversity, richness, and quality of Victorian-era material culture. Moreover, the overall project
has led to other stunning, non-archaeological discoveries that will be presented here.
van Keulen, Fred [215] see Ahlman, Todd
Van Keuren, Scott (University of Vermont), Jeffrey Ferguson (MURR Archaeometry Laboratory) and Mark Agostini (Brown
University)
[120]
Gray Ware Pottery Circulation and the Eruption of Sunset Crater
The eleventh-century eruption of Sunset Crater reshaped cultural landscapes in northern Arizona. Plain ware pottery distributions
hint at population resettlement and the emergence of new social relations. Using Neutron Activation Analyses (NAA) of San
Francisco Mountain Gray Ware, we trace connections between pre- and post-eruption settlements in the Sunset Crater area and the
Cohonina heartland to the northwest. These data reveal new economies of pottery production, but also speak to the notion that
utilitarian pottery was manufactured where it is found and can thus serve as a proxy of cultural boundaries in the past.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        571
van Leeuwen, Willem, Kyle Hartfield (University of Arizona), Sarah LeRoy (University of Arizona), Jeremy Weiss (University
of Arizona) and Lauren Meyer (NPS Vanishing Treasures Program)
[186]
A Cultural Resources Environmental Vulnerability Assessment Tool for National Park Service Intermountain Region Management
Units
Climate variability and change pose risks to landscapes and the cultural resources in National Park Service (NPS) Intermountain Region
management units. The NPS Intermountain Region stretches from Montana to Texas. Cultural resource environmental vulnerability
assessment is the first step in developing a plan for adapting to climate-related risks. Moreover, some assessments lack consideration
of projected climate changes. Using the most recent climate models (those also used in the Fourth National Climate Assessment), we
can quantify the vulnerability of at-risk material types and prioritize parks with at-risk resources. The Cultural Resources Vulnerability
Assessment Tool (CREVAT) is a geospatial web application that maps current environmental and future climate exposures to model the
vulnerability of material types found at cultural resource sites. The application displays a number of exposure layers representing the
degree to which environmental factors impact an area. These exposure layers currently include: Change in Days with Precipitation Less
than 0.01-Inch and Greater than 1-Inch, Wildfire Hazard Potential, Change in Freeze Thaw Frequency, Change in Annual Maximum
Temperature, and Soil Erodibility Factor. The reports and graphical outputs of the assessment tool are inputs to park-based scenario
planning processes, helping managers to develop potential adaptation strategies.
Van Slyke, Andrew (University of West Florida) and Hunter Whitehead (TerraSond)
[18]
Testing Photogrammetric Methods on Submerged Precontact Sites in Florida
In 2019, members of the Submerged Paleo-Landscape Archaeological Survey and Heritage project (SPLASH) tested
photogrammetric methods on three submerged precontact sites in Florida. Photogrammetric methods have been widely utilized to
interpret submerged historic sites; however, this has not been the case for submerged precontact sites. At the Lewis-McQuinn site
(8DI112) in the Suwannee River, the Page-Ladson site (8JE591) in the Aucilla River, and the Clint Scallop Hole site (8JE1796) in
Apalachee Bay, each in unique underwater environments with variable sediment types and visibility, divers collected video of
geologic profiles and artifacts discovered in situ to test 3D modeling capabilities. The methods of collecting imagery for the creation
of photogrammetric models of submerged precontact sites and geologic profiles are discussed here. The results from one site in the
Gulf of Mexico and two riverine environments in Florida demonstrate the promise photogrammetry has for the recording and
interpretation of inundated precontact sites.
Van Slyke, Andrew [18] see Smith, Morgan
Vance, Ashley (University of Illinois, Chicago) and Benjamin Carter (Muhlenberg College)
[257]
Non-Dietary Applications of Spondylus in Precolumbian Ecuador
The family Spondylidae is comprised of bivalve mollusks called “Spiny Oysters,” or Spondylus, which have delicate fleshy bodies
guarded by a “thorny” calcium carbonate shell. Two species of Spondylus, S. crassisquama (S. princeps) and S. limbatus (S.
calcifer) occupy the warm Pacific waters of Ecuador and Peru. Archaeological, ethnographic, and iconographic sources have
demonstrated the importance of these shells in prehispanic Andean communities. This presentation highlights new research on
precolumbian archaeological use of the bivalves in Ecuador, paying special attention to historical shell harvesting and marine
resource exchange in the Andean region. This talk will also address new research using archaeomalacological approaches,
including sclerochronology and GIS mapping of natural distributions.
Vander Linden, Marc (University of Cambridge) and David Meltzer (Southern Methodist University)
[173]
“You shall not oppress your neighbor, nor rob him” (Leviticus, 19.13): Methodological and Practical Considerations to Reassess the
Genetics-Archaeology Dialogue
The self-proclaimed ancient genomic revolution is oft-likened to the radiocarbon revolution of the 1950s. Yet, while each provides
important insight, these are merely methodological tools. The data they provide may be necessary to answering archaeological
questions, but are rarely sufficient. Consequently, archaeologists need to become better able to understand aDNA methods and
data, just as geneticists need to learn about archaeology. So what can be done to ensure a more symbiotic relationship? First,
aDNA data and results need to be made less opaque. Sequences deposited in genbanks are of limited use to most archaeologists
who, for example, could make better use of eigenvalues or consistent admixture values for all individuals, for exploratory data
analysis. Second, archaeologists do not need to become aDNA specialists, but need to engage more with genetics to be able to
gain a critical understanding of what aDNA can and cannot offer. Third, all parties need to actively collaborate in framing analytical
question(s), interpreting data, and putting the salient results in a larger context. Hopefully that will come as genetic research
becomes more hypothesis-driven, for then data can be evaluated not just on its internal genetic consistency, but whether it makes
sense in terms of archaeology.
Vandergugten, John [77] see Waters, Albert
VanderHoek, Richard (Alaska Office of History and Archaeology)
[69]
The Survival of the Spearthrower: An Overview of Throwingboard Technology from Northwestern North America
Northwestern North America provides a variety of evidence for spearthrower use, from ice patches and other archaeological sites to
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       572
extensive ethnographic documentation for sea mammal hunting. This paper will give an overview of archaeological and
ethnographic evidence for spearthrower and dart use in this broad region, focusing on the variation in marine throwingboards
between regions and through time. For example, comparison of archaeological and ethnographic examples shows continuity of style
in throwingboard use on northern Kodiak Island, where wet site archaeological finds show continuity of design for at least 700 years,
yet on Alaska’s northern coast, throwingboards from frozen sediments show a dramatic change in the last 1,000 years.
Northwestern North America has one of the very few areas in the world, the Yukon River Delta, where the throwingboard is still used
for hunting, being the tool of choice for ensuring the recovery of marine mammals hunted in fresh/brackish water. Work by traditional
carvers and archaeologists are bringing throwingboard and dart use back at tribal culture camps and with other groups in the region.
VanDerwarker, Amber (UCSB)
[1]
Chair
VanDerwarker, Amber (UCSB) and Dana Bardolph (Northern Illinois University)
[72]
Analytical Approaches to Identifying Inequities
Recent years have witnessed a resurgence of interest in how gender bias and a lack of diversity has affected the work that
archaeologists produce, interest that dovetails with current concerns about equity and safety issues. A series of recent publications,
in archaeology and in the broader realm of academia, employ different methods of data collection and analysis to document
inequities in various scientific fields, from publication to grant funding to salary disparities along gendered lines. In this paper, we
discuss the methodological complexities associated with doing this type of work. We highlight a variety of examples of statistical
measures and data visualization techniques from case studies in archaeology and other disciplines to explore best-practice
approaches to studying inequity in a robust quantitative manner. The more rigorous we are in the application of analytical
techniques to identify disparities, the more likely we are to be effective at recommending and implementing changes within these
spheres.
VanDerwarker, Amber [1] see Meyers, Maureen
Vandiver, Pamela [261] see Klesner, Catherine
Vang, Natasha [61] see Scaffidi, Beth
VanPool, Christine
[99]
Discussant
VanPool, Christine [136] see VanPool, Todd
VanPool, Todd (University of Missouri) and Christine VanPool (University of Missouri, Columbia)
[136]
“Watching from the Hidden Place”: Linking Ritual Space at Paquimé Using Architecture and Mirrored Features
Paquimé, the largest settlement during the Medio period (AD 1200–1450) occupation of northern Chihuahua and southern New
Mexico, has striking examples of communal spaces including two large public ball courts, ceremonial mounds in open plazas, and
enormous agave roasting pits that were likely central to communal feasting. Many of these communal places are symbolically linked
and at times directly linked though line-of-sight pathways with interior, private areas within the roomblook. For example, the interior
“ceremonial” ball court mirrors the two communal I-shaped ball courts outside of the roomblock. The Mound of the Heroes was
linked through a series of strategically placed windows to an interior plaza where the activities at the Mound could be watched and
likely augmented by rituals in hidden places. Here we examine the link between communal spaces and private locations to gain
insight into their linked ritual and social uses. Our analysis reflects the ways that private ‘high ritual’ and communal ritual interact to
create, modify, and legitimize each other.
VanValkenburgh, Parker (Brown University)
[32]
Moderator
VanValkenburgh, Parker [242] see Plekhov, Daniel
Vanzetti, Alessandro (University of Rome “La Sapienza”)
[207]
Discussant
Vanzetti, Alessandro [196] see Levi, Sara
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    573
Vargas, Juan Pablo [257] see Yamamoto, Atsushi
Varien, Mark (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center), Grant Coffey (Crow Canyon Archaeological Center), Gert Riemersma
(Routescene), Vincent MacMillan (BLM Canyons of the Ancients National Monument) and Steve McCormack (Caddis
Aerial)
[147]
Lidar Mapping Sand Canyon Pueblo: Technical Collaboration for Site Visualization and Reassessment
The Research Institute at the Crow Canyon Archaeological Center partnered with Canyons of the Ancients National Monument and
two private companies, Routescene Inc. and Caddis Aerial, to conduct a lidar survey of Sand Canyon Pueblo. The drone-based lidar
data penetrates the dense vegetation present on the site to make a highly accurate map. This allows archaeologists and the public
to better visualize the site and augments previous mapping efforts. Working together, we collected the data, finalized the site
imagery, produced a video explaining the project, and published a description of the project that appeared in several venues. This
poster details the work done as part of this project and focuses on new interpretations of the site made possible from the lidar work.
We also describe how lessons learned from this project will influence the future use of this technology at other sites in the area.
Finally, this project provides an important opportunity to augment and assess previous maps of Sand Canyon Pueblo produced by
Crow Canyon during its excavations there from 1984 to 1993.
Varillas, Rosa María (University of Illinois, Chicago), Carol Rodriguez Romero (Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Peru)
and Francesca Fernandini
[243]
Dyed Threads and Identity in the Cerro de Oro Textiles
In order to shed light on the nature of the people that inhabited a prehispanic city in Peru between two well-defined moments of
occupation, the authors explore the usage of color in textiles through two central aspects: a technical analysis of the manufacturing
attributes of dyed threads, and a visual study on the different color groups found in the sample through color palettes. The main goal
is to establish any changes in color use and production over time, as well as any particular preference in raw materials or spin of
threads that were to be dyed compared to the naturally colored ones. With this data, the authors will explore the nature of the people
living in Cerro de Oro, Cañete, between AD 550–850 and the group who used the archaeological site as a burial space between AD
900 and 1000. Here color works as a key attribute that seeks to define a Cerro de Oro identity.
Varley, Emily (Baylor University)
[51]
Analysis of the Fortification of San Giuliano in Lazio, Italy
Every inhabited space tells a story about the cultural values, social norms, and lives of those who utilized the space. This paper
focuses on the archaeological remains of a medieval fortification and presumed castle located in Barbarano Romano, Italy atop the
San Giuliano plateau. It discusses the excavated ruins as a source of data for understanding how this castle was once a social
space as well as examining the implications the space likely had on social actors who interacted within the fortification. By
integrating material evidence collected over four years of excavation, historical sources which refer to the site and other similar sites,
and spatial analysis, I will draw conclusions about the space and how it reveals cultural values and social norms as well as tells a
story that gives insight into the lives of those in the past.
Varney, R. A. (PaleoResearch Institute Inc.) and Linda Scott Cummings (PaleoResearch Institute Inc.)
[66]
What Happens When Your Depositional Record Appears to Be Scrambled: Interpreting the Deposition, Radiocarbon, and Pollen
Signatures for Bijou Creek, Colorado
The West Bijou Creek site, 5AH04, is situated in eastern Colorado on the first terrace above West Bijou Creek, an entrenched
meandering stream that flows from the Palmer Divide to join the South Platte River. The stratigraphic record, exposed in a cut bank,
appeared to be intact, so a 5-meter core was extracted and examined to better understand the local and regional paleoenvironment.
Radiocarbon dates from 18,000 to 945 RC, collected from obvious strata, were out of order, suggesting a punctuated depositional
and erosional history. A detailed pollen record, supported by six radiocarbon dates and XRF analysis at 3mm intervals, at first
presented a puzzling record. Upon re-examination, it appeared that alluvial sediments represented cut and fill sequences of
meanders rather than continuous deposition. Therefore, re-ordering the pollen and XRF signatures by radiocarbon ages afforded an
opportunity to examine this record in age order, revealing periods of elevated pine, goosefoot family, and sagebrush pollen. XRF
elements critical in understanding the depositional sequence include sulfur and strontium and the titanium/iron and
strontium/calcium ratios. Identifying sediment packages through radiocarbon dating allows paleoenvironmental interpretations not
possible without this level of analysis. We discuss challenges and successes of this evaluative process.
Varney, R.A. [66] see Battillo, Jenna
Vasquez Pazmino, Josefina (University of Florida)
[119]
GIS-Toponyms Analysis in Colta Lake Valley (Chimborazo, Ecuador)
Toponymic analysis in archaeology demonstrates the impact of colonialism on the spatial distribution and occupation of the year
Colta Lake valley during sixteenth and nineteenth Centuries. The Colta region was home to pluri-cultural settlements in which
linguistic interaction between Puruwá, Kichwa, and Spanish languages produced differentiation, syncretism, hybridity, and
inkanization. Based on historical maps and the results of the archaeological survey of Colta Lake valley, I have produced a
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       574
toponymic study using GIS-mapping to evaluate the trends of the relationships between Puruwá, Inka, and Spanish toponyms.
Changes in the agricultural economy and the appropriation of environmental zones, more than religious reasons, better explain the
transformation of toponyms under successive waves of colonialism.
Vaughn, Kevin (UC Riverside)
[21]
Discussant
Vavrasek, Jessica (The University at Albany) and John Hart (Research and Collections Division, New York State)
[29]
Pottery and Pipes, What Are They Trying to Tell Us? Interaction between Jefferson County Iroquoians Explored through Social
Network Analysis of Pottery and Pipe Motifs
Pottery and pipe decorative motifs are generally thought to change across time, space and group affiliation. While pipes and pottery
have been extensively study using various methods, they have only recently been studied in present-day New York, southern
Ontario, and Quebec (Northern Iroquoia) using social network analysis (SNA). Analyses to date have primarily focused on pan
Iroquoian networks rather than on regions within Northern Iroquoia. To better understand the St. Lawrence Iroquoians living in and
around present-day Jefferson County, New York, we have begun to utilize SNA methods to analyze pottery and pipe decorative
motifs to elucidate village interactions within this geographically restricted region, and to determine if the roles of individual villages
differed in intra- and extra-regional networks. Initial results indicate village interactions between those living within Jefferson County
differed from interactions of the same villages in the pan-Iroquoian networks. This is true for networks based on both pottery and
pipe decorative motifs. In addition, pottery design motif networks differ from pipe design motifs networks, suggesting that interaction
networks may have differed based on gender.
Vázquez-de-Ágredos-Pascual, Maria Luisa [10] see Puértolas, Carlos
Veach, Shawna [230] see Coughenour, Chance
Veach, Shawna [53] see Walling, Stanley
Vega, Enrique [28] see Hendrickson, Mitch
Vehik, Susan (University of Oklahoma)
[213]
Origins of Plains Military (Lance) Societies
Conflict was a vey common and often remarked upon feature of North American Great Plains cultures following European contact.
The institutionalization of conflict among these cultures was marked by organizations known as military, lance, or warrior societies.
These societies had distinctive material inventories marked by various animals, colors, and staffs or lances with distinctive points
generally made of metal. As conflict was present on the Plains hundreds of years before European contact, military societies likely
have their origins there as well. The best material remains of these societies for archaeologists may be lance points as most other
remains are unlikely to preserve. Using distinctive forms of very large stone projectile points that likely served as lance points, this
poster traces the development of Plains military societies.
Velasco Alban, Janny (Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar)
[257]
Anthropic Soils in Ecuadorian Upper Amazon? Approaches to the ADE Discussion from La Lomita Midden, Upano Earthen Mound
Complex, Morona Santiago Ecuador
Since Wim Sombroek’s research about Amazonian Dark Earths (ADE) in Brazil, many surveys have related these anthropic soils to
the sustainability of great populations for long-term periods in amazon environments. Brazil has led the investigation in this field,
promoting great advances on the understanding of the ancient peoples from the Amazon Basin. Arroyo-Kalin (2014) brings the
debate about ADE in Western Amazonia, discussing the possibility of ADE archaeological sites in Peru, Colombia and Ecuador. In
recent years, researchers have worked on anthropic soils in Ecuadorian Amazon; however, they have mildly addressed the issue
with mere inferences about anthropic soils in archaeological sites. In 2016, a survey sought to study the effects of human-
environment interaction on the stratigraphy of an archaeological Midden from the Upano Earthen Mound Complex (Porras, 1987;
Rostain, 1997; Salazar, 2008). This study has produced a chemical characterization of the soils, finding interesting data to
understand human landscape transformation. This paper brings into discussion the anthropic soils investigation in Ecuadorian
Amazon, contributing to the debate of ADE in Western Amazonia.
Velásquez García, Erik (Instituto de Investigaciones Estéticas de la UNAM)
[223]
Los gobernantes de la dinastía Kaanu’l en Dzibanché, Quintana Roo, México
Diversos hallazgos arqueológicos en Dzibanché (Kaanu’l) y en otros sitios de las tierras bajas mayas orientales han revelado que el
asiento original de los gobernantes de la dinastía Kaanu’l o “Cabeza de Serpiente” se encontraba en el sur del actual estado
mexicano de Quintana Roo. En esta ponencia se ofrecerá un recuento de toda la información disponible hasta el momento, para
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   575
conocer el devenir de los mandatios mayas de ese linaje gobernante, antes de que una rama de ellos se escindiera en 635–636
d.C. y se asentara en Calakmul (Huxte’ Tuun). No obstante, aún después de que una parte de la dinastía se asentara en el sur de
Campeche, tenemos evidencia de que el núcleo de esa familia gobernante continuó habitando por tiempo indefinido en Dzibanché.
Velazquez, Adrian, Belem Zúñiga (Proyecto Templo Mayor 8va temporada) and Norma Valentín (INAH-Subdirección de
Laboratorios y Apoyo Académic)
[10]
Archaeological Mollusks from Xalla
The Project “Teotihuacan, élite y gobierno” (Teotihuacan elite and government) has excavated 420 artifacts made of mollusk’s
shells. Ninety-one of them are objects, and 166 are valves or fragments that present traces of human modification; 163 are
fragments with no traces of human work. In this paper, the results of the analyses carried out on this collection are presented, which
include biological, typological, and technological aspects.
Velázquez Castro, Adrián [144] see Valentín Maldonado, Norma
Velázquez Galindo, Yuribia [269] see Arieta Baizabal, Virginia
Velchoff, Nancy (University of Texas, Austin)
[170]
Mike Collins and the Chuck Norris Effect
Mike Collins is known for his lithic expertise and Clovis Technology. The Gault Site is best known for at least 2-major components,
Clovis Technology and Mike Collins. An archaeological icon for longer than he’d like to admit (more than a half century) is revered
for his rare ability to connect to any population or age to inspire excitement about Texas and the peopling of the Americas. 15-
minutes doesn’t even cover a fraction of the impact that he has had on countless thousands of people, and in order of magnitude
one of the hardest tasks any person could ever be assigned. This presentation will attempt to bring some fresh perspective on the
excavations conducted in Area 15 as well as others around the Gault Site to honor Mike’s monumental achievements and generous
spirit that has brought so many people together for a common cause.
[170]
Chair
Velchoff, Nancy [73] see Williams, Thomas
Véliz, Vito [130] see Pineda de Carias, Maria-Cristina
Venter, Marcie (Murray State University) and Lacy Risner (Murray State University)
[227]
A Stylistic Comparison of a Cached Ballgame Yoke from Matacanela, Veracruz
The ballgame complex was an important component of the Classic Veracruz style that spanned the Late or Epiclassic period (AD
600–900) and that was concentrated along the Mesoamerican Gulf lowlands and extended into adjacent regions. The ballgame,
however, has early roots, both in Mesoamerica in general and in Veracruz in particular. In this paper, we will situate stylistically,
spatially, and temporally a broken yet complete stone ballgame yoke recovered from an in situ Late Classic offering context at the
Classic period center, Matacanela, located in the south-central Tuxtla Mountains. Although the date of discard and interment was
during the Late Classic, we examine how this yoke compares with the broader corpus of carved stone yokes and consider
processes of curation, authority, place-making, and memory in ancient Mesoamerica.
Vento, Frank J. [222] see Freund, Kyle
Ventresca Miller, Alicia (University of Michigan)
[244]
Dairying and Domestication in the Altai Mountains
The Altai Mountains, which delimit the western and eastern steppe, is an integral zone to understanding the timing of the adoption of
livestock. The transition to pastoral lifeways across central and inner Asia occurs not as a regular advancement, but in punctuated
fits and starts. Whether the Altai are a boundary or one of increased connectivity is unclear, as scholars continue to grapple with
evidence for trade and integration. In this paper we access several lines of evidence to clarify human-animal interactions, including
an outline of the timing and location(s) of the adoption of domesticated livestock and the consumption of species-specific dairy
products. Through detailed biomolecular analyses we demonstrate that ruminant pastoralism and dairying were adopted in the Altai
region at an early date, while the introduction of domesticated horses and horse dairy occurred much later. Our results support
models where domesticates and dairying are intertwined, albeit with an extended lag time between livestock species. These findings
provide needed insight into the trajectory of ancient human-animal interactions in Eurasia.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   576
Vepretskii, Sergei (Russian State University for the Humanities), Dmitri Beliaev (Russian State University for the
Humanities), Monica de Leon (Atlas Epigrafico de Peten) and Camilo Luin (Popol Vuh Museum, Guatemala)
[130]
Archaeological Reconnaissance and Excavations at El Encanto (Petén, Guatemala) in 2018
The Maya site of El Encanto is situated 12 km to the northeast from Tikal epicenter. Discovered in 1907 and occasionally visited by
various projects throughout the twentieth century, it has never been the subject of large-scale excavations. Based on the map by the
University of Pennsylvania Tikal project in 1964 that included two groups, El Encanto was interpreted by Dennis Pulestone as a
“minor center” within larger Tikal. In 2018 Atlas Epigráfico de Petén project realized two-week field work that included mapping of
the site and test-pit excavations in the South Group. The site turned out to be significantly larger and included at least four large
architectural groups with two internal causeways. The Southern Group, which is dominated by a 14-meter pyramid, played the role
of a ritual center. The Northern and Western groups, apparently, had an administrative and residential character. The occupation of
El Encanto goes back to the Middle Preclassic; the construction of the South Group started in the Late Preclassic or Protoclassic.
The latest levels are dated to the Late Classic. We suggest that El Encanto should not be regarded as a “minor center”, but as a
middle-level urban community within Tikal periphery.
Vepretskii, Sergei [223] see Helmke, Christophe
Verbaas, Annemieke [199] see van Gijn, Annelou
Vernon, Kenneth (University of Utah), Kate Magargal (University of Utah), D. Craig Young (Far Western Anthropological
Research Group), David Zeanah (California State University, Sacramento) and Brian Codding (University of Utah)
[195]
Explaining Paleoindian Settlement in the Intermountain West: A Marked Point Process Approach
What explains Paleoindian (or Prearchaic) settlement patterns? Answering this question matters because it allows archaeologists to
infer the drivers of colonization, mobility, and subsistence. Unfortunately, important proxies like spatial site patterning merely
approximate the actual distribution of settlement behavior. This is owing not only to taphonomic decay, but also to lingering survey
and statistical shortcomings, including imperfect detection, small samples, and presence-only observations. In principle, these fall
under the same concept of statistical thinning, whereby some subset of the true distribution is removed from analysis, thus
increasing the potential for spatial sampling bias. To address that bias and reliably evaluate hypotheses regarding the ecological
motivations for Paleoindian settlement, we explore recent advances in the allied field of ecology, which faces structurally similar
challenges. Specifically, we propose a multicomponent (or marked) Poisson point process modeling approach, drawing on the high-
resolution distribution of Paleoindian sites in Grass Valley, Nevada.
Vestuto, Matthew [160] see Hoppa, Kristin
Vetrisano, Lucas (University of Buenos Aires)
[232]
Blade Production in Southern Patagonia, Argentina: A Comparison between Cases from the Chico and Santa Cruz River Basins
Evidence for blade production has been found in the Santa Cruz River Basin, with chronologies between ca. 1900 and 1100 years
BP. Although in all the cases the blade component is limited to a small percentage of the total assemblage, it shows all the
technological characteristics of proper laminar reduction methods in regard to the shaping of the cores, preparation of the flaking
platform and the systematic extraction of blades, often used as blanks for retouched tools. Despite the similarities, there are is also
an important degree of variability in their frequency, as well as in the characteristics of the blades and cores produced. In this paper
we will compare our findings from the Santa Cruz River Basin with surface assemblages from the Chico River, to the North. The
area is close to sites which provided evidences of blade technology, mainly dated between 9500 and 4500 years BP. The two areas
compared are very different in environmental terms with variations in lithic raw materials, rock shelters and water availability. The
comparison of the artifacts allows us to asses the variability between the different cases of blade production in the region and to
assign a possible chronology to the surface recollections.
Vetrisano, Lucas [198] see Franco, Nora
Vianello, Andrea (University of South Florida)
[118]
Discussant
Vianello, Andrea (University of South Florida) and Robert Tykot (University of South Florida)
[159]
Mobility Patterns in Early Medieval Northeastern Italy: Results of Strontium and Oxygen Isotope Analyses
The study of skeletal materials from the region between Ravenna, capital of the Empires and Kingdoms in the fourth–eighth
centuries AD, and the Venetian lagoon had previously neglected migration and mobility approaches outside Ravenna itself, despite
the high mobility expected for that time. In this study, strontium isotope analysis by multi-collector ICP mass spectrometry was done
on teeth and bones of 100 individuals from 8 sites dating from the sixth–seventh centuries AD to determine the approximate
percentage of individuals born outside the investigated area, whether there is a pattern based on sex, and how many geographic
areas are represented. We use a database of existing analyses of animals and soils and our analyses of local water and plants for
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                577
comparison to determine foreign individuals, who may have come from across the Alps. Strontium isotopes are combined with
oxygen isotopes for some individuals to strengthen our ability to recognize mobility patterns. The burials encompass different
sectors of the society, from a crucifixion to a jeweled lady. The sampling of small cemeteries across a broader area instead of
sampling individuals at one site is valuable in providing a robust perspective of mobility in the region during the early Medieval
period.
Vianello, Andrea [199] see Tykot, Robert
Vidal-Guzmán, Cuauhtémoc (George Washington University), Alexis Clark (Advisory Council on Historic Preservation) and
Jeffrey Blomster (George Washington University)
[189]
Ceramics for a “New Sunrise”: Contextualizing a Mixtec Non-Polychrome Ware
While the Mixtec region of Oaxaca, Mexico is famous for its polychrome ceramics, including the iconographically rich “codex style”
pottery, we argue that non-polychrome ceramics also played a significant role in conveying particular messages associated with
ongoing social and political re-articulations during the Postclassic period (900–1521 AD). As new social orders were being
established in the aftermath of the political collapse of numerous Classic period polities, so did the means that promoted and
strengthened them. Similar to the better-known Mixtec polychrome ceramics, painted bichrome serving vessels also bore complex
decorative motifs. We focus primarily on a particular type called Yanhuitlán Red on Cream, a ware found throughout the entire
region in both elite and commoner contexts, with a large sample recently excavated at two middens in the site of Etlatongo, in the
Nochixtlán Valley. We propose that Yanhuitlán Red on Cream ceramics communicated through its iconography an ideology directly
linked with newly emergent forms of political power that suggested a new beginning, a new sunrise or creation in which humans
could practice agriculture due to the originary covenant with Earth and Rain forged by elites.
Vilar, Miguel (National Geographic), Frank Camacho (University of Guam), Gregory Vilshansky (National Geographic
Society), Koji Lum (Binghamton University) and Theodore Schurr (University of Pennsylvania)
[100]
New Insights into the History of Guam from Genomic Data
Guam is the largest and most populated island of Micronesia. Archaeological and linguistic evidences suggest Guam and the
Marianas were settled 3,600 years before present (ybp) from Island Southeast Asia (ISEA). Guam was also the first Pacific island
encountered by Europeans, later colonized for three centuries by Spain, and a stopping-point in the Acapulco-Manila galleon trade.
In 1898 Guam was annexed by USA. To infer origins of Guamanians and the impact of historical circumstances on islanders, we
analyzed 130,000 autosomal, Y chromosome, and mitochondrial (mt) DNA markers from 68 Guamanians. DNAs were compared to
those from ISEA, neighboring Pacific islands, and a database of global populations. Results reveal that 92% of Guamanians
belonged to mtDNA haplogroup E from ISEA, yet rare in Oceania, whereas 8% belonged to a unique branch of a Pacific
haplogroup. Paternal (Y DNA) lineages showed ties to Indonesia and the Philippines (84%) and 16% were European. Autosomal
DNA was a mix of Southeast Asian (76%), European (18%), and Amerindian (4%). That detail, though unexpected, is likely a
product of the connection to Mexico during Spanish colonization. Historical records detail dozens of Spanish galleons docking, and
wrecking, in the Marianas between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Vilar, Miguel (National Geographic)
[173]
Discussant
Villalpando, Elisa [240] see Carpenter, Michelle
Villalpando, Elisa [79] see McGuire, Randall
Villalva, Daniela
[266]
An Interdisciplinary Proposal for the Study of Sound and Music in Moche Art: The Case of the Afterlife/Underworld Dances (Dance
of the Dead)
In Moche art, sound and music can be found in a variety of supports, from sculptured bottles to the notorious fine line paintings.
Sound instruments, musicians and musical performances are spread in many of the major themes and narratives displayed in
worldwide museums and discussed by scholars in the last four decades. One of these narratives is the Afterlife/Underworld Dances,
where skeletons dance and play flutes in the world of the dead (hurin in the Andean ontologies). Morphological and iconographic
variations in the sample led us to establish five different subthemes, which can indicate chronological and regional idiosyncrasies in
the production and distribution of this theme amongst the different valleys of the Peruvian northern coast in the Moche era.
Proposing a methodological approach based on the convergence of visual semantics and ethnomusicological data, ontological
aspects of Moche sound production will be discussed, like the roles of flutes in rites of passage to the afterlife.
Villarreal, Alessandra (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[158]
Middle Preclassic Ceramic Distribution in Western Belize: A Comparative Study from Early Xunantunich
The value of ceramic sherds and vessels to the archaeologist extends far beyond the chronology of a site. Ceramic production and
distribution data, for example, reveal information about ancient lifeways, ideologies, and movement across a landscape, ultimately
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  578
telling us more about the people behind the pottery. In this paper, I will discuss the methods that archaeologists use to track ancient
ceramic production and distribution—including formal and typological analyses, as well as mineralogical and compositional testing.
A case study from the Mopan river valley in western Belize compares ceramic assemblages from the hinterland site of San Lorenzo
and the ritual center of Early Xunantunich to build an understanding of how ceramics are differentially produced and distributed
across these two contexts. The goal of this study is to highlight the social, ritual, and economic relationships between the sites that
are materialized in the ceramic assemblages. Further comparison to assemblages from the sites of Cahal Pech and Barton Ramie,
both situated west along the Belize River, reveals broader regional patterns of distribution, suggesting that, while Early Xunantunich
maintained a relationship with these sites, they also produced their own variety of ceramics.
Villasana, Isabell [205] see James, Nathaniel
Villasenor Iribe, Eunice (Arizona State University) and Christopher Morehart (Arizona State University)
[269]
Landscape Modification and Agricultural Production on Cerro Ahumada, Mexico
Studying agricultural productivity and intensification elucidates the behavioral and demographic patterns of past societies. By
understanding how physical environments were modified for agricultural use, it is possible to determine key economic and social
processes. This paper presents the results of the analysis of terraces associated with the Epiclassic period (ca. 600–900 CE) site of
Los Mogotes, located on Cerro Ahumada between the northern Basin of Mexico and the southern Mezquital valley of central
Mexico. We created GIS maps of terraces to determine their distribution. We have also produced estimates for the agricultural
productivity of terraces, which sheds light on several important economic, political, and demographic characteristics. Finally, we
integrate excavation data with ethnographic data on terraces to better ascertain other important functional and technological
attributes of the terraces.
Villaverde, Valentín [162] see Cabanes, Dan
Villegas, Gabriel [106] see Matsumoto, Go
Vilshansky, Gregory [100] see Vilar, Miguel
Vincent, Brice [205] see Little, Nicole
Vining, Benjamin (University of Arkansas, Fayetteville), Daniel Contreras (University of Florida) and Aubrey Hillman
(University of Louisiana, Lafayette)
[125]
The Organization and Scale of Agroecological Networks in Arid Environments of Coastal Peru as Risk Factors during Abrupt
Climatic Shifts
Extensive archaeological survey in the coastal portions of Peru’s Chicama Valley demonstrates that multiple agroecological
strategies were utilized during the prehispanic period. Even coarse-resolution chronological reconstructions suggest these
developed under varying climatic regimes, and this diversity may hold clues to mitigating or anticipating the impacts of future climatic
variability on agriculture. Here, we reanalyze published data on archaeological settlement distributions and palaeoclimatic conditions
within a geospatial framework to examine how variations in hydroclimate and landcover presented both risks and potential
opportunities for inhabitants of the Chicama Valley. We focus in particular on questions of how the scale, organization, and
strategies of agroecological networks conditioned responses to climate variations. We use remote sensing to estimate how
vegetation and ground/surface water dynamics responded to past climatic regimes, and through analysis of site catchments we
assess the commitments of each site to different agricultural strategies. Scaling this analysis up enables assessment of the varying
commitments of networks of contemporary sites and thus diachronic assessments of vulnerability. This approach is scalable in
space and amendable as improved archaeological and paleoclimate data become available, and through it we ultimately can better
understand how organizational mechanisms may contribute to vulnerability and resilience to climatic changes.
Vining, Benjamin (University of Arkansas, Fayetteville)
[220]
Discussant
Vining, Benjamin [59] see Contreras, Daniel
Vint, James (Desert Archaeology Inc.)
[24]
Stratigraphy and Chronology at Las Capas, an Early Agricultural Period Site in the Tucson Basin
This paper discusses the stratigraphic chronology for the Las Capas site in the Tucson Basin, southern Arizona. Las Capas was
inhabited by early farmers during the Late Archaic/Early Agricultural period (EAP), which dates from ca. 2100 cal BC to cal AD 50.
Maize and canal irrigation were introduced during this interval; settlement shifted from mobile hunting and foraging lifeways to a
more sedentary farming-based economy. Extensive excavations at Las Capas documented occupations within five distinct
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    579
floodplain strata. Cultural features included dozens of pithouses, thousands of pits, human and canine inhumations, and canal-
irrigated field systems. OxCal is used to model the site’s chronology based on the stratigraphy, which is dated by 78 AMS
radiocarbon and 3 OSL ages. The model divides EAP phases into relatively short intervals that provide the opportunity to study
change through time within otherwise monolithic culture-historical phases 400 or more years in duration. Over two dozen other EAP
sites have been excavated in the Tucson Basin, and more than 200 radiocarbon samples analyzed. The work at Las Capas and
evaluation of data from these sites indicate it is possible to model contemporaneity of EAP settlements in the Tucson Basin, and
refine the regional chronology in general.
Viola, Tony, IV, Corey Knox (University of Arizona) and Sara P. Chavarria (University of Arizona)
[184]
Experiential Archaeology Programming for Youth: An Evaluation
Linking Southwest Heritage Through Archaeology (LSWHTA) is an experiential youth archaeology program, run in partnership
between the National Park Service (NPS) and the University of Arizona (UA). Using archaeology as a tool, LSWHTA works with
local Latinx and Indigenous identifying high school students to engage with and explore various NPS locations and other cultural
and archaeological sites in Arizona. Students also participate in an archaeological field school, visit laboratories and interact with
archaeologists and scientists at the University of Arizona. Students who come from communities of historically low engagement or
exclusion from such spaces are able to learn about the rich cultures and people of the Southwest, in addition to being exposed to
potential fields of study or employment within the NPS and archaeology. This poster centers the voices and experiences of 13 Latinx
and Indigenous students through a presentation of results from a goals-based evaluation of the LSWHTA program. Thirteen
student-produced multimodal products were analyzed to identify the core components of LSWHTA and the unique perspectives of
the participants. This study explored the fit between the program’s preexisting framework as well as identified additional themes
based on students’ reflections.
Viola, Tony, IV [184] see Molinares, Stephen
Viskanta Khokhriakova, Sandra, Alexandre Tokovinine (University of Alabama), Dmitri Beliaev (Russian State University
for the Humanities) and Sandra Balanzario Granados (INAH, Mexico)
[223]
Nuevos datos, nuevas interpretaciones: Resultados preliminares de escaneo 3D y fotogrametría de algunos rasgos, monumentos y
artefactos de Dzibanché
This paper presents some preliminary results of the first field season of 3D documentation of buildings, monuments, and portable
artifacts from the archaeological site of Dzibanché in Quintana Roo, Mexico. Four building facades, twenty stairway blocks, nine
miscellaneous sculpture fragments, and six ceramic vessels were digitized with a structured-light system and/or structure-from-
motion photogrammetry. Documentation took place at Dzibanché, in the INAH regional research center in Chetumal, and in the
Maya Museum of Cancun. Part of the resultant corpus of imagery and inscriptions has not been previously disseminated in
academic literature. The analysis of published texts and iconography has benefited from higher resolution and visualization tools
made possible by 3D digitization. The presentation proposes several updates to the published interpretations of Dzibanché
monuments and highlights how new additions to the corpus expand our understanding of its political history and ideology.
Vivian, R. Gwinn [98] see Fladd, Samantha
Vlok, Melandri, Erdene Myagmar (National University of Mongolia) and Hallie Buckley (University of Otago)
[62]
Nutritional and Infectious Diseases in the Bronze and Iron Ages of Mongolia: The Archaeological Significance
The identification of nutritional and infectious diseases in human skeletal assemblages has value for both bioarchaeologists and
archaeologists for assessing the impact of particular biosocial and environmental contexts on health. We present skeletal evidence
for the nutritional diseases rickets, osteomalacia, and scurvy (Vitamin D and C deficiency) and infectious diseases including possible
brucellosis, tuberculosis, echinococcosis, and treponematosis in Bronze (~2500–400 BCE) and Iron Age Xiongnu (200 BC–100 CE)
human skeletal assemblages from Mongolia. The presence of these diseases in these contexts indicate considerable social change
between the Bronze Age and Xiongnu, affecting the health of these populations. High rates of rickets and osteomalacia were found
in both assemblages, whereas an increased presence of scurvy was identified in the Xiongnu. There is little increase in the
prevalence of infectious diseases between the Bronze Age and the Xiongnu (3.3% compared to 5.9%). However, the diversity of
different diseases increases from the Bronze Age to the Xiongnu which may reflect the impacts of increasing migration and trade
introducing new diseases. The presence of zoonotic infectious diseases in both assemblages highlight the intimate relationship
between pastoralists and their herds from the Bronze Age onward, supporting the idea of intensifying pastoralism at this time.
Vokes, Arthur [172] see MacFarland, Kathryn
Volta, Beniamino (HDR Inc., and University of California, San Diego) and Nancy Peniche May (Instituto Nacional de
Antropología e Historia)
[197]
Reconstructing the Political Strategies of Middle Preclassic Elites in the Northwestern Maya Lowlands: The View from Hobonyá
Recent research has upended long-held assumptions about the emergence of social complexity in the Northern Maya Lowlands,
once considered a marginal zone into which social innovations diffused from the Petén heartland. The dry northwestern corner of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     580
the Yucatán peninsula was home to at least 100 communities with Middle Preclassic (1000–300 BC) occupations, forming a
surprisingly dense three-tiered settlement system. These sites contained monumental public buildings, plazas, ball courts, and
causeways, and displayed significant variability in the size and elaboration of residential structures. The distribution of architectural
features across sites, however, does not lend itself easily to interpretation. Structures and arrangements usually associated with
ritual or political functions are found at both large, complex centers and at smaller second- and third-rank sites lacking evidence of
social inequality. Other sites lack any kind of monumental public architecture at all, but their considerable spatial extent suggests
that they were important communities. It is currently unclear whether this settlement system was headed by one or more primate
centers. Based on preliminary field observations from Hobonyá, a probable late Middle Preclassic regional center, we discuss the
implications of architectural patterns and settlement data for reconstructing the political strategies employed by emerging elites
during this crucial period.
Voorhies, Barbara (University of California, Santa Barbara), C. Fred Andrus (University of Alabama), Christine Bassett
(University of Alabama) and Holley Moyes (University of California, Merced)
[237]
Determination of Ritual Seasonality at a Prehistoric Maya Shrine: Preliminary Results
An exceptionally well-preserved shrine complex at the rear of the Entrance Chamber in the Las Cuevas Maya cave provides a
unique opportunity to address research questions usually beyond investigators’ reach. Post-abandonment flooding buried this
location so well that architectural features and cultural objects remain undisturbed. The structure and contents of the shrine complex
meet archaeological expectations for a ritual location, and robust analogies occur with ethnoarchaeologically known ritual locations
in the Maya Highlands. We suspect that activity at this shrine involved petitions for rain, perhaps similar to the rain rituals of present-
day traditional Maya farmers. If correct, ritual activity should occur only during the transitional period from dry to wet season. To
determine ancient ritual seasonality, we use as proxies isotopic signatures of freshwater snail shells that prehistoric Maya
worshippers left as offerings. The oxygen isotope profiles of these shells appear predominantly influenced by variations in
precipitation. For the hypothesis to be supported, the oxygen isotope shell profiles should show that season of snail capture
coincides with the onset of, or just prior to, the rainy season.
Vorderstrasse, Tasha (University of Chicago)
[261]
Approaches to Bactria in Late Antiquity
This paper will look at the different sources for Bactria in Late Antiquity and assess how these can help us understand the transition
to Islamic rule in the region. While archaeological investigations on the ground have been necessarily limited by the political
situation in Afghanistan, satellite imagery also provides valuable evidence for the archaeology of the region. There are also
documents, written in Bactrian and Arabic, which have been discovered in the region and help demonstrate how Bactria fits into the
wider Islamic world. Further, sources for Bactrians outside of Bactria, such as the Nestorian inscription from Xian in China, can also
provide information about the Bactrian population. Finally, this material can be examined with the historical sources and accounts of
travelers to the region to better understand not only what we know about Bactria but also the significance of these accounts when
compared to the archaeological evidence.
Vranich, Alexei [127] see Ogburn, Dennis
Vujevic, Dario [85] see Zaro, Gregory
Vyazov, Leonid [173] see Flegontov, Pavel
Vyhmeister, Joy
[247]
The Games They Played: Material Culture Highlights from a Historic Period Site in Downtown Redlands, California
Excavations at a historic period site in downtown Redlands have produced a large number of household artifacts dating to the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, including a significant number of items associated with play and leisure time. These objects give
us the chance to explore the value of play, and to examine variations in personal and cultural behaviors both through time and
across cultural divides. This presentation looks at the variety of more commonly identified toys and games (dolls, marbles, gaming
pieces), and highlights some of the more unique pieces of material culture that would fall through the cracks in a study that only
looked at functional items. It compares and contrasts the kinds of treasured items found in portions of the site representing
Chinatown and a Mexican barrio, and the implied differences in household behavior and cultural values. Most of the items, with the
notable exception of Chinese gaming pieces, likely belonged to children, but some are clear examples of how personal expression
and play continue into adulthood.
Wade, Angela [184] see Tullo, Dominic
Wade, Lizzie
[70]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 581
Wade, Mariah
[108]
Glass: Breathing into Matter
Blowing into molten glass gave it form, a breathtaking invention of the first century BCE. Before that, glass vessels were made using
the core-forming technique and by casting, which were more expensive and less efficient methods. Glass blowing enabled the play
of forms and color while making glass vessels more accessible to a wider market. This paper explores the mechanical and sensorial
properties of glass, the relationship between container and content, the dichotomy between the production of exquisite forms and
increased availability and how all those relate to the behavior of makers and consumers.
[108]
Chair
Wadley, Lyn [11] see Bader, Gregor
Wadsworth, William [202] see Supernant, Kisha
Wagner, Dustin [136] see Arakawa, Fumi
Wagner, Dustin [122] see Cron, Lindsey
Wagner, Logan (ALARIFE)
[145]
Discussant
Wagner, Mark and Mary McCorvie (Shawnee National Forest)
[269]
The “Place Where No One Ever Goes”: The Landscape Archaeology of the Miller Grove Community
The freed slave African-American inhabitants of the pre-Civil War Miller Grove community in southeastern Illinois lived within a
dynamic landscape of interlocking natural and cultural features that expressed their identity as a free people as well as their
resistance to slavery through covert participation in the Underground Railroad. Bluffs and caves became symbols of resistance
through their association with the Underground Railroad as did a school house where the community children learned to read and
write, activities that had been forbidden to their parents. Earthen paths linked the farmsteads comprising the community into a
unified whole while also providing access to socially significant aspects of the built environment such as a communal cemetery and
church/school. This paper explores these and other topics through an examination of the distribution of cultural and natural features
across the Miller Grove landscape, the spatial organization of the community, the archaeology of selected households within that
community, and the trail system that joined the community together. Artifacts recovered from the Miller Grove households indicate
participation within the larger Euro-American regional economy but also possible resistance to the pro-slavery sentiments of their
Upland South white neighbors.
Wagner, Stephen (Bison Historical Services Ltd.)
[95]
Discussant
Wagner, Stephen (Bison Historical Services Ltd.)
[183]
Managing a Data Hotel: An Artifact Catalog Database at a CRM Firm
Databases are often presented as being used as homes for archaeological data. In the CRM industry, private sector firms rarely
require long term storage of data as these duties are usually fulfilled by government agencies. Instead, data housing needs are
focused on a short term basis, conducted while data is transmogrified through analysis from field collection into a reporting format.
These data are then exported into the required format for curation. This presentation uses an artifact catalog database, developed
by Bison Historical Services Ltd., in order to illustrate the benefits of shifting from a spreadsheet-based cataloguing system. The
system increased the efficiency of recording by a large margin, however unexpected logistical constraints also became a factor.
Additionally, although the cataloguing process used in the database development was originally intended to be a continuation of
extant cataloging processes, the shift in recording medium resulted in changes to the actual process.
[183]
Chair
Wagner, Ursula [5] see MacDonald, Brandi
Wagoner, Ashlyn [122] see Cron, Lindsey
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   582
Waite, Danielle (University of Central Florida), Travis Stanton (University of California Riverside), Traci Ardren (University
of Miami) and Brigitte Kovacevich (University of Central Florida)
[5]
Household Economies in Light of Socioeconomic Integration: Sourcing Analysis of Obsidian Artifacts from Coba, Quintana Roo, and
Yaxuna, Yucatán, Mexico
During the Late to Terminal Classic periods (AD 730 –1000), the Maya state of Coba was the capital of the largest polity, and
perhaps most important political power, in the northern lowlands. During this period, Coba experienced substantial population
growth, unprecedented construction of monumental architecture, and most notably, the creation of an extensive causeway (sacbe)
program. These causeways served to physically integrate numerous nearby communities into Coba’s sphere of influence, including
the site of Yaxuna, approximately 100 km to the west. While clear power differences between the two sites is evident, how this
relationship impacted households and their associated economies at Coba is poorly understood. In order to understand these
impacts, this research investigated how the consumption of obsidian changed in light of the altered social and economic integration
of these two ancient Maya polities. Sourcing analysis through the use of Handheld XRF (X-Ray fluorescence) was utilized to identify
differences in the patterns of obsidian consumption between households at Coba and Yaxuna. The results suggest Coba
maintained a strong influence on the domestic economic strategies of resource exploitation during this period, indicating the
construction of the Yaxuna-Coba causeway spurred change in local domestic economies.
Walden, John (University of Pittsburgh)
[155]
Moderator
Walden, John [178] see Ellis, Olivia
Walden, John [230] see Hoggarth, Julie
Walden, John [169] see Izzo, Victoria
Walden, John [178] see Messinger, Emma
Waldo, Brian (California State University, Los Angeles)
[137]
A GIS Approach to Assess the Water Resources at Chichen Itza
Water has long been recognized as a critical but scarce resource in Yucatán. Settlement tends to be determined by the presence of
cenotes and habitation clusters around these water features. Water resources have not received a great deal of attention at Chichen
Itza because of the simplistic notion that the Cenote Xtoloc was the site’s water source while offerings were made to the Sacred
Cenote. Even the most cursory examination makes it clear that these two water sources could not have supported a city the size
and complexity of Chichen Itza. Geographical Information Systems (GIS) have been a potent tool in documenting resources across
city-scapes. Coupling GIS with pedestrian survey, this paper is a preliminary attempt to identify and illustrate a far ampler view of the
waterscape within Chichen Itza’s city limits.
Waldrip, Ashley [179] see Hard, Robert
Walker, Chester [192] see Pantel, Agamemnon
Walker, Chet [21] see Conlee, Christina
Walker, John [4] see Young, Danielle
Walker, Karen [59] see Lulewicz, Isabelle
Walker, Karen [146] see Miller, Sarah
Walker, William (New Mexico State University) and Judy Berryman (New Mexico State University)
[122]
Ritual Closure: A Countermeasure to Witchcraft
Archaeologists routinely encounter ceremonially closed buildings and sites yet specific explanations about why this occurs and how
to frame it remain murky. For the American Southwest and likely many other parts of the world fear of witchcraft may explain these
closures. We argue in this poster that ritual burning and the inclusion of materials in the deposits of closed pueblo villages
counteracted potential dangers of things falling into the wrong hands. Among southwestern peoples ashes serve as an antidote and
prophylactic against spiritually dangerous powers. Similar powers reside in projectile points. Indeed, in the southwest the agency of
many objects such as shell, turquoise, fossils, and crystals likely conditioned their inclusion in closure deposits. We conceptualize
these additions as a form of temper used in a ritual technology to process the closure of Cottonwood spring Pueblo, a large El Paso
phase (AD 1300–1450) village on the western flanks of the San Andres mountains of southern New Mexico.
Walker, William [136] see Corl, Kristin
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 583
Wall, Peggy
[179]
Using Summed Probability Distributions to Develop Expectations of Mobility in Bexar County, Texas
Radiocarbon (14C) dating at the Chandler site (41BX708) in northwest Bexar County, Texas, shows evidence of intermittent site use
from over 10,000 BP. Summed probability distributions of radiocarbon dates from Central Texas are used to develop expectations of
changing residential and logistical mobility patterns of ancient hunter-gatherer groups from the Late Paleoindian period through the
Archaic, and into the Late Prehistoric periods. These changes can be associated with population growth and decline as well as
adaptations to local environments over time.
Wallace, Rod [124] see Ladefoged, Thegn
Waller, Steven (Rock Art Acoustics)
[25]
Archaeoacoustic Studies of Rock Art: Who, What, When, Where, Why, and How?
Cases studies are presented supporting the archaeoacoustic theory that sound was an important factor for rock art site selection
and subject matter. Sound phenomena were spiritually significant to pre-scientific cultures mystified by echoes. Yet modern
investigators have only recently begun using acoustic techniques to study rock art. Examples are given of mythical descriptions of
echo and thunder spirits that match major visual motifs in rock art up to 30,000+ years old. Remarkable acoustics were found at
hundreds of rock art sites on three continents, from European deep caves and open air sites (Lascaux, Niaux, Cougnac, El Castillo,
Valltorta, Valcamonica, Coa...), to American Southwest canyons and cliffs (Horseshoe, Hieroglyphic, Back, Little Lake, Oiseau...), to
Australian rock shelters (Flying Fox, Red Lady, Giant Wallaroo...). Quantitative methodology is discussed; results are presented
from systematic surveys at specific sites, which demonstrate that decorated panels emanate louder echoes than non-decorated
surfaces within particular canyons and caves. These investigations aid in understanding our ancestors’ motivations for producing
rock art, and reveal a need for conservation of natural soundscapes of rock art sites. These results suggest the use of sound
reflection in ancient ritual practices for communicating with the spirits believed responsible for echoes and thunderous reverberation.
Waller, Joseph (Jay), Jr. (PAL)
[12]
Home Is Where the Hearth Is: Narragansett Indian Houses and Homes on the Eve of European Contact
Site RI 110 on the southern Rhode Island coast has yielded evidence of a large Narragansett Indian settlement occupied between
AD 1000 and 1500. Archaeological investigations exposed more than 20 individual wetus (houses) or other structures concentrated
within an approximate 0.81 ha (2 acre) portion of the larger site. This presentation will describe Narragansett Indian house
construction, intrasite house patterning, and variability in house size, shape, and the use of domestic space (home) at the site. The
results provide new information on Narragansett Indian life during the decades and centuries leading up to first European Contact.
Walling, Stanley (Community College of Philadelphia), Jonathan Hanna (Pennsylvania State University), Christine Taylor
(Rio Bravo Archaeolgiocal Survey) and Shawna Veach (Google Corporation)
[53]
Intra- and Intersite Commoner Ritual in the Rio Bravo Basin, Northwestern Belize
The Rio Bravo Archaeological Survey has carried out field investigations at several Late Classic Maya commoner sites in the Rio
Bravo Conservation and Management area of northwestern Belize. This paper will focus on recent evidence from the site of Chawak
But’o’ob and nearby ancient communities, where a commoner ball court, landscape modification and manipulation of natural
hydrology provide evidence for ancient intrasite and intersite ritual.
Walling, Stanley [230] see Coughenour, Chance
Wallis, Neill (Florida Museum of Natural History) and Thomas Pluckhahn (University of South Florida)
[29]
Understanding Multi-Sited Woodland Communities of the American Southeast through Categorical Identities and Relational
Connections
While communities are often considered to be isomorphic with settlements, this equivalency is ill-suited to understanding contexts in
which the structure of settlement and social organization was cyclical and nested at multiple spatial and temporal scales. In the
coastal plain of the American Southeast, most Middle Woodland (ca. 500 CE) settlements comprised only a few households, but
they were integrated by interactions and institutions that spanned many localities and included large civic-ceremonial centers.
Overlapping communities included kin-based segments, non-kin institutions such as sodalities, and various regional affiliations.
These communities were constituted by shared identities, interconnected economies, integrative practices such as mound building
and feasting, networks of regular social interaction, and associations with particular places. We investigate the intersections of
communities at various scales by comparing categorical identities—affiliations proxied by the relative frequency of pottery surface
treatments—with relational connections defined by face-to-face interactions between sites. The latter are evidenced by sourcing
data and paddle matches on complicated stamped pottery that reveal earthenware vessels or carved wooden paddles were carried
between sites. Using social network analysis we explore the spatial boundaries of distinctive categorical identities among sites and
evaluate their correlation with the frequency and distance of evident relational connections.
Wallis, Neill [123] see Duke, C. Trevor
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  584
Wallis, Neill [80] see Williamson, Kylie
Wallman, Diane (University of South Florida), Douglas Armstrong (Syracuse University), Mark Hauser (Northwestern
University), Kenneth Kelly (University of South Carolina) and Lennox Honychurch
[239]
Archaeological Research of Indigenous-European Interaction at La Soye 2, Dominica
In 2017, storm surges from Hurricane Maria exposed evidence of an early European colonial settlement on the Caribbean island
nation of Dominica. Subsequent survey and testing established the site as a trading factory, dating from the sixteenth to eighteenth
century, a period of dynamic change in the Caribbean. The site of La Soye 2 is located on the coastline of an active trading channel
between Marie-Galant, Guadeloupe and Dominica, protected by a headland called Point La Soye. Behind this point is the first
sheltered anchorage for vessels voyaging from Africa and Europe, and territory of indigenous Kalinago groups. Two seasons of
archaeological testing at the site have recovered indigenous “Cayo” and imported European ceramic wares, syncretic artifact forms,
trade items, faunal remains and more, indicating complex interactions between indigenous groups and the European traders.
Evidence for the active role of indigenous communities in trading and economic activities are documented through the material
culture and features within the settlement. This site offers a rare opportunity to examine the consequences of informal European
colonialism on the Caribbean frontier.
Walsh-Haney, Heather [18] see Duggins, Ryan
Walsh-Haney, Heather [188] see Elgart, Alison
Walter, Richard and Andy Cloud (Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State Univ.)
[40]
Excavations at the Genevieve Lykes Duncan Site: Exploring the Character of Late Paleoindian Deposits in the Big Bend Region of
the Chihuahuan Desert
Investigations at the Genevieve Lykes Duncan (GLD) site have uncovered a range of data on Late Paleoindians and their lifeways in
the Texas Big Bend. With exceptionally intact thermal features and cultural residue dating from ca. 11,000 to 8500 BP, the site is
helping to rewrite our understanding of this little known period in the region. Excavations at GLD by the Center for Big Bend Studies
of Sul Ross State University, beginning in 2010, have uncovered an array of data about these early regional inhabitants and the
environment they lived in, including attributes of early earth ovens, information on chipped-stone and ground stone assemblages,
economic pursuits, and the paleoenvironment. More importantly, this paper highlights that plant processing was a significant
component within a generalized foraging strategy during the Early Holocene in the eastern Trans-Pecos/Big Bend region.
[40]
Chair
Walter, Richard [40] see Hart, Thomas
Walz, Jonathan [249] see Sarathi, Akshay
Wang, Chunxue (Jilin University), Dong ei (Jilin University), Huiqiu Shao (Jilin University) and Jiaqi Wang (Jilin University)
[212]
Preliminary Study on Animal Bone Remains Discovered at Sanjianfang Site in Loulan Ancient City, Xinjiang, China
A integrated investigation in Lop Nur was carried out by Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Chinese Academy of Geosciences,
Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth and Xinjiang Institute of Ecology and Geography,Chinese Academy of Science,
Xinjiang Institute of Cultural Relics and Archaeology, School of Archaeology in Jilin University in 2014. We have carried out small-
scale excavation of the Sanjianfang Site in Loulan Ancient City and obtained a large number of animal skeletons. This paper mainly
discusses the living environment, living mode and eating habits of the ancestors in Loulan city by means of species identification,
anatomical location identification and observation of skeletal surface traces. Based on the ecological characteristics of animal
groups, the number of cattle, sheep, camels, horses and other animals should be considerable, indicating that the water and food
resources at that time were more than enough to meet the daily needs of human and livestock. That is to say, the ecological
environment at that time was better than that at present. The Tarim River was rich in water resources, and the coverage rate of
natural vegetation was higher. The resulting nomadic industry also provided more adequate food resources for the local people’s
lives.
Wang, Chunxue [162] see Wang, Jiaqi
Wang, Chunxue [36] see Wei, Tianxu
Wang, Jiajing
[45]
Grinding Stones and Human Domestication
In East Asia, the innovation of grinding stones enabled humans to exploit a diversified array of plant resources. First invented by late
Pleistocene hunter-gatherers, these tools were used at a relatively small scale, but from the beginning of Holocene they were
increasingly common, becoming a ubiquitous and dominant technology. The intensified production of grinding stones has often been
interpreted as a result of demand for processing domesticable plants during the Neolithic transition. Drawing on recent data from
residue analysis, this paper shows that early grinding stones were predominately used for processing wild foods. At the same time,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    585
the active agencies of grinding stones physically and culturally “domesticated” humans, creating an irreversible reliance on
technologies and trapping them into a sedentary life.
Wang, Jiaqi (Jilin University), Chunxue Wang (Jilin University) and Lishuang Sheng (Protection Center of Cultural Heritage
in Tianjin)
[162]
A Preliminary Report on Excavations at Locality 2 of Chaoyangdong Site in North China
The Chaoyangdong Site is located in Tianjin City, north China. It was first found in 2015 and was excavated from June to
September, 2019. Chaoyangdong Site includes two cave sites, which are Locality 1 and Locality 2. This paper is a preliminary report
of the excavation in Locality 2. There’re 71 lithic artifacts found in Locality 2 and more than 90% of them were made of flint, which
are transported materials from other sources, indicating mobility pattern changes. The types of them include tools and flakes.
Chaoyangdong Site is the first cave site in Tianjin City, playing an important role in the research of Paleolithic archaeology of this
area and compared with Locality 1, Locality 2 has better lithic artifacts to be analyzed, which means it is of more value.
Wang, Jiaqi [212] see Wang, Chunxue
Wang, Jiaqi [36] see Wei, Tianxu
Wang, Li-ying and Ben Marwick (University of Washington)
[55]
Investigating Social Inequality Using Bayesian Inference for Network Analysis of Burials from Iron Age Northeast Taiwan
Prestige goods among burials may reflect social relations between individuals and allow us to infer social structures. We study
whether European colonial activities in seventeenth century Taiwan resulted in increasing social inequality in an indigenous society
using social network analysis (SNA). Do the observed burial data indicate a more clustered network than a distribution of random
networks with similar qualities? Exponential random graph models (ERGMs) are important models for analyzing network data and
evaluating its structure. However, ERGMs are difficult to compute because their normalizing constant, which depends on model
parameters, is intractable. A Bayesian framework allows for parameter inference using MCMC strategies, which avoids the need for
computationally intensive calculations of the normalizing constants. We use Bayesian SNA to study burials from an Iron Age site in
northeast Taiwan. We expect the network to present a higher degree of clustering (e.g., the number of completed triangles) in the
European contact period that might hint at social heterogeneity. This study helps to expand the use of burials in understanding the
indirect effects of colonial presence on indigenous groups. A Bayesian approach enables the efficient quantification for uncertainty,
parametrization, and model evaluation of social network metrics.
Wang, Li-ying
[139]
Discussant
Wann, Kevin (Murray State University) and Chris Begley (Transylvania University)
[77]
Creating Computational Scripts for Microsoft Excel and Python 2 That Determine the Exact Coordinates of a Submerged Artifact
Measured through Trilateration
This study focuses on the application of software and informatics to the growing practice of underwater archaeology. One common
challenge present to underwater archaeologists is the mapping of seafloor artifacts. Traditionally, submerged artifacts are measured
by taking two separate measurements to a baseline with an origin of known coordinates and degree bearing. Then, archaeologists
can effortlessly map the location of these artifacts by hand using a geometric compass. However, this presents a great deal of error
when transcribing a hand map to a digital GIS software. This study seeks to bypass the error involved in hand-mapping by devising
coding scripts that use the trigonometric law of cosines and several conditional operations to calculate the exact geographic
coordinates of an artifact entirely digitally. A Microsoft Excel spreadsheet formula will allow for novices in GIS to easily read and
assess the measured artifacts’ coordinates, whereas a Python 2.7 script presents informatics and GIS specialists with a tool to
efficiently project these coordinates as points onto a Data Frame within ArcMap 10.7.
Ward, Allegra
[63]
Historicizing the Design and Use of Log Tombs in the Ohio Valley during the Woodland Period
Since the early twentieth century Adena and Hopewell have been two of the most recognizable social units of the Eastern
Woodlands. Mapping and excavations of the mounds constructed by both groups began in the mid-nineteenth century and
continued steadily for a century, and while often less systematized, gathered the majority of data utilized by archaeologist today to
understand the mortuary practices and traditions of these groups. Through this work, log tombs were deemed a diagnostic burial
practice of Adena societies of the Early Woodland period (800 BC to AD 1), though they continued to be built and utilized by
Hopewell societies during the Middle Woodland period (AD 1 to 400). To date, research has yet to fully address the diversity in the
practice of log tomb construction and use, specifically if this variability aligns to broader trends in the Woodland period. In this
presentation, I share the results of archival research through which I historicize the practice of log tomb construction by
diachronically evaluating the relationship between construction techniques and mortuary practices to improve our understanding of
the course of social complexity in the Eastern Woodlands.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    586
Ward, Grace (Washington University, St. Louis)
[235]
People and Plants at Jaketown: A Case Study of Poverty Point-Era Landscape Management
The people who built major earthworks at Jaketown and Poverty Point during the terminal Late Archaic lived and labored in a
complex floodplain ecosystem. The past two seasons of excavation at Jaketown, located in the Yazoo Delta of west-central
Mississippi, have yielded geoarchaeological and paleoethnobotanical data that speak to the complexity of both the social and
ecological landscape of this section of the Lower Mississippi Valley. This presentation reports the results of preliminary
paleoethnobotanical analysis, focusing on markers of human engagement with herbaceous floodplain pioneers such as chenopod
(Chenopodium berlandieri), as well as food-producing perennials, including hickory and pecan (Carya spp.), and persimmon
(Diospyros virginiana). The stratigraphy of the contexts from which flotation samples were collected indicates patterns of earthen
construction and seasonal flooding, offering insight into the relationship between social and environmental history and plant life at
Jaketown during the Late Archaic.
Ward, Maxwell (University of California, Santa Cruz) and Ryan Hechler (Tulane University)
[201]
A Shiny Clear Rock and a Hard Place: Obsidian Usage in Ritual Contexts in Cochasquí
This paper focuses on the analysis of the role of the obsidian contents of a ritual floor found on top of one of the pyramids from the
Late Integration Period Cochasquí monumental center in Ecuador. Obsidian contexts were derived from the ritual floor as well as
the natural levels above it. Obsidian usage by the Cara people in ritual and utilitarian contexts were compared in order to see if there
was a preference in obsidian between these different contexts. A variety of qualities were observed in 112 different types of obsidian
to ascertain if attribute-based preference could be determined based upon context. Does obsidian within different contexts of the
largest monumental construction of the site reflect preference in obsidian usage based upon context, or merely the quantity of
obsidian usage in ritual and utilitarian contexts?
Ward, Naomi [244] see Ricketts, Macy
Wardle, Joseph (University of Michigan)
[194]
Variation in Anadromous Fish Migrations and the Scale of Plant Intensification in the Upper Willamette Valley, Oregon.
Intensification of salmon, shellfish, nuts, and geophytes occurred in the Pacific Northwest of North America during the post-
Pleistocene. While much of the regional research has focused on intensification of salmon, this paper explores spatial and temporal
variability in intensification strategies in the Upper Willamette Valley (UWV) in Oregon. Anadromous fisheries in this region would
have been characterized by greater seasonal and annual variability than those in nearby river systems. This was due to the height
of Willamette Falls, an obstruction which would have influenced the abundance and predictability of fisheries above the falls. To
assess one possible effect of this, the following hypothesis was proposed: UWV groups during the Late Holocene (3,000 BP to
Contact Era) would have intensified plant species such as camas at a greater scale than groups in regions where there was access
to more predictable, abundant fisheries. The diameter of cooking pits and frequency of fire-cracked rocks were analyzed within two
regions: the UWV and the broader Columbia River Basin. The results indicated that both variables were significantly greater in the
broader Columbia River Basin, suggesting that intensification of plants was not conducted at a greater scale in response to less
predictable and abundant fisheries.
[194]
Chair
Warner, Jacob (Louisiana State University)
[174]
Catastrophe or Opportunity? The El Niño-Southern Oscillation and the Dusk of the Chavín Interaction Sphere in the Lower Nepeña
Valley
One of the perennial questions surrounding the decline or reorganization of societies in the past is the influence of climate and
environmental change. Understanding the role of climate and environment in these scenarios requires a careful consideration of
multiple lines of evidence and underlying causal mechanisms in social and natural systems. We examine the possible influence of shifts
in the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) on the dusk of the Chavín Interaction Sphere in the Nepeña Valley, Peru. We present
evidence of increased ENSO variability during the local Nepeña and Samanco phases Horizon (850–150 BCE) from the geochemistry
(δ18O and El/Ca) of the short-lived bivalve Donax obesulus. This increased ENSO variability appears driven by a limited number of
large El Niño events, similar to those recorded in other paleoclimate archives for the preceding Initial Period (1800–900 BCE) and part
of a trend of increasing ENSO variability from the middle Holocene to modern times. Increasing ENSO variability may have played a
significant role in the decision-making processes that led to the foundation of agglutinated proto-urban settlements following the Chavín
influence in the lower Nepeña Valley, as strong El Niño events bring devastating flooding to the valley floor.
Warner, Mark (University of Idaho)
[89]
Discussant
Warner, Mark (University of Idaho)
[132]
From Peale to Trimble: Communicating with Collections
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      587
Taking care of, working with, and managing archaeological collections is frequently viewed as a relatively undifferentiated issue. The
reality, however is that historical collections present a variety of challenges that are distinct from precontact materials. This paper
highlights the challenges faced by people working with historical collections and it provides some summary commentary on Sonny
Trimble’s contribution to SHA and the organization’s collections practices as well as his integral role in the establishment of the
Archaeological Collections Consortium.
Wasse, Alexander [125] see Heidkamp, Blair
Watanabe, Shinya (Nanzan University, Japan)
[106]
Cultural Diversity and Its Implications: A Case Study from Middle Horizon Cajamarca, Northern Highlands of Peru
In this paper, we will discuss the pottery typology and chronology of Cajamarca Region to consider the cultural dynamics during the
Middle Horizon Period. We will present the excavation data from three archaeological sites: El Palacio, Paredones, and Terlén La
Bomba. During the Middle Cajamarca Phase A (C.E. 600–750) the kaolinitic ceramic of Cajamarca presents intense uniformity, but
during the Middle Cajamarca Phase B and C (C.E. 750–950) this pattern changes for a more diverse fine ceramics and mortuary
patterns. In order to test our hypothesis, we will consider the following points: 1) the relation between cultural diversity and political
system of Wari Empire, 2) the interaction between the Cajamarca region and the north coast of Peru, and 3) the genesis of new
material culture. An example of this last point is the “Coastal Cajamarca” type pottery which appeared during the Middle Horizon and
continued in the Late Intermediate Period in Lambayeque region. This new style is distributed mainly along the Jequetepeque
Valley, this was an important route to connect Cajamarca and the North Coast of Peru. Finally, we will discuss the transition from
the Middle Horizon to the Late Intermediate Periods.
Waterman, Anna (Mount Mercy University), Bryan Kendall (University of Iowa), Andrew Somerville (Iowa State University)
and Julien Royer (Iowa State University)
[78]
Stable Isotope Analysis of Faunal Remains from a Western Iowa Oneota Site: A Preliminary Investigation of Diet and Mobility in the
Late Prehistoric Period of the Upper Midwest
Stable isotopic analysis can provide quantifiable data about diet and mobility patterns in humans and animals. In this study the
apatite and collagen of 20 animals recovered from recent excavations of the Oneota (AD 1300–1400) Dixon site (13WD8) in
western Iowa were analyzed for δ13C, δ15N and δ18O values. The results of these analyses provide valuable information about
human and animal diets, mobility, and faunal procurement strategies in the Late Prehistoric period of upper midwestern North
America.
Waters, Albert (Independent Researcher), John Vandergugten (University of Toronto,), Gavin Donathan (Binghamton
University, U.S.), Courtneay Hopper (University of Toronto,) and Genevieve Dewar (University of Toronto)
[77]
A 3D Interactive Model of Spitzkloof D Rockshelter, Namaqualand, South Africa
Archaeology is of great public interest, but a lack of approachable academic and popular materials may deter public engagement
with our field and our research, meaning archaeologists must develop innovative means of communication. It is also vital that we
make our work more accessible to local community members, whose history we are often excavating. Digital reproduction of
archaeological sites through photogrammetry is a valuable documentative and educational tool that is easily accessible and
engaging. We present photogrammetry results of the Spitzkloof D Rockshelter located in Namaqualand, South Africa, data for which
was collected during the 2019 field season. Over 400 points were designated in and around the site, and their cartesian coordinates
recorded using a Nikon Nivo 5M total station. The Rockshelter was then photographed using a Sony a6400 camera, and the
resulting images georectified using the program Agisoft Metashape. Using this information, we generated a 3D model of the
Rockshelter, the excavated units, and the immediate landscape. The ability to remotely view a relatively inaccessible site such as
Spitzkloof D provides an opportunity to better present visual representations to the general public and local community members.
Initiatives like these may be crucial in building and strengthening local relationships.
Waters, Gifford [123] see Sorresso, Domenique
Waters, Michael (Texas A&M University) and Thomas Stafford Jr. (Stafford Research Laboratories)
[19]
Five Decades of Research at Hall’s Cave, Texas
Hall’s Cave is located on the Edwards Plateau 200 km west of Austin, Texas. The cave formed in Cretaceous limestone and was
exposed to the surface when a segment of the roof collapsed during the late Pleistocene. Today the cave consists of a single large
room entered via a talus cone. Since the opening of the cave, 4 m of well-stratified, clastic sediments filled the cave. Over 200
radiocarbon dates on bone and charcoal provide chronological control. These sediments contain a vertebrate paleontological and
environmental record spanning the last 20,000 years. Archaeological evidence shows that people first entered the cave about
10,500 cal yr BP. and continued using the cave throughout the Holocene. The paleoenvironmental records allow us to reconstruct
changes in climate for the last 20,000 years and its effect on fauna and humans in this region.
[19]
Chair
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   588
Waters, Michael [19] see Linderholm, Anna
Waters, Michael [19] see Stafford Jr., Thomas
Watkins, Joe (Archaeological and Cultural Education Consultants)
[1]
Setting the Context of Equity and Harassment Issues: They Are NOT Only Women’s Issues
Social sciences within the United States, like U.S. society in general, are facing serious ramifications regarding issues related to
equality and harassment. Gender equity, pay equity, and funding equity are all part of the problems being faced by professionals
employed in academic, public, and private sectors. Additionally, harassment in all forms—sexual harassment, gender harassment,
and “bullying,” for example—is also encountered throughout the social sciences. As is to be expected, practitioners within the
discipline of archaeology are reporting these same issues. Statistics are telling, and indicate that the situation has reached a turning
point. No longer can archaeologists presume to adhere to codes of conduct that relate only to responsibilities to the past, but rather
archaeologists must recognize their responsibilities to each other as well. The paper outlines some actions that national and local
social science organizations have undertaken in attempts to influence equity and harassment concerns as a means of setting the
context for the session.
Watkins, Joe (Archaeological and Cultural Education Consultants)
[207]
Moderator
Watkins, Tia (University College London), Jaime Awe (Northern Arizona University), Claire Ebert (Northern Arizona
University) and Douglas Tilden (Belize Valley Archaeological Reconnaissance Projec)
[158]
Recent Chronological Developments at Xunantunich, Belize: Investigating Preclassic Architecture in the Monumental Site Core
Preclassic architecture in the Mopan River Valley provide an understanding of the earliest political developments in the region,
contributing to our understanding of the development of the region’s political landscape. Recent research at the hilltop center of
Xunantunich, Belize focused on developing a chronology for the site’s occupational sequence of architectural construction. During
the 2018 field season, the Xunantunich Archaeology and Conservation Project, in collaboration with the Belize Valley Archaeological
Reconnaissance Project, carried out stratigraphic excavations of Structure A7 in the Xunantunich site core to address these issues.
Results from AMS 14C radiocarbon dating and analysis of architectural construction phases indicate impressive monumental
construction at Xunantunich as early as the Late Preclassic period. This presentation reports on the results from the 2018
investigations and explores the possible socio-political roles of the hilltop center during the Preclassic.
Watkins, Tia [130] see Fitzmaurice, Rosamund
Watkins, Tia [178] see Saldaña, Gabriela
Watling, Jennifer (University of São Paulo) and Morgan Schmidt (Massachusetts Institute of Technology)
[161]
Identifying Past Vegetation Dynamics in Xingu Indigenous Territory Using Soil Phytolith Analysis
This paper presents the preliminary results of a soil sampling programme aimed at mapping precolumbian and historic vegetation
dynamics in the Xingu Indigenous Territory, Brazil. Research carried out with the Kuikuro community during the last three decades
has resulted in the archaeology of part of this area being one of the best-studied and best-mapped anywhere in Amazonia, but until
now there have been no archaeobotanical or palaeoecological studies aimed at identifying plant management within these highly-
complex cultural landscapes. By applying phytoliths, charcoal and geochemical analyses to strategically-placed soil transects that
capture visible gradients of both modern (village > gardens > forest) and precolumbian (site > dark earths > unaltered soils)
indigenous land-use, we aim to contribute new data on the history of forest composition and the distribution of resource
management areas over the last 1,000 years of occupation.
Watling, Jennifer [161] see Schmidt, Morgan
Watson, Adam [98] see Fladd, Samantha
Watson, April (Lynn University) and Alanna Lecher (Lynn University)
[228]
Archaeology as the CURE (Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience)
Course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) provide students the opportunity to explore research topics that are of
interest to the broader scientific community, as well as community partners. CUREs also connect students in iterative work, by
repeating and building on their own and others’ work. This repetitive process aids in creating links between diverse subject areas,
not limited to archaeology. Archaeology, with its wide ranging applicability in natural, applied, and social sciences, provides
instructors an unique opportunity to take real world research and conceptualize scientific ideas by active engagement. At Lynn
University, a small, private teaching-intensive university in south Florida, professors in archaeology, geology, and biology have
begun collaborative efforts to instruct students in archaeological methods. These efforts include sediment analysis, geospatial
modeling, marine biology, and taphonomy. By conducting research situated in a broad scientific curriculum, students build bridges
from the classroom to the real world. These methods have shown success in students’ persistence in STEM fields, as well as
success in the university setting and beyond.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                       589
Watson, James [240] see Carpenter, Michelle
Watson, James [180] see Chen, Jennifer
Watson, Jessica [12] see Holly, Donald
Watson, Valerie [56] see Mills, Rebekah
Watt, David [9] see Britt, Tad
Wattenmaker, Patricia (University of Virginia)
[205]
Urban Ideologies and Demographic Revolutions in Ancient Mesopotamia
Dramatic demographic growth is a hallmark of urbanism, yet reasons for population explosions in emerging urban systems are not
well understood. This paper draws on archaeological and textual evidence of house practices and cultural values to explore why
populations increased so dramatically in third millennium Mesopotamia. Additional consideration of some of the challenges to
population growth serves to highlight the complex relationships among population growth, prestige building and inequalities in some
early urban societies of Southwest Asia
Watts, Corinne
[34]
Monuments as Assemblages: Case Study at Falkner’s Circle (Wiltshire, U.K.)
Archaeological study consistently relies on rigid classifications to explore and discuss the past. The study of monumentality within
the discipline is no exception and has been built on a separation of nature and culture. The use of this dualism restricts the way that
archaeologists can understand prehistoric structures and environments, as these frameworks effectively disarticulate these sites
from their context. Using Falkner’s Circle (Wiltshire, United Kingdom) as a case study I will re-examine how archaeologists have
analyzed and categorized the site. Pulling on ideas of materiality and assemblage I will negotiate a new perspective on Falkner’s
Circle, as an individual site and as part of the larger landscape of Avebury, Wiltshire. This perspective makes it possible to see
Falkner’s Circle as an active assemblage. Each meaning and actor being articulated at different temporal and physical points-
including the Mesolithic utilization of the site, the Neolithic formation of the larger structure, the Iron Age depositions, and the later
destruction of the stones. While other theoretical frameworks have been applied, this perspective allows for Falkner’s Circle to be
understood as a reactive and engaged aspect to this larger region.
Watts Malouchos, Elizabeth (Indiana University)
[70]
Moderator
[70]
Discussant
Waweru, Veronica (National Museums of Kenya), Christine Ogola (National Museums of Kenya) and Job Kibii (National
Museums of Kenya)
[232]
The Acheulean to Middle Stone Age Transition at the High-Elevation Yiapan Site in Mau Narok, Kenya: A Preliminary Report
The Acheulean/Early Middle Stone Age (MSA) transition period is important to understanding both the appearance of our own
species and the attendant behavioral adaptations. In East Africa, few sites document this transition. Still, these sites are almost
exclusively found within the rift basin at lower altitudes which favor preservation. At 2300m asl, Yiapan site is a high elevation
stratified site that documents the terminal Acheuelan and Early MSA at Mau Narok, Kenya. This paper presents temporal and
technology aspects of this transition and contributes to a better understanding of behaviors that cover a wider range of habitats used
by early members of our species. It is expected that the inclusion of data from non-basinal high elevation sites will result in a less-
skewed archaeological record.
Way, Phylicia (SWCA), Abigail Key (UTA) and Jessica Smith (UTA)
[37]
Archaeology at Way Ranch: A Multicomponent Site in Central Texas
Way Ranch is a multicomponent site located on the Blanco River in Central Texas. The local and regional geographic and
environmental settings are rich in resources, which reveals why specific areas were reused for millennia. Survey and excavation
during the UTA field school from 2017–2019 identified cultural materials and features ranging from historic to middle archaic. The
primary excavation areas are (1) Uptown—a palimpsest of historic and prehistoric materials, (2) Downtown—a major excavation
block on an alluvial terrace with in situ deposits, and (3) the Rockshelter—a large burned feature with multiple ash lenses and
artifacts. Overall, Way Ranch is an ideal laboratory for investigating changes in lithic technology through time.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  590
Wayman, Joseph (Independent Researcher)
[162]
Further Experiments Exploring the Kinetics of Acheulean LCTs Interacting with Animal Footsteps
Experiments using an animal footstep simulator and Acheulean LCTs at one sixth scale show more of the complex interaction
between the forces of animal locomotion on the ground and LCTs as would have occurred if the devices were used as foot
damaging devices placed in traps and animal trails.
Weakley, Jacob (University of Cincinnati)
[63]
Increasing Bone Volume and Body Size Odocoileus virginianus as Evidence of Intensification of Maize Agriculture in the Ohio Valley
This paper examines chronoclinal variation in Odocoileus virginianus in the Ohio Valley during the Late Archaic, Middle Woodland,
and Fort Ancient cultural periods to determine the relationship between body weight and intensification of maize agriculture over
time. Astragali are examined from the Dupont (33Ha11), Twin Mounds (33Ha24), State Line (33Ha58), and Wynema (33Ha837)
sites, respectively. Zoometric measurements including astragalus medial depth, medial length, and distal width are used to calculate
bone volume and estimate the overall body weight of the deer. It is cogitated that the observed variation in body weight through time
is attributed to the increase in availability and consumption of cultivated maize in the Ohio Valley.
Weaver, Brendan (Stanford University), Lizette Muñoz (University of Pittsburgh) and Karen Durand (Proyecto Arqueológico
Haciendas de Nasca)
[143]
From Slavery to Servitude: Approaching Hacienda Worker Health through Transformations in Labor and Foodways in Nineteenth-
Century South Coastal Peru
The nineteenth century was a dynamic period for hacienda workers on the south coast of Peru. Once Jesuit vineyards with two of
the largest enslaved afro-descended populations in rural coastal Peru, the haciendas of San José and San Javier and their annexes
in Nasca’s Ingenio Valley underwent dramatic changes with the replacement of their grapevines with cotton, and the introduction of
new types of workers. Cantonese indentured workers were contracted beginning in the 1830s, and 1855 brought legal emancipation
to the majority-enslaved workforce. Seasonally, highland Andean workers joined the demographically shifting permanent hacienda
population. This paper uses evidence from excavated midden contexts at San Javier, San José, and San José’s annex of Hacienda
La Ventilla to explore these changing agroindustrial dynamics and worker health through the lenses of labor and foodways.
Webb, Dallin (Logan Simpson) and Michael Ligman (Logan Simpson)
[194]
A Diachronic Analysis of Land-Use and Subsistence Patterns in the Virginia Mountains, Nevada
On a grand scale, we know that settlement and subsistence patterns have varied greatly across the Great Basin throughout
prehistory. Using a theoretical framework based in human behavioral ecology, archaeologists have learned—among other things—
that: (1) gathering and processing tools/features for “low-ranked” plants and seeds became more common; and (2) that large-scale
communal hunting features saw more use later in time as human populations grew. We aim to investigate these trends on a
relatively small scale within and around the Virginia Mountains in southern Washoe County, Nevada. In 2017 and 2018, Logan
Simpson conducted five archaeological inventories here—totaling 17,985 acres—that resulted in the recordation of 199 prehistoric
sites across a variety of landscapes, elevations, and habitats. Following the site typology for the “Sierra Front” region developed by
Young (2014), these sites include everything from relatively straightforward Simple Flaked Stone Assemblages (SFSAs) and
Quarries to Complex Habitation Assemblages (CHAs) and Stone Linears spanning multiple temporal periods. Using these high-
quality, diachronic data, we hope to create a more fine-grained picture of how land-use and subsistence patterns changed across
time in the Virginia Mountains.
Webb, Elizabeth [54] see Emery, Kitty
Weber, June (University of Nebraska, Lincoln), Effie Athanassopoulos (University of Nebraska Lincoln) and Amy Neuman
(University of Nebraska, Lincoln)
[192]
Historic Archaeology of Lincoln, Nebraska: Defining Urban Trade and Industry at the Turn of the Twentieth Century
An archaeological perspective on trade and industry in urban Nebraska has not yet been well defined. Comparative analyses of
several collections excavated on the present-day University of Nebraska-Lincoln campus have begun to reveal the intricacies of
local industry in conjunction with larger national trends. These collections provide a glimpse into daily life within the developing
urban landscape of Lincoln, Nebraska, at the turn of the twentieth century. This research was developed from the student-led
analysis of artifacts from three late nineteenth-early twentieth century archaeological sites. Diagnostic glass bottles and ceramics
from a variety of features (e.g., cisterns, outhouses) were utilized for the bulk of this study. These materials lend themselves to
sourcing their locations of manufacture and allow us to draw inferences on the probable lifestyles and economic stratification of the
associated households. Furthermore, these collections provide the basis for local and regional comparisons and can reveal broader
trends in the development of urban sites in the Plains region.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                         591
Weber, Marion (Universidad Nacional de Colombia), Natalia Acevedo (Universidad Nacional de Colombia, sede Medellín),
Sebastián Betancur (Universidad Nacional de Colombia, sede Medellín), Joaquín Proenza (Departament de Mineralogia
Petrologia i Geologia A) and Antonio García-Casco (Departamento de Mineralogía y Petrología, Universi)
[246]
Provenance of Lithic Artifacts from the Nahuangue and Tairona Societies, Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta
Numerous lithic artifacts have been found in archeological sites in the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta in northern South America that
represent an important part of various museum collections in Colombia. This cultural heritage belongs to the Nahuangue (AD 100–
1000) and Tairona (AD 1000–1600) societies. Many of these artifacts are prestige objects and include beads, winged plates
(klangplatten), and anthropomorphic and zoomorphic figures made out of colored stones and rocks. Most materials are green (e.g.,
serpentinite, nephrite, basalt, and variscite), white or translucent (e.g., quartz), black (e.g., nelsonite), and red (e.g., cornelian). Initial
provenance studies on these artifacts have shown that many of them were handcrafted from rocks and minerals that are found
locally, within the Sierra Nevada. For instance, serpentinites and nephrites are often used for winged plates, and nelsonites for
beads and cylinders. In contrast, other artifacts have been sourced from distant rock formations and mineral deposits, as is the case
of variscite, the source of which lies to the east, in the Gran Roque Island in Venezuela. This suggests that complex interchange
routes existed in prehispanic societies as well as a religious and hierarchical meaning given to specific colors and materials.
Weber, Sadie (Harvard University) and Michelle Young (Yale University)
[61]
Eating Local, Drinking Imported: Chicha Recipes and Identity Formation at Atalla, Huancavelica, Peru
This study combines microbotanical and stable isotope analyses to explore interregional interaction, cuisine, and identity formation
during the late Initial Period and Early Horizon in the South-Central Andes, specifically at Atalla, a settlement and civic-ceremonial
center in Huancavelica, Peru. Investigation of Atalla’s ceremonial and domestic sectors, carried out from 2014 to 2017, has revealed
much about the site’s domestic economy, role in interregional exchange, and the foodways of its inhabitants. In order to obtain a
more complete understanding of subsistence and interaction, residues extracted from ceramic sherds were analyzed for starch
granules. We found that a wide variety of plants were used at Atalla, including cultigens that cannot grow within the site’s immediate
area, including manioc, chili pepper, yam, achira, algarrobo, and sweet potato). Evidence of ground, boiled, and possibly fermented
starch granules points to the consumption of chicha whose ingredients included a combination of maize, manioc and algarrobo at
Atalla. In this presentation, we explore the implications of such distinct chicha “recipes” with regard to identity formation during the
Initial Period.
Weber, Steven [205] see James, Nathaniel
Webster, Chris (Wildnote)
[95]
Discussant
Webster, Chris (Wildnote)
[183]
Choosing the Right Hardware and Software for Challenging Fieldwork Conditions
From hardware to software to basic use and data entry, using something other than paper to record archaeological sites can be
difficult and cumbersome. What tablet do you use? Do you even need a tablet? What about durability, weather, and battery life?
When choosing software does it need to work offline? Is it easy to use? What about exports—how do I get my data out of the
system? After 10 years of working with tablets in the field, I’ve come up with rock-solid methods and gear recommendations for
digital archaeology. From the heat of the desert to the colds of the mountains there are solutions for everyone. Picking the right
software, with the right company behind that software, is also very important. You need support and the confidence that it will work
when you need it.
Webster, David (Penn State University)
[102]
Diachronic Puzzles in Lowland Maya Demography
Once a central topic of Maya scholarship, demographic modeling was heavily sidelined beginning in the 1990s. It is now
experiencing a resurgence because of the application of lidar technology to much of the central and southern Lowlands. Once again
the emphasis is reconstruction of Late Classic populations. Important as such reconstructions are for understanding Classic society
and its “collapse,” the longue durée of population change presents many puzzles.
Webster, David (Penn State University)
[152]
Discussant
Webster, David (Penn State University)
[181]
Discussant
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      592
Webster, Laurie (University of Arizona) and Kelley Hays-Gilpin
[2]
Snakeskin and Corn Markings: The Dotted-Diamond-Grid Pattern in the U.S. Southwest
The dotted-diamond-grid pattern first appears on the textiles and pottery of the southwestern United States in the mid-AD 1000s or
early AD 1100s. Fifteenth-century kiva murals from the northern Southwest confirm the importance of this design system for
decorating ceremonial cloth prior to Spanish contact. In this paper we use evidence from textiles, ceramics, rock art, and other
media to explore the spread of the dotted-diamond-grid pattern into the Southwest, from its ancient Middle American roots based on
reptiles, water, maize agriculture, and fertility, to its incorporation into Southwestern ideologies and persistence in ritual practice.
Wedemeyer, Rachael (University of California, Riverside) and Kenichiro Tsukamoto (University of California, Riverside)
[197]
Investigating Bench Architecture and Iconography at El Palmar, Campeche, MX
El Palmar is a major Maya polity located in southeastern Campeche, Mexico where recent excavations have been concentrated in
the Guzmán Group. The following paper focuses on the central room of Structure GZ7, most likely a residence of non-royal elite’s
leaders, known as lakamob (banner-bearers). Structure GZ7 is comprised of three rooms, each accompanied by an eastern and
western gallery, and was occupied during the Late-Terminal Classic periods (AD 600–850). The western gallery of the central room
holds a distinctive bench with a reclining backrest. Such benches are often depicted in courtly scenes of polychrome vessels but are
rarely seen in physical architecture. Examinations of the masonry bench at Structure GZ7 provide deeper insights into the internal
political organization of the El Palmar dynasty . A comparative study of this feature within the Petén and Rio Bec regions further
refines our understanding of non-royal elites in Classic Maya society.
Weeks, Lloyd [59] see Cable, Charlotte
Weeks, William (Chattanooga State Community College)
[99]
Come as Strangers, Leave as Friends: An Invitation to A. Irving Hallowell’s Essay on “Ojibwa Ontology, Behavior, and Worldview”
for Soul-Searching Archaeologists
Who do archaeologists mean by souls? If their terminology closely aligns with the notion of persons, then A. Irving Hallowell offers some
enduring insights in his often cited but seldom digested essay, “Ojibwa Ontology, Behavior, and Worldview.” Through ethnographic
examples drawn from the everyday life of the Berens River Ojibwa (eastern Manitoba, early twentieth century), he showed how a small
indigenous community seemed to extend the potential for personhood far beyond the limits of many western conceptions and in ways
that appeared to defy any presumption of a natural-supernatural dichotomy. According to Hallowell, personhood among the Ojibwa was
attributed circumstantially and individually rather than absolutely and categorically. A person was understood to have a stable inner vital
essence and an outer appearance that could metamorphose and was ambiguous. Hence, strangers—human or otherwise—may be
greeted with as much kindness and as caution. Solidarity was hard won through experience and personal testimony. Foremost,
someone—not something—was responsible for all that happens, especially the death of kin. As archaeologists become aware of their
naïve realism and avail themselves to native relational possibilities with Hallowell’s attitude, they will find tremendous potential for
learning from those who came before and their respective descendant communities.
Weetaluktuk, Tommy [50] see Ryan, Karen
Wegmann, Karl [195] see Holcomb, Justin
Wehner, Ivan [252] see Berman, Mary Jane
Wei, Dong [212] see Wang, Chunxue
Wei, Tianxu, Chunxue Wang, Jixiang Song, Jiaxin Dou and Jiaqi Wang
[36]
Many Late Paleolithic Sites Have Been Found in Suifen River Basin
The Suifen River Basin is located in the northeastern part of the Old World. It is an important transportation hub for the migration
and exchange of people in the Pleistocene, between the New World and the Old World, and has important Paleolithic archaeological
significance. In 2017 and 2018, we conducted archaeological investigations along the Suifen River and found 22 sites. Most of these
sites date to the late Paleolithic, and some may be of Neolithic Age. In these sites, we found a variety of stone cores, a large
number of flakes and abundant blade tool assemblage, indicating that there was modern people once camped，multiplied and
thrived here in the upper Paleolithic.
Weik, Terrance
[259]
Cattle Colonialism in Chickasaw Mississippi
Indigenous and enslaved people’s increasing global encounters with cattle in the nineteenth century present unique vantage points
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 593
from which to understand the diversity of engagements with capitalism, colonialism, and settler imperialism. The archaeology of Levi
Colbert’s Prairie (LCP) and landscapes of Chickasaw territories in what became the U.S. Southeast demonstrate the culturally
specific and entangled practices and experiences of Africans, Native Americans, and Europeans who facilitated ranching, exchange,
conflicts, and cooperation. An exploration of logistical models of pastoral capitalism at LCP contributes to a broader understanding
of emergent cattle colonialism, which extended as far as the Pacific Ocean. Archival sources such as maps and head counts
(human or bovine) are fruitful forms of evidence that, along with artifacts, animal bones and other forms of data, lend themselves to
complementary and unique lines of inquiry. The resulting research can make valuable contributions to our understanding of
economic processes, material and cultural flows, and social and experiential aspects of labor.
Weinberg, Camille (University of Texas, Austin), Jo Osborn (University of Michigan), Kelita Pérez Cubas (Pontificia
Universidad Católica del Perú) and Richard Espino Huaman (Universidad Nacional San Luis Gonzaga de Ica)
[125]
Where the Wild Things Grow: Desert Resources and Risk Management on the Peruvian Coast
Desert landscapes are often characterized as barren due to their minimal vegetation. On the Peruvian coast, the aridity is
accompanied by El Niño climate fluctuations that can pose destructive hazards for coastal populations. Yet humans have
continuously occupied this desert for millennia, and there are highly productive ecosystems that create ecological variation within a
seemingly static and inimical environment. There is also growing evidence that this landscape, and the availability of these
resources, has changed dramatically over time. This paper considers the role of wild resources for Prehispanic coastal inhabitants
of Peru’s South Coast and how mosaic subsistence strategies may have been a strategy to mitigate risks associated with El Niño
perturbations. I discuss botanical data from the Topará Valley to examine how littoral populations relied on wild plant resources and
marine species in this arid environment during the Late Paracas Period in the final centuries BCE, despite the availability of
agricultural cultigens.
[125]
Chair
Weinberg, Camille [21] see Osborn, Jo
Weintraub, Neil [255] see McNamee, Calla
Weir, Donald (Commonwealth Heritage Group)
[58]
Forty-Four Years of Doing Cultural Resources Management
Commonwealth Associates, Gilbert/Commonwealth, Commonwealth Cultural Resources Group, and Commonwealth Heritage
Group. Forty-four years of doing cultural resources management (CRM) work. Fourteen years working for a large private corporation
and 30 years as the owner of my own firm with 10 offices in eight states. This paper will discuss the early years (1974–1988) when
my work consisted of providing CRM support for large projects being developed through the NEPA process and later years (1988–
2018) working primary with the Section 106/110 process. The profession of CRM has come a full circle in those years. The early
work was done as part of a large teams represented by many disciplines, the middle years were mostly working on archaeology with
little impute from other professionals, in the later years we realized that archaeology worked best by including a wide range of other
professionals. It is important to understand that archaeology is one of many resources to be considered in project development. In
addition, I will discuss my experience with expansion through acquisitions, and my experience with ownership transition to my son
Andrew J. Weir, RPA.
Weisler, Marshall (University of Queensland), Quan Hua (Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Org.), Jian-xin Zhao
(University of Queensland), Hiroya Yamano (National Institute for Environmental Studies) and Ai Du Nguyen (University of
Queensland)
[100]
Determining the Chronology of Reef Island Development for Constraining Initial Human Colonization of Pacific Atolls
As recent worldwide news coverage has aptly reported, Pacific coral atolls are the most precarious landscapes for human
settlement, yet many of them evidence continuous occupation for 2,000 years. Coral atolls are unique in their small size, low
elevation, limited diversity of terrestrial flora and fauna, poorly developed and unconsolidated soils, and absence of surface potable
water—all characteristics that constrain human settlement. Indeed, global warming has accelerated sea level rise that is altering
shorelines, eroding archaeological sites, and inundating modern villages and gardening zones. Consequently, how did small human
founding groups survive over the millennia and, in a sense, flourish on these most challenging of Pacific landscapes? Our multi-
disciplinary research utilizes information from archaeology, island emergence and development, and sea level rise to understand
human colonization and adaptation to Pacific low-lying coral atolls. Atoll emergence constrains the earliest time possible for human
colonization—the dating of which is fundamental for addressing the tempo of economic and social change and for charting
population growth. Using dated samples from habitation layers and paleo-sea-level indicators, we reconstructed sea-level history,
island emergence, and facies development for constraining the period of initial human colonization at Ebon Atoll, southern Marshall
Islands, eastern Micronesia.
Weisler, Marshall [27] see Rogers, Ashleigh
Weiss, Jeremy [186] see van Leeuwen, Willem
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   594
Welch, John (Simon Fraser University)
[116]
Moderator
Welch, John [1] see Hodgetts, Lisa
Welch, John [122] see Loughran, Kailey
Welker, Martin (Arizona State Museum) and Eréndira Quintana Moranes (Northern Illinois University)
[22]
Meta-analysis of the North Atlantic Cod Fisheries: The Zooarchaeology of the Sixteenth to Nineteenth-Century Trans-Atlantic Cod
Trade
The distribution and abundance of animal populations have significantly impacted human settlement decisions, mobility, economics,
and conflict throughout history. The abundance of cod (Gadus morhua) in North Atlantic fisheries enticed English, French, and
Basque fishermen to the region to catch, salt, and export cod to Europe. Efforts to monopolize economically important cod fisheries
in the region led to repeated military conflicts between major European powers. Despite this, the archaeological record of the cod
trade in North America, and archaeological evidence for the trade of cod from the North Atlantic to other North American and
European ports have not been widely studied. Our study focuses on zooarchaeological evidence from the sixteenth to nineteenth
centuries. We show that though cod remains are abundant in the regions where they were caught and processed, they show up only
infrequently in other North American assemblages. Furthermore, though North Atlantic cod have been previously identified in
European assemblages, they are found primarily in regions where cod had been, or were still available. These results contribute to
our understanding of cod’s important economic role in the development of North American trading ports and reveal trans-Atlantic
connections in post-medieval Europe.
Wellman, Hannah (University of Oregon), Megan Spitzer (Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History) and Torben
Rick (Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History)
[129]
Archaeology and Ethnobiology of Late Holocene Bird Remains from the Northern Oregon Coast
Archaeological bird remains from the Oregon coast have recently received renewed attention. We contribute to this discussion with
an analysis of bird remains from the Late Holocene Par-Tee site (35CLT20) in Seaside, Oregon. We sampled the Par-Tee avifaunal
assemblage to near-redundancy and generated the largest sample from a single site on the Oregon Coast to date (N=7204). Our
results support previous Oregon coast avifaunal assemblage analyses. The Par-Tee assemblage is dominated by near shore or
estuarine birds including scoters, alcids, and shearwaters. There are also small amounts of unique species such as the California
condor (Gymnogypus californianus) and the short-tailed albatross (Phoebastria albatrus), both of which are currently endangered
and face conservation challenges. The Par-Tee avifaunal assemblage is diverse, but people at the site focused on acquiring the
most accessible species in the near shore habitat. Our study of the Par-Tee bird remains helps clarify the nature of past human-bird
interactions in coastal Oregon, emphasizes the importance of sample size in documenting species of conservation concern that may
be rare in the archaeological record, and illustrates the value of zooarchaeological studies of archaeological legacy collections.
Wells, Joshua (Indiana University, South Bend)
[95]
Discussant
Wells, Joshua (Indiana University, South Bend), Eric Kansa (Open Context), David Anderson (University of Tennessee),
Erick Robinson (Utah State University) and Sarah Whitcher Kansa (Alexandria Archive Institute)
[183]
Growing Convergence between Compliance and Research Archaeology through Linked Open Data Strategies in the Digital Index of
North American Archaeology
The Digital Index of North American Archaeology (DINAA) is a linked open data hub situated to help illuminate theoretical and
practical connections between compliance archaeology and broader realms of archaeological science and public knowledge. This
paper provides an assessment of prevalence of compliance activity represented in the approximately one million archaeological
sites registered with DINAA. Areas of dense compliance activity are then compared against topic models for those areas built from
the DINAA Linking Sites and Literature module, which contains citation information for journal articles, grey literature reports, and
Federal Register communications. Using these two vectors of information focused on geographical areas of interest (density of
compliance activity and topical foci in heritage research and preservation) we suggest compelling issues on which compliance firms
and practitioners may converge with one another and with colleagues in other sectors to create data interoperability based upon
integration of shared goals as reflected in intermingled concepts. Because DINAA is a completely free and open-source (CC BY and
CC 0) information project, we further define practical ways that DINAA resources and other free and open-source tool kits may be
leveraged by professional communities seeking to create ethically, financially, and reproducibly sustainable processes of
convergence.
Wells, Joshua (Indiana University, South Bend)
[217]
Moderator
Wendel, Martha [255] see Forste, Kathleen
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   595
Wernecke, D. Clark (Gault School of Archaeological Research) and Ashley Lemke (University of Texas, Arlington)
[170]
Keep Calm and Doodle On
Art work, defined very broadly, is found on every continent apart from Antarctica, and is shared trait across humanity. Art work in the
form of incised or engraved stones, shell, and bone is among some of the earliest found by archaeologists. The time depth of these
objects continues to increase, demonstrating a long tradition to this universal human trait. Incised and engraved objects are
becoming increasingly common in the archaeological record and most represent abstract patterns of zigzags, crosshatches, and
simple lines. Drawing or “doodling” can have profound effect on the processing of information and communication, and problem-
solving. Cross-cultural studies demonstrate that children have the same evolution in visual logic as they grow. Both the
archaeological record and contemporary studies demonstrate that doodling, perhaps taking the form of incised objects found in the
archaeological record, has powerful evolutionary implications.
Werness-Rude, Maline (Ventura College) and Kaylee Spencer (University of Wisconsin-River Falls)
[164]
Furnishing the Plaza: Classifying and Examining Northern Plaza Features
As major components of the built environment and features that helped define the center of any given site or neighborhood, both
literally and ideologically, Maya plazas have received considerable scholarly attention. So too have their various features, like the
palaces, sacred spaces, and/or administrative structures that bound them, or their internal furnishings, such as stelae, caches,
altars, and/or small platforms. Many questions remain regarding such features, however: How were altars incorporated into plaza
use patterns? How strongly and widely held was the significance of central placement, or the connection with site foundation and
dynastic succession, and/or associations with burials/caches? Did examples without iconography carry the same associations as
those with imagery and text? When we turn to the Northern Maya area more specifically, the questions proliferate: What is the
distinction between the altar and some small platforms, as types? How do these elements relate to entrances or to the iconographic
feet of balustrades found in the plaza’s architectonic frame?, for example. In this paper, we explore the classification of such plaza
features. We also work to understand the ways in which they would have impacted and facilitated behavior in Northern site centers.
Wernke, Steven (Vanderbilt University)
[32]
Moderator
Wernke, Steven (Vanderbilt University)
[200]
Discussant
Wernke, Steven [175] see Zimmer-Dauphinee, James
Wescott, Konnie (Argonne National Laboratory), Thomas Chiodini (Argonne National Laboratory), Alison Rubio (AFCEC),
Perri Gerard-Little (Argonne) and Kendra Kennedy (Argonne)
[184]
Community Outreach Efforts for Cultural Resources on Air Force Installations
What else lies inside the fence? Alongside military operations and infrastructure, many installations hold important natural and
cultural resources. The Air Force Civil Engineer Center funds community outreach projects to enhance military and civilian
awareness of these resources. Argonne National Laboratory is assisting with several projects, from developing interpretive signs
battered by intense sun, volcanic ash, and corrosive salts, to smartphone applications that offer self-guided historical tours. These
projects raise awareness of resources within the fences, decreasing the risk of unintentional damage, increasing public appreciation,
and suggesting opportunities for further research. Argonne has assessed material solutions and techniques for increasing sign
longevity in harsh climates on Ascension Island; developed a smartphone application that provides audio tours and Quick Response
(QR) code scanning based on geographic location at Joint Base San Antonio; and designed interpretive signs and brochures for
important resources, including Hustler Hut at Little Rock Air Force Base (AFB), Hanover Furnace at Joint Base McGuire-Dix-
Lakehurst, a nature trail with archaeological and natural resources at Laughlin AFB, and historic structures at Tinker AFB. These
projects resulted in durable, easily maintained, and accessible information, allowing the public and military personnel to learn about
history inside the fence.
Wesolowski, Veronica [240] see Di Giusto, Marina
West, Catherine (Boston University), Michael Etnier (Western Washington University), C. Fred Andrus (University of
Alabama), Caroline Funk (University of Buffalo) and Megan Partlow (Central Washington University)
[59]
On the Ice Edge: Abrupt Climate Change in the Aleutian Islands
The interdisciplinary Unalaska Sea Ice Project (USIP) tests the hypothesis that sea ice was present in Alaska’s Aleutian Islands
during the Middle Holocene. Global evidence suggests that there was sea ice expansion during this period across the northern
hemisphere, which would have had significant effects on human and animal activity in temperate regions. The Eastern Aleutian
Islands provide a case study to test the local effects of this change: previous studies have suggested that sea ice expanded into the
Aleutian Islands, citing evidence of ice-loving animals in the zooarchaeological record. However, the co-occurrence of temperate
species in this record challenges this conclusion and complicates our understanding of sea ice, human adaptation, and animal
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     596
behavior through time. This interdisciplinary project integrates multiple lines of archaeological and paleoenvironmental evidence—
sclerochronology and oxygen isotopes, faunal analysis, stable isotope analysis, and artifact analysis—from Unangan ancestral sites
on Unalaska Island. Here we present the preliminary results of this project in the context of contemporary climate change.
Westbury, Michael [64] see Szpak, Paul
Weyrich, Laura (University of Adelaide), Raphel Eisenhofer (University of Adelaide), Atholl Anderson (Australian National
University), Keith Dobney (University of Liverpool) and Scott Fitzpatrick (University of Oregon)
[100]
Utilizing Ancient Oral Microbes to Track Human Migrations across the Pacific Islands: Insights from Palau and Beyond
Ancient human migrations underpin the origin of past cultures, health, ecological interactions, and identity. However, recent or rapid
migrations are difficult to track using classical demographic tools that monitor human genetic mutations over time. A new method—
tracking human migrations by assessing microbial genome evolution over time within calcified dental plaque—provides a unique
solution to this problem. Here, we sequenced ancient DNA preserved within calcified dental plaque from more than 150 ancient
individuals spread throughout the Pacific Islands from Micronesia to Polynesia. We explore the oral microbial communities in 16
different Pacific Island Nations, revealing unique insights into oral health and diet. We also use a phylogenomic approach to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of 10 different vertically-inherited oral microbes preserved across all individuals to investigate
past movements throughout the Pacific. In specific, a key oral species within the Anaerolineaceae family improves resolution
provided by past human ancient DNA studies and provides exciting new insights into the settlement of the Pacific Islands, especially
Palau. Overall, this study highlights how ancient human-associated microbes can offer key demographic and cultural insights,
revealing this method as a minimally invasive method to identify past cultures and potentially repatriate human remains.
Wharton, Jeffery [229] see Stephens Reed, Lori
Wheaton, Gene [231] see Gillaspie, Amy
Wheelbarger, Linda (San Juan College)
[267]
Analysis of Ceramics from the Point Pueblo D-Shaped Chacoan Great House, Northwestern New Mexico
The past two years of excavation at Point Pueblo, derived from San Juan College field school sessions and volunteer work,
revealed a D-shaped Chacoan great house associated with the known Chacoan great kiva. The 2018 excavations concentrated on
rooms within the arc and yielded information that they had been used for domestic activities during the Pueblo III time period. The
2019 excavations concentrated on four of the large multistory rooms attached to the north side of the arc of rooms. Rooms 30 and
31 each provided evidence of a burned roof/ceiling/floor situated between their upper and lower story rooms. Pueblo III ceramics
were present in the upper story rooms. Abundant Pueblo II ceramics including a number of partial vessels were recovered from the
floor exposed within Room 34 as well as from room fill. Less work was completed on Room 33, although those artifacts are included
in this ceramic analysis also. Previous ceramic analyses have provided information that Point Pueblo ceramics are predominantly
local in origin but also include large quantities of tradewares from the south and west. The goal of this analysis is to assess the
extent of Chacoan influence and interaction at Point Pueblo.
Wheelbarger, Linda [236] see Rospopo, Steven
Wheeler, Ryan (Robert S. Peabody Institute of Archaeology)
[254]
The Journal of Archaeology and Education
Archaeologists Meg Conkey, Dan Sandweiss, Ryan Wheeler, and Nancy Gonlin founded the Journal of Archaeology and Education
in 2017 at the Robert S. Peabody Institute of Archaeology. The JAE reflects the institute’s long-standing interest in using
archaeology in the classroom and is hosted at the University of Maine’s Digital Commons website
(https://digitalcommons.library.umaine.edu/jae/). A peer-reviewed, open-access, online journal is a major step in fostering a sense of
community among the diverse individuals engaged in archaeology and education. The format ensures equal access to interested
parties; it also is a platform dedicated to disseminating research and sharing practices in archaeological education at all levels. The
JAE’s mission statement is broad, and publishes articles dealing with education in its widest sense, both in and out of the
classroom—from early childhood through the graduate level—including public outreach from museums and other institutions, as well
as professional development for the anthropologist and archaeologist. Archaeology can play a significant part in education at all
levels and the Journal of Archaeology and Education is intended to provide a home for the growing community of practitioners and
scholars interested in sharing their first-hand experiences and research.
Whelan, Carly (California State University, Chico)
[15]
Why Delay Dinner? A Future-Discounting Approach to Examining the Origin and Evolution of Food Storage
Food storage is a critical adaption in environments with seasonal resource disparities, but it also serves a key social function by
permitting the accumulation of capital and making redistributive economies possible. Yet, storing food is costly relative to consuming
it immediately, as storage leaves food vulnerable to decay and theft. This raises the question of how this practice could have
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        597
evolved. I present a model that incorporates the concept of future-discounting to examine the adoption of storage, as well as the
choice of which foods to store. Storage is expected to evolve when the value of stored food exceeds the value of food that could be
acquired and consumed immediately, taking into account the time needed to collect and process it. This could occur in seasonal
environments, or in situations in which the caching of surplus food entails little cost. In some regions, experimentation with dispersed
caching likely gave way to formal central place storage, which reduces the risk of loss of a cache through regular monitoring
throughout the storage period. Because of this, central place storage produces a higher return rate than dispersed caching, which
may have caused incipient delayed return economies to become more firmly entrenched.
[15]
Chair
Whelan, Carly [188] see DeGeorgey, Alex
Whisenhunt, Mary (University of Texas, San Antonio), John Roney (Colinas Cultural Resource Consulting), Robert Hard
(University of Texas, San Antonio), Lori Barkwill Love (University of Texas, San Antonio) and Toni Lambach
[122]
Living on the Mimbres Western Edge: Regional Affiliation in Arizona’s Upper Gila River Valley, AD 750–1300
Data derived from archaeological survey and local informant knowledge in southeastern Arizona’s York-Duncan Valley provides new
insights into regional affiliations and potentially the identity of those living on the far western edge of the Mimbres region. From 2014
to 2019, University of Texas at San Antonio field school participants and Colinas Cultural Resource Consulting partnered to survey
and work with the local community to record nearly 80 prehistoric and historic sites. Site surface assemblages in the research area
represent the entire sequence of Mimbres-Mogollon ceramic types, suggesting valley communities established enduring internal
social relationships and long-term continuity of occupation. Decorated pottery designs and types, and the presence of non-local
ceramics and exotic trade materials, reveal distinct relationships with external groups and suggest an identity both similar to and
different from those living in the Mimbres Valley. Analysis of a recently acquired collection of whole pot photos acquired from a local
informant offers additional insights into the York-Duncan Valley’s cultural diversity and interregional relationships.
Whisenhunt, Mary [156] see Zaragosa, Gabriella
Whitcher Kansa, Sarah [183] see Wells, Joshua
Whitcomb, Donald (University of Chicago)
[261]
Archaeological Investigation of the Islamic City
The Islamic city has been the focus of many general studies in Islamic Archaeology and interest has only increased with time. As
fieldwork is increasingly difficult, this is perhaps the time for generalizing examination of the field. Specialized field are still often
possible and need to be encouraged, especially for young archaeologists. Likewise, examination of older excavations from fresh
urban perspectives may well be encouraged. This paper will suggest or rather hope to encourage new research in this field.
White, AJ [140] see Maher, Lisa
White, Loren (Oregon State University)
[195]
Geoarchaeological Insights from a Late Pleistocene–Terminal Holocene Site on Isla Cedros, Baja California
Current geoarchaeological investigations of the Cerro Pedrogoso (Rocky Hill) site on Isla Cedros, Baja California seek to provide a
context for a Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene human occupation along the Pacific Coast. Here, a rich assemblage of artifacts
signals the presence of maritime coastal adaptations from at least 12.6 cal ka. A series of stratigraphic exposures and seven
archaeological excavation units reveal the local geomorphic history and repeated cultural occupations. Intact deposits were
characterized, dated, and correlated for lithostratigraphic and pedologic continuities. Topography and lithofacies were mapped with
a laser transit to display excavation units and stratigraphy in three dimensions. A regional interplay of tectonic and hydrologic factors
controls the discharge of nearby freshwater springs that likely had a singular influence on the locus of cultural activities here. I
hypothesize a model of combined aeolian and alluvial fan deposition during the Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene epochs with
subsequent landform incision and stability. Soil and climate geomorphic factors were also considered to further assess this site’s
formation and taphonomy. Identifying paleoclimatic influences on Cerro Pedrogoso’s situation in the larger landscape may be
generally instructive to understanding cyclical landform evolution on the Baja peninsula at the Pleistocene-Holocene transition.
White, Nancy (University of South Florida)
[222]
Middle Woodland and Mississippian People and Practices at Richardson’s Hammock Burial Mound (8Gu10), Northwest Florida
Richardson’s Hammock is a large-gastropod shell midden and burial mound site on the shore of salty St. Joseph Bay. Test
excavation in the habitation area has documented coastal subsistence continuity over a millennium. Now a collector has requested
study of materials looted from the mound 40 years ago. The mound, one that C. B. Moore missed, had both Swift Creek and early
Weeden Island ceramics, typical elaborate pottery for the Middle Woodland (ca. AD 350–700) in the Apalachicola-lower
Chattahoochee valley region. It also had intrusive later burials from Fort Walton times (the local variant of Mississippian; ca. AD
1000–1500), with ceramics and two artifacts representative of the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex: a copper (plate?) fragment,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    598
and a carved-shell “spaghetti-style” gorget. Other grave goods could be from either component. Human bone represents at least 10
individuals. Most have cranial modification and expectable minor pathologies. Radiocarbon dating and analyses of stable-isotope
and ancient DNA samples are underway, supported by a National Geographic Society grant, and in collaboration with a local Native
American representative. Preliminary data from these studies and how they augment the archaeological record will be discussed.
After the research, we hope for respectful reburial of the remains.
[222]
Chair
White, Sean (University of Colorado, Boulder) and Karen Schollmeyer (Archaeology Southwest)
[122]
Mealing Bins: An Analysis of Cultural Connections
Mealing bins are an important architectural feature in the U.S. Southwest with potential for helping us understand cultural
connections between places and populations. Mealing bins are food processing features usually found with two major components:
grinding stones to grind corn kernels or similar foods and a receptacle to catch the processed flour, both of which are built into room
floors. These features have been used in the southwest as diagnostic evidence to associate archaeological sites with specific
archaeological material culture traditions, including Mogollon. This poster examines the geographic and temporal distribution of
mealing bins. It also examines the usefulness and reliability of these features as indicators of links to specific archaeological culture
areas.
Whitehead, Hunter [18] see Van Slyke, Andrew
Whitehead, William (SWCA Environmental Consultants)
[183]
Recent UAV Data Collection and Integration with Traditional Archaeological Methodologies
UAV data collection has become increasingly common in North American archaeology. This presentation will give an overview of
the state of the art in UAV data collection, technologies, and processing methodologies. All fronts in UAV data collection are
progressing at an ever increasing pace, making staying up to date almost impossible for most archaeologists. Aircraft, payloads,
software, and mapping techniques have made it even easier for UAV technology to be integrated into all aspects of fieldwork.
Examples of landscape mapping, intensive site mapping, and terrain analysis will be given, with the methodologies recommended to
repeat the results.
Whitley, David (ASM Affiliates Inc.)
[60]
Terminal Pleistocene Petroglyph Traditions in North America
At least four Terminal Pleistocene/Paleoindian petroglyph traditions have been identified in western North America. The Great Basin
Carved Abstract Tradition was short-lived and relatively localized in the northwestern Great Basin. The Great Basin Tradition
persisted for millennia but its range contracted and expanded during that period. Eastern and Western Northern Plains traditions
were restricted to the Terminal Pleistocene/early Archaic but later rock art traditions in these regions have similar geographical
distributions, suggesting some form of long-term cultural continuity. Correlates of the different traditions in the larger archaeological
record provide insight into the regional social dynamics of this early period.
Whitley, David [8] see Whitley, Tamara
Whitley, Tamara (Bureau of Land Management), David Whitley (ASM Affiliates) and Johannes Loubser (Stratum Unlimited)
[8]
Climate Change and Occupation on the Carrizo Plain National Monument
The Carrizo Plain National Monument (CPNM) contains some of the most significant Native American heritage sites in the United
States. A cultural landscape, including habitations, camps, quarries, and pictograph sites, has been designated as the Carrizo Plain
Archaeological District National Historic Landmark (NHL). An important thematic element for the NHL involves the research values
specifically related to landscape-level studies of long-term human occupation. Of particular interest has been evidence for climate
change as a driver for settlement within this region. This has been described by Whitley, Loubser, and Simon (2007), who have
developed a model for climate-related settlement pattern changes on the CPNM. Parameters for testing this model include temporal
changes in the nature, location, and dispersal of pre-contact sites, as these changes may relate to the regional climatic record.
Assessments based on broadly defined climate regimes provide positive correlations, but it may be possible to further refine this
modeling through CPNM climate-focused lakebed core sampling studies, which are ongoing. This poster will provide information on
current modeling and site data, and discussion of current studies.
Whitlock, Bethany (Brown University)
[200]
Emplacing Empire: Inka Presence and Power in the Central Utcubamba Valley, Chachapoyas, Peru
In recent years, archaeological research on empires has shifted away from top-down approaches toward a focus on the affective,
institutional, and material correlates of imperial processes. Approaches to Inka imperialism have embraced this trend: in contrast to
earlier research, which focused on the typological classification of Inka “conquest”, recent analyses have foregrounded the ways in
which empires are emplaced through diverse assemblages of affective practices. Here, I follow this shift, specifically focusing on
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    599
how the emplacement of Inka architecture in pre-existing settlements can inform our understanding of local experiences of Inka
imperialism. Taking the sites of La Fila and Llaucán as a case study, I combine architectural, excavation, and ceramic analysis to
consider how Inka rule was enacted, emplaced, and experienced in one rural community in the Central Utcubamba Valley,
Chachapoyas. While previous research on the Inka conquest of Chachapoyas has focused principally on the idea of an epic conflict
between the invading Inka and Chachapoyas residents, I instead focus on the local-scale ways in which the Inka engaged with
Chachapoyas’ landscapes and peoples.
Whitney, Kristina (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers), William Hooker III (National Cemetery Association Department of Vetera)
and Andrea Gregory (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers)
[132]
A New Push for the MCX: Historic Preservation with the National Cemetery Administration
Following in the spirit of Dr. Trimble’s push for new ideas and management of cultural resources, USACE is working with the
Department of Veterans Affairs National Cemetery Administration on a long-term historic preservation project focusing on
superintendent’s lodges listed on the National Register of Historic Places located in national cemeteries. As is typical of federal
infrastructure, these 57 lodges were all erected prior to 1950 and are in need of repair and rehabilitation meeting Secretary of
Interior’s Standards. The project is complex for a variety of reasons: the lodges are located across the country, are different
architectural styles, have different periods and themes of significance, and have distinct needs for treatment. These are a unique
and particular resource for our national cemeteries; each building is a record of changes in cemetery administration and planning
since the Civil War. The Mandatory Center of Expertise for the Curation and Management of Archaeological Collections is excited to
take on this logistically complex project due to its unique nature and the ongoing need and concern for managing federally owned
historic properties. This paper will examine the Center’s first steps into historic preservation management and review several
examples of the lodges managed by the NCA.
Whittaker, John (Grinnell College), Chuck LaRue (Independent Researcher) and William Bryce (Southwest Archaeology
Research Alliance)
[69]
The Atlatl in Basketmaker Rock Art
While atlatls (spearthrowers) were used before the advent of bow-and-arrow technologies all over the Southwest, and indeed the
North American continent, in only a few places did they loom large enough in the imaginations of their users to become major
components of symbolic expression. In the SW corner of Utah and adjoining canyon lands, the Basketmaker “culture” produced an
unusual clustering of atlatl and dart images. There are not only animals with projectiles in them, common in many areas but also
depictions of conflict, and detailed depictions of atlatls and darts. The associations and images reflect concerns with hunting, fertility,
conflict, dualism, and other issues to which atlatls are functionally or symbolically attached.
[69]
Chair
Whittaker, William [8] see Kendall, Bryan
Whittington, Jennifer [170] see Horn, Marty
Whittlesey, Stephanie (Standing Reed Books) and James Reid (Professor Emeritus, University of Arizona)
[156]
Episodic Change among Ritual Structures in the Mogollon Highlands
A well-dated sequence of ritual structures is recorded in the Mogollon Highlands. Beginning with what Reid and Montgomery (1999)
have called low-walled, masonry-and-jacal protokivas, the next architectural features are small, rectangular, masonry kivas and
plazas. Last, some plazas were converted to great kivas. Different symbologies and social groups were associated with each type of
structure, although similarities run through the sequence. This ritual and architectural sequence has implications for the traditional
phase system and the influence of ethnicity on ritual organization. When chronology is robust and supported by tree-ring dates, we
see that the change from protokivas to traditional kivas to great kivas took place within a span of 50 years and within a
circumscribed area, at sites only about a mile apart—far less than the times and space defined for most Mogollon Pueblo phases. In
addition, we believe that ethnicity—specifically, Mogollon Pueblo versus Ancestral Pueblo—influenced the form and function of ritual
structures.
Wholey, Heather (West Chester University), Daria Nikitina (West Chester University), Katherin Dowling (West Chester
University) and Michael Powers (West Chester University)
[9]
Prioritizing Site Loss in the Delaware Bay, USA, Using Probablistic Modeling
The Delaware Bay is the second-largest estuary along the U.S. Atlantic coast and is experiencing some of the gravest effects from
climate-driven sea-level rise along the east coast. Certain areas along the bay have the lowest mean elevation in the U.S. and are
experiencing both accelerated sea-level rise and coastal subsistence. Coastal sites are often at an elevation of one meter or less
and subject to daily tidal action, storm surge, and long-term inundation. The archaeological heritage of the region encompasses
diverse occupations by Dutch, Finns, American Indians, and Africans, and is represented by iconic cultural landmarks such as
Native American villages; seventeenth-century Dutch settlements; nineteenth-century resort towns; and, WWII defensive
installations. We propose that the projected impacts to known and potential archaeological resources and should be modeled using
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                600
Probabilistic sea-level projections (Kopp et. al, 2016) based on the Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5 gas emission
scenario (IPCC A5) which accounts for atmospheric carbon concentration and incorporates regional processes influencing relative
sea-level rise. Results can yield localized and even site-specific decadal inundation projections up to 2100 that we demonstrate
provide a useful priorization and planning tool for known and potential archaeological resources.
[9]
Chair
Wholey, Heather (West Chester University)
[220]
Discussant
Whyte, Rachel (University of Central Florida), Michael Callaghan (University of Central Florida) and Brigitte Kovacevich
(University of Central Florida)
[5]
Working toward a Lost Cause? Comparing pXRF Analysis to Neutron Activation Analysis and Petrography using Maya Ceramics
from Holtun, Guatemala
Recent research has demonstrated that Handheld (portable) X-ray fluorescence spectrometers (pXRF) have difficulty in consistently
and accurately determining chemical composition of non-homogenous cultural materials such as ceramics. This is unfortunate as
pXRF instruments have proven to produce accurate and consistent compositional data for other archaeological materials like
obsidian and metal. They are also known for being a non-destructive way to test chemical composition, maintaining the artifacts
integrity; saving time, money and solving issues related to the transportation of artifacts. While pXRF instruments do not always
perform as well as conventional methods, such as Neutron Activation Analysis (NAA), bench-top XRF, and Laser Ablation
Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), they still allow archaeologists to identify other patterns related to
composition. In this paper I report on the chemical compositional patterns generated through handheld XRF study of ceramic sherds
from the Maya site of Holtun, Guatemala. These sherds have been previously run with NAA and subject to petrographic analysis. I
compare the pXRF data for ceramic pastes with the NAA and petrographic data to further test limitations of pXRF on archaeological
ceramic pastes, and to identify any patterns unique to pXRF analysis.
Wibowo, Marsha [173] see Plattner, Paige
Wichlacz, Caitlin (Arizona State University)
[17]
2D Geometric Morphometric Analysis of Ceramic Vessel Profiles from Phoenix Basin Hohokam Sites
Two-dimensional profile drawings of whole and reconstructible ceramic vessels were routinely made during archaeological projects
in the Phoenix Basin in recent decades, creating a valuable archive of 2D shape information. The overwhelming majority of these
whole and reconstructible vessels were recovered from mortuary contexts and have since been repatriated, precluding additional
analysis of the original objects. Archaeologists working at Pueblo Grande in the early 1990s recovered, documented, and analyzed
over 2,000 whole and reconstructible vessels, giving substantial attention to considerations of vessel morphology, but their
classification and analyses of vessel forms are not unproblematic, and new questions prove difficult to address with existing data.
This work tests the feasibility of using 2D geometric morphometric analyses of archival vessel profiles to reevaluate vessel form
classifications from Pueblo Grande in order to aid in asking new questions of the dataset. Because of the large amount of additional
data recorded for these vessels during the Pueblo Grande project, relationships between vessel shape and numerous other
characteristics can be tested and compared to existing models of ceramic production and exchange for the area. A smaller
collection of archival vessel profiles from the site of Las Colinas is similarly evaluated and compared.
Widmer, Randolph (University of Houston)
[152]
Discussant
Widmer, Randolph (University of Houston)
[181]
Discussant
Wiedenmeyer, Emilie [215] see Friend, Sadie
Wieland, Spencer (University of North Carolina, Greensboro), Donna Nash (University of North Carolina, Greensboro) and
Emily Schach (University of California, Santa Cruz)
[5]
Semi-Precious Stones at the Wari site of Cerro Baúl
Our poster will present the results of pXRF analysis conducted to identify and source semi-precious stones from the Wari site of
Cerro Baúl. The Wari Empire existed from approximately 500–1000CE in what is now Peru. The sample includes 118 green stones
(most likely Chrysacolla), 111 blue stones (most likely Sodalite), and 45 pieces of what is possibly local onyx. These items represent
lapidary objects or production debitage recovered during excavations of Cerro Baúl. We also analyzed reference samples from other
locations in the Andes. The data collected from pXRF will allow us to more accurately identify the stones present at Cerro Baúl. We
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   601
will also compare the chemical composition of stones from Cerro Baúl to the stones from other sites. This comparison will be done
to see if pXRF can be used to identify the source of stone materials found in an archaeological context. These stones were part of a
vast network of goods accessible to Wari elites from within their empire and abroad. Tracking the movement of these materials can
shed light on the political economy of the Wari by increasing our understanding of how raw materials were sourced and transported
for the production of prestige goods.
Wiewel, Adam
[107]
Twenty-First Century Archaeological Geophysics in the National Park Service
The Midwest Archeological Center (National Park Service) has long been at the forefront of geophysical surveys for archeological
research and heritage management in the United States. Since the Center’s pioneering efforts to showcase the practicality of
geophysical methods nearly 50 years ago, our use of ground-based surveys has become indispensable for documenting,
understanding, and preserving archeological resources. I will discuss significant findings from recent projects to illustrate how
geophysical surveys facilitate communication with our partners and the public and also inform our understandings of the past. These
case studies include (1) our use of GIS methods and spatial statistics to create intuitive visualizations of gradiometry survey results
at a multicomponent Woodland site in Iowa significantly impacted by decades of cultivation; (2) a multi-instrument survey at Wright-
Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio to identify the remnants of a historic community forced to move following the Dayton Flood of
1913, a site of considerable interest to resource managers and the local public; and (3) our assessment of the National Historic
Landmark designation of an Initial Coalescent fortified village in South Dakota based on a gradiometry survey, the results of which
also reveal new information with historical implications for the site’s fifteenth-century occupants.
Wigley, Sarah (Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas, San Antonio)
[194]
Hunter-Gatherer Mobility at the Granberg Site (41BX17), Bexar County, Texas
This paper examines the mobility patterns of hunter-gatherer groups inhabiting the Granberg site as reflected in the recovered lithic
assemblage. The site, located in Bexar County in the Middle Salado watershed, contains significant quantities of chipped stone,
multiple burned rock features, and several burials that evidence multiple occupations throughout the Archaic period. It has been the
subject of numerous archaeological investigations, from 1963 through 2006. Using various measures of debitage and lithic tools
from selected dated proveniences at the site, this paper examines potential changes in site use throughout the Archaic. Measures
on debitage, including flake measurement ratios, flake completeness, and cortex, as well as ranges of variability in raw material of
debitage and tools, reflected in color analysis and UV florescence, suggest that mobility strategies at the site may have shifted from
a residential emphasis in the Early Archaic to a more logistically focused strategy in the Late Archaic.
Wiig, Øystein [64] see Szpak, Paul
Wilcox, Michael [184] see Lippert, Dorothy
Wilcox, Timothy [41] see Campbell, Wade
Wilde, James (AF Civil Engineer Center) and Amy Williams (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers)
[132]
Collaborating on Contingency Operations: A Reconnaissance Archaeological Survey of Air Base 201 in Niger
In 2017, the U.S. Air Force Civil Engineer Center (AFCEC) requested archaeological assistance from the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers’ Mandatory Center of Expertise (MCX) for the Curation and Management of Archaeological Collections (CMAC) to
support a project in Niger, Africa. This collaboration led to a survey of over 1,200 acres of Airbase 201 (AB 201) near Agadez, where
culturally sensitive materials had been identified. This paper focuses on the successful collaboration between AFCEC and MCX
CMAC, which resulted in an update to AB 201’s cultural resources management plan, the modification of training and visual aids for
airmen on AB 201, and the recovery of several Acheulean hand axes and the recordation of burials for avoidance.
Wilhite, John (University of Memphis)
[47]
An Iconographic Analysis of Negative Painted Effigy Bottles at Tyler Mound
Negative painted ceramics are rare and sit squarely on the frontier of our understanding of Mississippian ritual, but they potentially
hold valuable information concerning cosmology, as well as ritual institutions. In this paper, I interpret the black bands with white
dots, a design found on negative painted ceramics at the Tyler Mound, as motifs depicting souls traveling along the Path of Souls.
These motifs typically accompany swirls and petaloid designs on human effigy (hooded) bottles. By comparing design fields on
these vessels with previous interpretations of motifs from other Mississippian sites, in addition to employing the ethnographic record
of Prairie and Southeastern groups, I further elaborate the probable Mississippian concept, or concepts, of the soul. Negative
painted effigy bottles at the Tyler Mound site illustrate how Mississippians conceptualized and depicted their concept of life forces or
souls.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 602
Wilkes, Margaret (NPS Northeast Region Archeology Program)
[107]
NPS Northeast Region Archeology Program Remote Sensing: An Integrated Approach to Archaeological Research
The Northeast Archeology Program (NRAP) has engaged in geophysical surveys since the 1980s. Rarely is there a park in the
region, that extends from Maine to Virginia where Bruce Bevan has not been; establishing not only a standard for baseline inventory
evaluation, but setting a precedence for the application of remote sensing in NRAP’s archeological investigations. Over the past 40
years NRAP has developed the expertise to engage in increasingly high resolution surveys as part of Section 106 compliance and
Section 110 baseline inventory and evaluation work. Projects focus on baseline inventory but also include critical themes that
address cases of climate change impact, lesser told stories of Park landscape occupation and use, and always reveal new
information to contribute to broader research hypotheses. This paper presents an overview of geophysical surveys, metal detecting,
UAS mounted sensors and GIS in archeological inventory research through case studies across the region.
Wilkins, Crae [234] see Becker, Hilary
Wilkins, Jayne [11] see Collins, Benjamin
Wilkinson, Darryl (University of Cambridge)
[33]
Chair
Wilkinson, Darryl [33] see Wilkinson, Toby
Wilkinson, Toby (University of Cambridge), Darryl Wilkinson (Dartmouth College) and Adam Green (University of
Cambridge)
[33]
A Triadic Model for Transportation in Ancient Civilizations
A socio-transport system manifests the collective capacity of an ancient civilization to move humans, goods, and information across
the landscape. Technology and environment shape these systems, setting the energy requirements of social interaction, and
impacting the spatial arrangement of human activities, and thus exerting a powerful influence on politics and economies. Ancient
civilizations inhabited mountains, seas, and riparian corridors, each of which exerted particular pressures on socio-transportation
systems. This paper presents a novel schema for classifying, analyzing and visualizing socio-transportation systems using
computational tools. Our aim is to model interrelations between socio-transport systems and other social variables, integrating them
into an explanatory framework. We identify three basic facets of socio-transport systems: terrestrial, aquatic linear, and aquatic
radial. Terrestrial systems required human or animal portage, with high incumbent costs. Aquatic transport systems massively
reduced transport costs, especially for bulky items, but they were not all the same. Aquatic linear systems were usually riverine,
such as in early Egypt; and aquatic radial systems were oceanic, lacustrine, or braided riverine contexts, as ancient Indus or
Amazon, or the Aegean in the extreme. Our proposed triadic model may reveal regularities in these systems interacted with other
aspects of social structure.
[33]
Chair
Wilkinson, Toby [33] see Green, Adam
Wilks, Stefania (University of Utah), Lisbeth Louderback (Natural History Museum of Utah, University of Utah) and
Shannon Boomgarden (Natural History Museum of Utah, Range Creek Field)
[245]
Identification of Water Regime Influence on Zea Mays in Range Creek Canyon Based on Starch Grain Morphometrics
Starch grains of Zea mays (maize) have been well-studied during the last few decades, providing a wealth of information on global
patterns of human subsistence and plant domestication. Very little work, however, has been conducted on how the size and
morphology of the grains might change if exposed to different environmental contexts (e.g., the amount of water parent plants
receive). This poster session examines the costs and benefits of irrigation to growing maize at Range Creek Canyon in central Utah.
Our study seeks to determine if there are significant changes in the size or morphological attributes of starch grains from maize
planted at Range Creek under different irrigation regimes (low, moderate, ample). Two varieties of maize (Pima and Tohono
O’odham) from three different source populations were examined to develop starch reference material. Range Creek grains grown
under the three water regimes were then measured and compared to reference grains. Our results provide data on the impact of
irrigation on the size and morphology of starch grains and, therefore, have implications for identifying archaeological maize and
possibly determining past water regimes at Range Creek Canyon.
Wilks, Stefania [245] see Boomgarden, Shannon
Wilks, Stefania [235] see Louderback, Lisbeth
Will, Manuel (University of Tuebingen) and Nicholas Conard (Department of Early Prehistory and Quaternary Ecol)
[11]
Regional Temporal Signatures in the Howiesons Poort Support Complex Patterns of Behavioral Evolution in the Middle Stone Age
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   603
of Southern Africa
The Howiesons Poort (HP) of South Africa plays a key role in scenarios on the early cultural evolution of Homo sapiens. Many
models portray the HP as homogeneous technocomplex, but recent work has uncovered increased variability. We focus on
diachronic variation within the HP and its implications for the behavioral evolution of modern humans. Based on high-resolution
quantitative data on HP lithic assemblages from Sibudu, we test previous assessments of the technocomplex at the site and
regional level. Significant variability and consistent unidirectional change characterize the Sibudu sequence, with gradual reduction
in blade proportions, backed pieces, and HP cores. These changes conform to biased cultural transmission within demographic
continuity, but also covary with shifting hunting patterns and landscape opening. Quantitative comparisons with seven HP sites in
South Africa from various geographical and ecological zones reveal temporal trends that vary in an intricate and opposing manner
between, and sometimes within, regions instead of parallel diachronic changes. These regional patterns are associated with
different ecological adaptations and different connection networks, but the complex nature of temporal changes in lithic attributes
across sites precludes mono-causal explanations. Our findings reinforce scenarios of regionally variable and historically contingent
trajectories of behavioral evolution for the MSA.
Williams, Alexandra [177] see Tomich, Kassi
Williams, Amy [132] see Wilde, James
Williams, Charles
[175]
Lidar Prospection Uncovers the Forgotten Industrial Forest of the Shippenville Furnace, Northwestern Pennsylvania
Clarion County was a leader in historic iron production in northwestern Pennsylvania during the mid-nineteenth century with 31
furnaces operating from 1829–1882, of which 28 used charcoal as fuel. Shippenville Furnace, Clarion County, was a water-
powered, hot-blast charcoal iron furnace in blast from 1832–1859, a span of 27 years. As part of a larger study of colliers and
historic charcoal production in Clarion County, I used lidar imagery to identify putative relict charcoal hearths (RCH) within an 8.5
km2 forested study area adjacent to the furnace. Ground surveys were used to confirm or refute putative RCH identification. Of the
25 putative RCHs selected for ground survey, 21 (84.0%) were confirmed by soil coring. RCHs exhibited the slope discontinuity and
circular platform morphology typical of cut-and-fill construction and were largely located on gentle slopes and plateaus (mean slope
= 3.1%). Mean diameter of RCHs was 13.5 m; mean distance to nearest hearth was 126.2 m. Soil cores from all RCHs showed a
single A horizon of charcoal dust and fragments, indicating that each had been fired only once. Lidar imagery is currently being used
to uncover other features of the charcoal-making complex at Shippenville Furnace, particularly collier huts and haul roads.
Williams, Charlotte [57] see Smit, Douglas
Williams, Daniel [78] see Belcher, Megan
Williams, David [172] see Lamie, Katherine
Williams, John [235] see Perrotti, Angelina
Williams, Megan (University of Calgary), Elizabeth Paris (University of Calgary), Roberto López Bravo (Universidad de
Ciencias y Artes de Chiapas,) and Gabriel Lalo Jacinto (Institutio de Nacional de Antropologia e Historia)
[203]
Obsidian Production and Exchange at Tenam Puente, Chiapas, Mexico
Obsidian has long been utilized across the Maya world, both spatially and temporally, and is found at archaeological sites
throughout Mexico, Belize, Guatemala, and Honduras. Worked by skilled craftsmen into prismatic blades, projectile points, scrapers,
biface tools, ear spools, mirrors, and decorative ornaments, the morphological and compositional analysis of the obsidian
assemblage from an archaeological site can tell us much about the economy, prosperity, and daily life of its inhabitants. This paper
examines an obsidian assemblage from the Maya site of Tenam Puente in the highlands of Chiapas, Mexico. Established in the
Classic Period (AD 300), and occupied through the Early Post Classic period (AD 900–1200), Tenam Puente has been excavated
extensively since 1992, with the most recent 2019 field season focusing on the previously unexcavated Main Plaza next to the site’s
principal ball court. This paper discusses the results of morphological study and X-ray Fluorescence analysis of the obsidian
assemblage from these excavations, and offers insight into the nature of industry, marketplace, trade, and economy at Tenam
Puente during the Postclassic Period.
Williams, Ryan (Chicago Field Museum) and Donna Nash (UNCG)
[86]
Wari Beer: Production as Practice at the Cerro Baul Brewery
Between 600 and 1000 AD, the Wari state expanded across the Andes. Wari beer was one of the quintessential ways in which Wari
identity was promoted in provincial centers hundreds of kilometers from the Ayacucho heartland. Based on excavations at the far
southern provincial Wari brewery at Cerro Baul, we take a chaine operatoire approach to beer production to evaluate the nature of
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   604
Wari brewing as state practice. We investigate each step of the brewing process, from ceramic container manufacture, through plant
processing, mashing, and fermentation in different spatial venues at Cerro Baul used in the production of Wari chicha de jora y
molle. This method provides us with insights into the practice of Wari state brewing and into the corollary activities being undertaken
in the same spaces. In so doing, we establish the nature of craft production of beer-making in Wari state contexts and how it is
differentiated from contemporary and later household contexts of beer production in the region.
Williams, Ryan [127] see Sharratt, Nicola
Williams, Thomas (University of Texas, Austin), Ciprian Ardelean (Autonomous University of Zacatecas) and Nancy
Velchoff (University of Texas, Austin)
[73]
The Ballad of Bruce Bradley: Tales of Teaching and Knapping on the Job
Bruce Bradley’s willingness to engage with all students should rank highly in his contributions to archaeology over the past 50 years.
His personal approach to research, his understated but ever-present search for evidence in lithic technologies and the need for
science to lead the way, has always spilled out into his teaching. From debating the early origins of people in the New World, to how
to apply experimental archaeology in the service of scientific reasoning, he has always been willing to share his knowledge. The
authors of this paper came into Paleoamerican archaeology via different routes, but eventually found Bruce, who inspired them to
research the early prehistory of the Americas. We discuss how Bruce impacted on our research and continues to help and advise
us. It is his knowledge, expertise, open mindedness, and passion that has helped and inspired us and many others, directly and
indirectly.
Williams, Thomas (University of Texas, Austin)
[170]
Discussant
[170]
Chair
Williamson, James (Memorial University Newfoundland)
[12]
Beothuk Housepits in Virtual Spaces
In 1964, an amateur archaeologist Don Locke gave the the Provincial Archaeology Office of Newfoundland a record of the locations
for more than 100 Beothuk housepits along the Exploits River Valley. Since then, more housepits have been located but never fully
recorded. My research has focused on recording these features using image-based modeling and the analysis of the 3D models.
Focus was put on finding the best method for acquisition and processing in photogrammetry. Following that, advanced visualization
methods for 3D models to recognize features within housepits must also be discussed. The results of these techniques will be
discussed, focusing on the morphology of the exteriors and the topography of the interiors of the house-pits. This will show how
digital methodologies can be used to record and analyze residential features nondestructively and demonstrate that there are more
internal features than previously thought, including hearths and benches. This suggests that prior beliefs about the paucity of
Beothuk features may be incorrect and points toward new avenues for study.
Williamson, James [12] see Holly, Donald
Williamson, Kylie (University of Florida), Neill Wallis (Florida Museum of Natural History), George Kamenov (University of
Florida) and John Krigbaum (University of Florida)
[80]
Osteological and Isotopic Analysis of the Pillsbury Burial Mound (AD 600–900), a Weeden Island Site Situated along the Gulf Coast
of Florida
Since the excavation of its type site in Tampa, Florida, much variation has been observed regionally for sites associated with the
Middle Woodland phenomenon known as Weeden Island. Materials analysis of characteristic pottery demonstrates extensive extra-
local connections at Weeden Island sites, indicating large scale interactions particularly centered around burial mound rituals. This
research seeks to further explore the nature of region-wide interactions and community formation processes by means of
osteological and isotopic analyses of human remains from the Pillsbury Burial Mound site just north of Sarasota, in Bradenton,
Florida. The site consisted of a temple mound and adjacent burial mound, and was in use from ca. AD 600–900. Osteological
analysis of the remains yields a minimum of 199 individuals dispersed across 143 burials. Isotopic analysis is aimed to clarify
individual life history focused on first molar, third molar, and bone fragment remains, and data collected will be interpreted against
previously analyzed Weeden Island sites. Preliminary isotopic analysis suggests a mixed dietary regime including marine and
riverine-based foods. This study seeks to expand on previous analyses to include life history data to elucidate the processes of
community formation and better situate Pillsbury Mound in the larger Weeden Island religious complex.
Willis, Kelsey [126] see Neff, Hector
Willis, Mark (Flinders University) and Satoru Murata (BREA)
[14]
Mapping of the Largest Inland Perennial Wetland in Belize
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     605
During the summer of 2016, large scale Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) mapping was conducted in the Western Lagoon near
Crooked Tree, the largest inland perennial wetland in all of Belize. Our aim was to record a series of linear features in the wetlands
that may represent ancient Maya canals and other features possibly related to transportation, irrigation, aquaculture, and agricultural
production. The aerial survey, comprising over 44 km2, is the largest ever conducted in Belize with a UAV. The logistics of this large-
scale aerial survey will be presented along with our preliminary findings and interpretations of these features. Excavations carried
out in subsequent field seasons are aimed at testing some of these hypotheses.
Willis, Mark [79] see Castañeda, Amanda
Willis, Sam [194] see Bajdek, Brennan
Willis, William (University of Nevada, Las Vegas) and Elizabeth Shikrallah (University of Nevada, Las Vegas)
[148]
What Do Small Sites Tell Us about Virgin Branch Puebloan Lifeways on the Shivwits Plateau?
Recent archaeological work on the Shivwits Plateau in Northern Arizona has focused on the distribution and purpose of small
habitation sites among the Virgin Branch Puebloan culture. Preliminary data suggests that these small sites contain a high degree of
variation in terms of their placement on the landscape, and their function in Virgin Branch society. This research looks at some of
this variation within the context of how the Virgin Branch interacted with their environment to buffer against ecological risk.
Willison, Megan (University of Connecticut)
[13]
Trade and Settlement in Seventeenth-Century Connecticut
Following some of Dr. Brian Jones’ recent research interests in the archaeology and history of seventeenth-century Connecticut, this
paper will explore three seventeenth century Pequot domestic sites dated to between 1611 (the arrival of the Dutch) and 1637 (the
conclusion of the Pequot War of 1636–1637) and one Euro-American homestead excavated by Dr. Jones that dates to the mid- to
late seventeenth century. The three indigenous domestic sites, along with two others nearby, represent the “largest assemblage of
early seventeenth century indigenous sites associated with a single Native group ever identified in southern New England” (McBride
et al. 2016:20) and contain a diverse array of trade objects. This paper will discuss the diagnostic artifacts recovered from each site
and discuss the implications of trade and settlement for both indigenous constituents and Euro-Americans in the seventeenth
century.
Wilshusen, Richard (PaleoCultural Research Group)
[98]
Discussant
Wilson, Danee [240] see Fitzpatrick, Leslie
Wilson, David (Florida State University)
[270]
Stable Isotope Analysis of Megafaunal Materials from Paleoindian Sites in the Southeast United States
Excavations at Page-Ladson (8JE591) and other sites in the southeast United States have recovered zooarchaeological artifacts of
megafauna species including Pleistocene camel and mastodon. Tusk and tooth samples from these individuals have been subject
to Carbon and Oxygen stable isotope analysis to determine individual diet and water consumption. The preliminary data indicates a
possible seasonal water/food resource rotation and differences in food consumption between the species. The findings provide
additional insight to the seasonal availability of these species on the landscape for human exploitation, as well as the seasonal
availability of floral and water resources on the landscape during the Pleistocene.
Wilson, David [196] see Kilikoglou, Vassilis
Wilson, Douglas (Portland State University/National Park Service), Theresa Langford (National Park Service) and Meagan
Huff (National Park Service)
[172]
Navigating Museum Collections and Archaeological Research at Fort Vancouver
Since 1947, the National Park Service and its collaborators have excavated at Fort Vancouver, a nineteenth-century fur-trade and
U.S. Army colonial site in the Pacific Northwest of the United States. Museum collections are dominated by archaeological
collections from indigenous and colonial sites from the National Historic Site and related, affiliated sites. Challenges to collections
management include refining and sampling in the face of interest from multiple stakeholders, including academic and indigenous
communities, and changing theoretical directions in archaeology. The lessons from 20 years of collaboration between
archaeologists and museum curators suggest that museum curators should assist in the formulation of archaeological research
designs, including the development of protocols for artifact sampling to avoid future issues with deaccessioning. Developing
proactive protocols for collections management that address archaeology is particularly important for park units with collections that
do not have permanent staff archaeologists and/or curators.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   606
Wilson, Gregory [211] see Bardolph, Dana
Wilson, Jeremy (Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis), Grace Bocko (Indiana University-Purdue University,
Indianapolis) and Olivia Messenger (Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis)
[167]
The Bioarchaeology of Bethel Cemetery: Dying, Death, and Demographic Transitions in Nineteenth-Century Central Indiana
During the 2018–2019 Bethel Cemetery Relocation Project, 543 individuals were exhumed with 507 subsequently undergoing
osteological analyses by bioarchaeologists at the University of Indianapolis and Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis
(IUPUI). In this presentation, we review the scope, protocols, methods, and procedures utilized during the skeletal analyses,
focusing on the development of biological and taphonomic profiles for each individual, as well as the challenges and opportunities
related to ongoing and future research. We then shift our focus to the extraction of demographically meaningful information from this
predominantly nineteenth century cemetery, comparing the adult mortality profiles for Bethel Cemetery derived from the osteological
analyses to the data obtained from the cemetery’s legible headstones. We also compare the skeletal-derived mortality models to
proxy data on deaths and causes of death collected as part of United States Censuses between 1840 and 1890. Our preliminary
results indicate that important paleodemographic insights can be obtained when utilizing appropriate techniques, comparative data,
and mathematical models. Furthermore, our results suggest that Bethel Cemetery was in use during the onset of an important
second demographic transition characterized by attenuated age-specific risk of death among adults.
Wilson, Jeremy [232] see Flood, John
Wilson, John [124] see Langlie, BrieAnna
Wilson, Kurt (University of Utah), Brian Codding (University of Utah) and Joan Coltrain (University of Utah)
[61]
Exploring the Intersection of Climate, Society, and Diet in the Prehistoric Andes
Diet influences many social interactions, yet the role of subsistence in structuring our social worlds is often underappreciated. To
help integrate studies of subsistence and social dynamics, here we investigate how dietary decisions vary as a function of climate
and social inequality across the Peruvian Andes and northern Chile. Identifying dietary changes possibly driven by climate enables
the examination of how subsistence mediates social interactions, and allows for the identification of residual variation in diet that
may be better explained by social status, gender, or other social constructs. Using a comprehensive database of carbon and
nitrogen isotope data for individuals from the Peruvian Andes and northern Chile (n = 1570) we compare dietary changes over
space and time with climate reconstruction derived from TraCE-21ka. Statistical analysis of co-variance in climatic and dietary
change reveals relationships with environmental shifts which may serve as a baseline for analysis on gender, age, and other
demographic factors.
Wilson, Jeremy [167] see Powell, Allie
Winchell-Sweeney, Susan [190] see Lothrop, Jonathan
Winkler, Stephan [11] see Fisher, Erich
Winter, Barbara [203] see Cannon, Molly
Winter, Marcus [39] see Minc, Leah
Wiseman, Chelsea [238] see McCarthy, John
Witham, Samuel [252] see O’Mansky, Matt
Witmore, Christopher (Texas Tech University) and Bjørnar Olsen (UiT—Arctic University of Tromsø)
[159]
Svaerholt, WWII History, and Archaeology
What difference does an archaeological approach make to a period saturated by history? Since 2011 a group of archaeologists
have undertaken fieldwork at a WWII prisoner of war camp at Sværholt in northernmost Norway. The labor camp for Soviet
prisoners was established in 1942 as part of the construction of the German coastal battery at Sværholt, a fortification within the
Atlantic Wall. In late fall 1944 the camp, the coastal fort, and the local Norwegian hamlet were abandoned and destroyed in step
with the massive and abrupt German retreat from this northern region. This paper explores the afterlife of the camp and the coastal
fort and shares details of the excavation and archaeological finds. In weaving a path alongside objects revealed over the last nine
summers at Svaerholt this paper indicates how the things found challenge our common assumptions about the relationship between
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    607
prisoners, guards, and locals. Ultimately, it provides suggestions as to what an archaeological account my look like as a
complement and alternative to history.
Witt, David (NYS Department of Environmental Conservation)
[77]
Remote Sensing of Chacoan Roads in the Middle San Juan Region
This poster demonstrates recent applications of remotely sensed data to track Chacoan roads in the Middle San Juan Region,
specifically the use of high resolution (1 meter) Digital Elevation Models obtained from Light Detection and Ranging (lidar) data and
multispectral imagery obtained from the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission Reflectance Radiometer (ASTER) instrument to
track a potential route between the Aztec Community and the Holmes Group through the Farmington Glade and surrounding mesas.
These data sources, in combination with historical aerial imagery, spaceborne orthoimagery, and archaeological site data obtained
from the New Mexico Cultural Resources Information System (NMCRIS), allow for the continued development of a geographic
record for potential Chacoan roads that is ready for ground truthing.
Witt, David (NYS Department of Environmental Conservation)
[154]
Discussant
Witt, David (NYS Department of Environmental Conservation)
[25]
Discussant
Witt, David [25] see Richards-Rissetto, Heather
Witte, Emilee, Donna Nash (University of North Carolina, Greensboro) and Emily Schach (University of California, Santa
Cruz)
[260]
People, Pigments, and Parallels
The Late Intermediate Period is viewed as a time of collapse, when the Wari and Tiwanaku polities fragmented and new cultural
traditions emerged. In this paper I use portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) to examine changes from the Middle Horizon to Late
Intermediate period in the availability and use of slip pigments and colorants. Pigments are essential to polychrome pottery
production seen in the varying cultural traditions being studied. The knowledge of production was transferred between communities.
The spread of ideas followed social networks and led to the development of new communities of practice. I will describe changes
and continuities in the use of pigments in the Moquegua region and discuss the implications these results have for understanding
the transmission of craft knowledge and the scope of exchange networks from the Middle Horizon to Late Intermediate period.
Woldekiros, Helina (Washington University, Saint Louis)
[33]
Donkeys, Mules, Camels, and Caravans: Aksumite (400 BC–900 CE) Terrestrial Transport System in Northern Ethiopia
Pack animals played a significant role in shaping the world’s earliest continental and regional terrestrial transport systems. Pack-
based caravans, organized by the state or small-scale traders, facilitated the economic growth and political strength of complex
ancient societies. This paper examines the organization of ancient Aksumite (400 BC–900 CE) salt transport on the Afar trade route
drawing on recent ethnoarchaeological and archaeological evidence. Ethnoarchaeological research on the Afar salt trail provided
data on traders and pack animal trains moving 160 km from the high Ethiopian plateau to the Afar salt source. The study sheds light
on the daily rhythms of the trail, presenting data on drover feeding, harnessing, loading, and unloading, working and resting of
animals. The data reveal that ancient and modern traders followed the least costly path on a portion of the route, with ideal slopes
for pack travel and water sources, while brunching routes passed through trader towns as well as foothill towns. Radiocarbon date
shows use of the trial during the Aksumite and Medieval period.
Wolfe, Allison (University of Utah)
[27]
The Bonneville Basin Avifauna
The final regression of Lake Bonneville during the Pleistocene/Holocene transition resulted in dramatic environmental changes in
the Bonneville basin, followed by further environmental fluctuations throughout the Holocene. Recent research of faunal and floral
remains throughout the basin has increased our knowledge of the corresponding biotic changes that occurred in the region. The
dynamics of the region’s avifauna, however, remain poorly understood due to a limited availability of avifaunal assemblages that
cover this period. Homestead Cave is the only site within the basin that has produced a substantial, fine-grained avifaunal record
that spans the past 13,000 years. Identification of the changes in taxonomic composition of the Homestead Cave avifauna
throughout this long record allows for study of the response of certain taxa to shifts in different environmental factors. This analysis
has important implications for the modern conservation and management of birds, including that of the Greater Sage-Grouse, which
represents one of the most prominent and controversial wildlife conservation issues in western North America today.
Wolff, Christopher (University at Albany)
[23]
Is Maritime Archaic an Archaic Term? A Consideration of Terminology in Newfoundland and Labrador
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      608
The Archaic period of Newfoundland and Labrador is vaguely defined. It shares aspects with the Paleoindian period elsewhere
because the “Maritime Archaic” peoples of the region were the first to colonize it (ca. 8000 BP) following the melting of the
icesheets. It differs in that it does not fit the historical Paleoindian timeframe and because the Maritime Archaic developed a coastal
economy and technology unlike the terrestrial assemblages associated with traditional views of Paleoindians. However,
characteristics that define the Archaic period elsewhere, such as broader subsistence strategies, territoriality, and greater
sedentism, are rare in the early Archaic period of the region. Moreover, near the end of the Archaic period, there are no changes
from a highly mobile, hunter-gatherer society that traditionally defines Woodland periods elsewhere. There are some shifts to a more
generalized economy, larger residential groups, and more reliance on terrestrial fauna, but those traits elsewhere define “Archaic”
periods instead of distinguishing them from later periods. With this in mind, this paper will ask if the term “Archaic” in Newfoundland
and Labrador is useful? Is it just a chronological marker or something more important, and does it fit with traditional ideas of what it
means to be “Archaic”?
[23]
Chair
Wolff, Christopher [12] see Holly, Donald
Wolff, Christopher [72] see Yakabowskas, Dana
Wolfhagen, Jesse (Stony Brook University)
[55]
Why Not A Bayesian Archaeology? Debunking Misconceptions about Bayesian Statistics
Bayesian inference has become a popular framework for statistical analyses across scientific fields in the past several decades,
thanks to the development of software for generalized or specialized Bayesian modeling. With the logistical barriers to Bayesian
inference becoming less onerous, a wide variety of Bayesian applications have started to appear in scientific fields, including
archaeology. While increased exposure to myriad applications normalizes Bayesian statistics in archaeology, misconceptions about
the nature and application of Bayesian methods to archaeological problems remain and get in the way of broader and creative
applications in the field. Here, I explore and attempt to correct misunderstandings about 1) prior distributions, 2) how Bayesian
statistics is performed, and 3) when is a Bayesian approach appropriate. By reducing anxieties surrounding the proper use of
Bayesian statistics in archaeology, I hope to encourage further use of this approach to explore a wide variety of archaeological
questions and to normalize the use of Bayesian inference in our research and models.
[55]
Discussant
[55]
Chair
Wolterbeek, Leo [199] see van Gijn, Annelou
Wolters, Steffen (Lower Saxony Institute for Historical Coastal Research, Wilhelmshaven), Anja Behrens (Lower Saxony
Institute for Historical Coastal Rese), Moritz Mennenga (Lower Saxony Institute for Historical Coastal Rese) and Martina
Karle (Lower Saxony Institute for Historical Coastal Rese)
[107]
Relicts under the Bog: Reconstruction of the Neolithic Landscape and Vegetation in the Ahlen-Falkenberger Bog in Northwestern
Germany
In the bogs of northwestern Germany, the landscape of the Neolithic is preserved like only few other places in Europe. Due to
agricultural bog cultivation for some decades, megalithic graves of the funnelbeaker culture (3400–3800 BC) are successively
emerging from the moor. These monuments and their surrounding are now the focus of the research of the “Relicts under the bog”
project, funded by the Ministry of Science of the federal State of Lower Saxony, Germany. Aiming to locate archaeological sites and
indicators of the ancient landscape that is covered by bog, geomagnetic prospection on an area of about 600 ha was carried out.
Although this area is positioned in a moraine landscape of the Saale glaciation and shaped by layers of inhomogeneous sediments
with interspersed stones of varying size, it was possible to identify sites where so far unknown megalithic tombs may be expected.
The geomagnetics were followed by archaeological investigations that allowed a detailed study of one megalithic grave and another
lithic feature. The results confirmed that the graves covered with bog within a relatively short time after its construction. Additional
archaeobotanical and geoarchaeological investigations were conducted that allowed detailed reconstruction of the ancient
landscape and the bogs growths.
Wong, Amanda [183] see De Guzman, Margarita
Wong, Charmaine [186] see Duarte, Trever
Wong, Gillian (University of Tübingen), Dorothée Drucker (Senckenberg Centre for Human Evolution and Palaeoe), Britt
Starkovich (University of Tübingen) and Nicholas Conard (University of Tübingen)
[162]
Heterogeneity in Late Glacial Environments of Southwest Germany and Implications for Magdalenian Settlement
During the Late Glacial (~18–11.6 k cal yr BP), Magdalenian peoples recolonized southwest Germany, which was uninhabited
during the Last Glacial Maximum. Past research has generally characterized this region as tundra during this time but making
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   609
smaller-scale interpretations can be difficult due to the nature of the fossil record. To tackle this problem, we pair stable isotope
analysis of large ungulates with the analysis of a micromammal assemblage from Langmahdhalde, a Magdalenian site in the
Swabian Jura of southwest Germany. We apply two bioclimatic models to the micromammal assemblage to predict several climate
variables, including temperature and length of vegetative activity period. Additionally, we present carbon and nitrogen stable isotope
data from bone collagen of reindeer and horse. We reconstruct a mostly tundra environment with pockets of denser vegetation,
including trees, and argue that this heterogeneous environment was likely more productive and had a higher diversity of species
than modern tundra environments. This may have been one of the reasons that Magdalenian settlement was successful in this
region and may, at least in part, explain the regional nature of Central European settlement strategies during this time.
Woo, Katherine (University of Sydney), Peter Moe Astrup (Moesgaard Museum), Jonathan Benjamin (Flinders University)
and Geoff Bailey (University of York)
[252]
To Shell with It: the Zooarchaeological Analysis of a Submerged Ertebølle Midden
Coastal environments have long been acknowledged as important resources for past peoples and middens are one of the most
prevalent site types in these areas. Shifting sea-levels have resulted in many of these prehistoric coastlines being submerged,
leaving a distorted record from terrestrial sites that have traditionally been used to reconstruct past landscapes and their functions.
The examination of submerged palaeolandscapes, however, has become more prominent and provides archaeologists with the
ability to address this current bias in the coastal record. Recent zooarchaeological analyses conducted on a submerged, early
Ertebølle midden site at Hjarnø Vesterhoved, Denmark, appear to indicate that the mollusc assemblage follows a different trend to
what has been examined in terrestrial middens for the region. This suggests a need to re-evaluate our current models for the region
and to consider the unique taphonomic issues with examining submerged midden sites.
Woo, Katherine [18] see Hale, Nathan
Wood, Marilee (Honorary research associate University of the Witwatersrand)
[249]
Zanzibar’s Seventh- to Tenth-Century Glass Beads Reveal a World Connected by Trade
Glass beads first arrived in eastern Africa in large numbers beginning in the seventh century CE. An in-depth study of these beads,
including chemical analysis of the glasses used to make them, provides insights into where the glasses were produced, where the
beads were possibly made, what trade patterns brought them to Africa and how these patterns were affected by political events,
particularly in regions where the glasses and beads were made. The beads recovered from Sealinks Project excavations at Unguja
Ukuu in Zanzibar are well suited to explore trade connections in the Western Indian Ocean between the seventh and mid-tenth
centuries. It appears that traders carrying beads made of a mineral soda glass from Sri Lanka were the first to arrive in Zanzibar
followed soon after by traders from the Persian Gulf who carried beads made of a plant ash glass that was probably produced in
Iraq. But this glass type was widely traded so the beads may have been made at far-flung places, from southern Africa to Gao in
Mali or from Thailand to Scandinavia. These beads show how interconnected the Old World was in this Early Islamic Period.
Wood, Warren [18] see Damour, Melanie
Woodard, Buck [251] see Moretti-Langholtz, Danielle
Woodfill, Brent (Winthrop University) and Lucia Henderson
[127]
Missing Persons: Animate Landscape and Nonhuman Persons in Ancient Maya Ritual Economy
In indigenous Maya belief, many landscape features are viewed as living, agentive beings. Human persons thus interact with a wide
variety of nonhuman persons in their daily and ritual lives. Although scholars often cite the “living landscape” as an important feature
of ancient Maya belief and religious practice, the manner in which this agentive landscape actively affected matters of economy,
trade, and ideology is rarely addressed. This presentation contemplates the ways in which nonhuman persons—especially animated
features of the landscape such as caves, lakes, mountains, and volcanoes—participated in ancient Maya ritual economy. Focusing
particularly on trade and pilgrimage routes, the authors consider the ways in which nonhuman persons may have affected the
logistics of ritual pathways and economic exchange, including the ownership, management, procurement, and transportation of
goods and materials between sites and across regions. How did living landscape features interact with those living with them and
passing by them? As persons, could these sites be owned, or did they serve as neutral nodes in contested territory? Overall, how
does applying this indigenous, expansive view of personhood to the archaeological record affect scholarly theories related to
economic systems and ritual practice?
[127]
Chair
Woodfill, Brent (Winthrop University)
[209]
Discussant
Woodfill, Brent [175] see Gillam, J. Christopher
Woodfill, Brent [168] see Leight, Megan
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 610
Woodhead, Genevieve (University of New Mexico)
[148]
Ordinary but Not Insignificant: Assessing the Symbolic Import of Embellished Ancestral Puebloan Utility Wares
Why embellish the practical things we make? A focused approach to the study of utilitarian material culture is a necessary first step
for answering this larger question of human behavior and erasing the false Western profane/mundane vs. sacred/holy dichotomy.
This study looks at ceramic utility wares from the United States northern Southwest. Whole and partial Ancestral Puebloan
corrugated cooking vessels often feature decorative appliques and intricate, basket-like surface designs. A close archaeological
study, pulling from both art historical and statistical approaches to analysis, reveals the degree to which these embellishments were
either systematic or haphazard. If orderly patterns emerge, especially within a localized ceramic tradition, then perhaps one could
infer that even everyday objects were imbued with a certain symbolic significance.
Woodhead, Genevieve [149] see Schleher, Kari
Woods, Alexander (Colorado State University)
[52]
A Comparative Analysis of CRM Work Experiences on DoD Installations
Cultural Resource Managers (CRMs) on military lands have developed different knowledge bases and encountered different
challenges in their time balancing the needs of heritage management while simultaneously advancing the military mission. The
diversity of people, environments, histories, and architectural styles on military installations leads to some of the variations in
experience. These differences are compounded, however, by the diversity of weapon systems, land use patterns, housing
arrangements, and workplace cultures across, and even within, different service branches. As a result, each military installation’s
CRM program has it’s own “flavor,” much like the installations themselves. This paper presents an analysis of the results of
qualitative surveys of CRMs across the DoD, and discusses emerging themes in their experiences running effective Cultural
Resource Management programs on military lands.
[52]
Chair
Woodson, Kyle [229] see Morgan, Linda
Woodson, Kyle [229] see Plumlee, R. Scott
Woollett, James (Université Laval, Centre d’études nordiques) and Héloïse Barbel (Université Laval, Centre d’études
nordiques)
[50]
From Omajuk to NiKik: The Variable Transformation of Animals into Social Things among the Historic Period Labrador Inuit
Archaeological studies have conventionally regarded Inuit relationships to animals in terms of subsistence and food-getting, from
seasonality and hunting strategies to calories of meat, fat and marrow consumed. Inuit oral traditions and ethnographic sources,
however, offer a richer narrative of subsistence than archaeologists have succeeded in portraying, one including the ideological
significance of animals, their spiritual autonomy and the multiple transformations of social meanings attached to animals during their
appropriation, dismemberment and dis-embodiment. This study will re-examine seal, dog, fox and caribou bone across a set of
historic period sites in Nunatsiavut (Labrador) in order to explore the potential of a social zooarchaeology of Inuit-animal inter-
actions. As a starting point, differences in the treatment of live animals, and postmortem treatment of carcasses related to butchery,
food preparation and other forms of exploitation were examined through comparisons of pathologies, cutmark and other tool marks
in assemblages from midden, house floor and cache contexts, with different treatments clearly being accorded to different animals.
These differences likely relate in part to functional variables such as anatomy and seasonality but also to conceptual distinctions
between animals derived from ideology, habitus and the introduction of commercial trapping and hunting practices.
Woollett, James [50] see Marengère, Véronique
Wooten, Kimberly (California Department of Transportation)
[226]
The Biggest Anthropocene Site in the World: Using the Archaeology of Plastics to Engage in Public Education and Activism
The world’s oceans have become a dumping ground for plastic waste, perhaps creating the single largest archaeological site in the
world. But what if we could teach people to see their plastic footprint in the Anthropocene Era? As a way to tackle this issue,
eXXpedition launched a round-the-world research sailing voyage in October 2019. The mission of the two-year trip—which features
30 voyages, 300 women, and over 38,000 nautical miles—is to gather women from a wide array of nationalities and disciplines,
creating “ambassadors” who will bring their understanding of single-use plastics back to their communities. Ms. Wooten joined the
first leg of the research trip, over 1,200 nautical miles from England to the Azores, as an archaeologist. In preparation for her
voyage, she developed guidance based on historical archaeology methods. In a way that is easy for the public to understand, she
traces the development of the disposable economy and compares historically available materials such as ceramic, glass, and metal
with their modern plastic descendants. This paper looks at the both the responsibility and opportunity for archaeologists to engage
the public as activists and educators in seeking solutions to the Climate Crisis.
Worman, F. Scott (Missouri State University) and Elizabeth Sobel (Missouri State University)
[213]
“A rural backwater of poverty and illiteracy”: Preliminary Investigations at the Phenix Town Site
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     611
For nearly a century, books, movies, and other media have portrayed the Ozarks region as isolated, rural, and backward. During the
summer of 2019, we led an archaeological field school investigating a company town constructed by the Phenix Stone and Lime
Company in Southwestern Missouri. We documented remnants of public architecture, including the community hall, school, and
church, as well as a barn and root cellars used by multiple families. We also identified architectural remains and domestic refuse
associated with several households. In combination with our ongoing collection of oral histories and documentary research, the
archaeological data are beginning to reveal a more complex and nuanced picture of life in the Ozarks during the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. Quarry workers and their families came from a wide range of backgrounds and re-shaped the demography
of the area while participating fully in regional, national, and international economic networks. This project adds to our broader
investigations of large-scale industrial production of lime, dimensional stone, marble, and other materials in the area, the
environmental impacts of those industries, and the roles of race and class in mediating how economic change affected diverse
households.
Worth, John [192] see Eschbach, Krista
Wright, David (University of Oslo), Ke Dong (Kyonggi University), Jonathan Adams (Nanjing University) and Helena Pinto
Lima (Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi)
[161]
Anthropogenic Landscapes in the Lower Xingu: Detection, Characterization, and Future
Recent archaeological research demonstrates unique niche construction activities across the Amazon associated with the formation
and maintenance of terra preta and related anthropogenic soils. Advances in remote sensing technology and geospatial statistics
have provided new opportunities to detect and quantify anthrosols in forested settings. This paper presents geochemical
characterization of soils to provide insights into the nature and extent of precolumbian anthropogenic landscape formation in the
lower Xingu basin. This research demonstrates that soil amendments induced significant microbial ecological shifts within the
context of a closed canopy forest in a flattened-trophic environment. Prehistoric land use stands in marked contrast with modern
landscape management practices, which are rapidly opening large swaths of rainforest for ranching and other agricultural pursuits.
Additionally, drainage of wetlands during the historic period has been extensively documented in percussion cores taken in the
vicinity of Gurupá, which further attests to diverging strategies of forest use over time. Modern agricultural practices threaten to tip
the Amazon into a new, unprecedented ecological regime, which is unlikely to provide sustainable livelihoods for the majority of the
forest’s inhabitants unless the pace of deforestation is reversed.
Wright, Joshua (University of Aberdeen)
[62]
Chair
Wright, Kevin (The University of Alabama)
[3]
Examining Choctaw Coalescence through Ceramic Communities of Practice
This paper discusses the results of a study aiming to highlight the mechanics behind Choctaw coalescence in east-central
Mississippi. A sample assemblage of eighteenth-century Choctaw ceramics from the Chickasawhay Creek sites (22KE630 and
22KE718) underwent both chemical and petrographic analyses. The results were used to identify ceramic communities of practice
and to highlight social boundaries. A combination of indigenous and experimental archaeology was also used to help refine ceramic
chronologies, highlight systems of trade and exchange, and explore the processes behind Choctaw identity formation.
Wright, Rita (New York University)
[143]
Discussant
Wright, Sterling (University of Oklahoma), Kristen Rayfield (University of Oklahoma), Courtney Hofman (University of
Oklahoma), Andrei Soficaru (University of Southampton) and Adam Rabinowitz (University of Texas, Austin)
[169]
The Integrity of Biomolecules across the Oral Matrix from Histria, Romania
During the Archaic period (seventh century-sixth century BCE), Greek colonists from Miletus founded the city of Histria. Located
near the Black Sea mouth of the Danube, this urban center experienced environmental and demographic changes during its 13
centuries of existence. The site has been under archaeological investigations for more than a century and has yielded a rich skeletal
collection that is housed in the Fr. J. Rainer Institute of Anthropology in Bucharest. To assess biomolecular preservation at the site,
this project applied metagenomic sequencing to two dental calculus and two dentin samples, as well as, proteomic analysis of sex-
specific peptides to two dentin samples. All samples in this study date to the Roman imperial period. Our data suggest that ancient
DNA and proteins are well-preserved at Histria. Microbial analysis suggests that calculus samples contain human-associated oral
taxa and human genetic analysis reveals the presence of U5b2a5 and I3a haplogroups. Additionally, we were able to identify the
sex for two individuals using minimally destructive proteomic methods. These results are encouraging and provide a direction for
potential research on the skeletal remains from this site.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    612
Wriston, Teresa (Desert Research Institute) and Kenneth Adams (Desert Research Institute)
[198]
Clovis in Coal Valley? Paleoindian points in the Basin and Range National Monument, Nevada and Their Relationship to Pluvial
Lake Coal
In 2016 DRI began a multi-faceted study of pluvial Lake Coal’s history and how it relates to the earliest people in the region. This
work was funded by the Lincoln County Archaeological Initiative administered by the Bureau of Land Management. In total, we
surveyed 2,162-acres for archaeological evidence and examined many stratigraphic exposures for dateable remains. Of the seventy
archaeological sites documented, twelve contain Crescents, Fluted (Clovis?), or Western Stemmed projectile points, suggesting that
Coal Valley was a good place to be during the Terminal Pleistocene/Early Holocene. However, a shell age of about 16,084 cal yr BP
in the highest shoreline, combined with Fluted points (n=5) discovered within a single site well below, suggests that people using
Fluted points arrived after the lake began to recede. Western Stemmed points have a broader elevation distribution, from the top of
the pluvial lake’s highstand down to the site containing the Fluted points. In fact, within this dense site, Crescents, Fluted, and
Western Stemmed points all intermingle. We don’t know when people using Crescents and Stemmed points arrived, but we do know
that they lived in the same place as people using Fluted points after the lake had retreated to the valley floor.
[198]
Chair
Wrobel, Gabriel (Michigan State University), Carolyn Freiwald (University of Mississippi) and Eleanor Harrison-Buck
(University of New Hampshire)
[14]
Bioarchaeology of the Lower Belize River Watershed
Burials from the BREA excavations represent a small, but diverse assemblage of mortuary contexts. Skeletal analyses have
focused thus far on estimation of age and sex, as well as documentation of pathologies, trauma, and cranial and dental
modifications. Additionally, isotopic analyses are underway, which will provide further information about burial dates, diet, and
geographic origin. This paper will describe the current results generated from these analyses, and will utilize the biological and
mortuary data to discuss the significance of the individuals within the broader context of the BREA research area of central Belize.
Wrobel, Gabriel [240] see Biggs, Jack
Wroth, Kristen [162] see Bousman, Britt
Wu, Dongming (Columbia University)
[94]
A Craft of Destruction: The Phenomenon of Bronze Scraping in Bronze Age China
The practice of damaging objects of ritual importance is commonly seen in ancient civilizations. Through breaking burial goods or
removing stele inscriptions, this practice diminished the original function and substituted it with a new meaning. Bronze vessels bore
important ritual function in Bronze Age China, yet the decorations and inscriptions on bronze vessels were sometimes scraped off.
This phenomenon is not limited to the bronzes plundered in wars when the names of the defeated were removed but can also be
seen on those passed down in the same state, lineage, and family. In this sense, this phenomenon alludes that there existed a
culture of manipulating the ritual meaning of bronzes through damaging and scarping, which was more complicated than simply
erasing the memories of the previous owners. Therefore, it required the artisans to master not only the skill of bronze production but
also the craft of destruction. This research discusses bronze scraping and its possible purposes by examining the bronze vessels
demonstrating this phenomenon in the Zhou dynasty. It broadens the current study on this topic by introducing new archaeological
evidence. This research points to the importance of destruction of ritual artifacts and the culture and craftsmanship of destruction.
Wu, Qian [45] see Zhai, Shaodong
Wu, Si [244] see Rayfield, Kristen
Wu, Yue [36] see Chen, Ran
Wyatt, Andrew (Middle Tennessee State University), Laura Furquim (Universidade de São Paulo) and Helena Pinto Lima
(Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi)
[161]
Archaeological Plant Remains from the Lower Xingu
Recent archaeological excavations at the sites of Jacupí, Carrazedo, and Gurupá in the Lower Xingu in the Brazilian Amazon have
implemented a significant program for the recovery of plant remains, resulting in a large archaeobotanical assemblage currently
undergoing analysis. Recent archaeobotanical research in Amazonia has focused on and identified large-scale processes of
environmental change, domestication, and agricultural practices; however, archaeobotanical studies to identify more local and short-
term environmental and cultural processes are less common. The analysis of plant remains from these smaller and more local sites
can provide information on local environmental change, plant use, and also provide insight into the process of the manufacture of
Amazonian Dark Earths (ADE). In this presentation, we will discuss the preliminary results of our analysis of the archaeobotanical
remains from these sites, and situate the data within the local environmental context of this region. In particular, we will discuss the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    613
plant remains recovered specifically from ADE contexts and suggest possible techniques for ADE manufacture.
Wyckoff, Don [23] see Lohse, Jon
Wygal, Brian (Adelphi University), Kathryn Krasinski (Adelphi University), Charles Holmes (University of Alaska,
Fairbanks), Barbara Crass (Musem of the North) and Dominic Tullo (University of Nevada, Reno)
[82]
The Holzman Site: Fourteen Thousand Years of Human Activity along Shaw Creek, Alaska
The Holzman archaeological site lies along the west bank of Shaw Creek, a northern tributary of the middle Tanana River in Interior
Alaska. Recent excavations have yielded an expedient stone technology alongside well-preserved hearths, avifauna and large
mammal remains including abundant mammoth ivory in deeply buried deposits. Evidence of food preparation and ivory tool
manufacture has been dated to at least to 13,700 cal BP. A smaller occupation at the site, uncovered in 2019, dates to 14,000 years
ago making Holzman one of the earliest sites in the Americas. A multidisciplinary team conducting wide-ranging analyses has
contributed to our understanding of the human activities and local environmental change in this region—rich in Paleolithic
archaeology.
Wygal, Brian [82] see Holt, Evan
Wyllie, Cherra
[191]
Chair
Wyllie, Cherra
[227]
Cerro de las Mesas Monument 2
Cerro de las Mesas Monument 2 is a colossal portrait head. Its flattened rear surface contains a relief-carved scene with a ruler in a
broad-brimmed hat, vanquished captive with a calendric sign above his or her head, and a worn hieroglyphic text placed between
them. In its entirety Monument 2 bridges the site’s Olmec heritage with Late Classic Veracruz conventions of image and text,
forming a microcosm of Cerro de las Mesas elite traditions. While the enormous head on the obverse of the monolith is reminiscent
of Tres Zapotes monumental sculpture in both form and detail (such as the three tear-like striations beneath the eyes), other
elements, including the trefoil headdress and buccal mask anchor it firmly to Early Classic ruler portraits on Cerro de las Mesas
stelae, a point noted by Mathew Stirling. Moreover, the dissociated head and fleshless jaw are consonant with the decapitated ruler
with detached mandible interred in Cerro de las Mesas Burial II-18 amid lavish grave goods, including a plain stone yoke. Rulers on
Cerro de las Mesas stelae are frequently dressed as ballplayers. Similarities between Burial II-18 and Monument 2 offer renewed
credence to the notion that colossal heads represent rulers as ballplayers.
Wynne-Jones, Stephanie (University of York)
[250]
Discussant
Wynne-Jones, Stephanie [216] see Fitton, Tom
Xia, Yin [42] see Li, Xiuzhen
Xiao, Yuqi (Chinese University of Hong Kong)
[94]
Stories under the Patina: A Case Study of Bronze Production and Circulation in Southern Hunan
The inconsistency of the early development of bronze production throughout ancient China has been a gradually appreciated fact—
especially for the southern mountainous area, where the distinctive topography has sorted and segregated the whole “south China”
into various small regions. This study conducts compositional (SEM-EDS and p-XRF) and metallographic analyses of the major
bronze collection in Chenzhou Museum, Hunan Province, which covered most findings within southern Hunan from Eastern Zhou to
Eastern Han periods. This region is often known as a “cushion” area between the northern centralized polities and the less “tamed”
ethnic groups in far south during multiple periods throughout history, yet received little research focus that clearly illustrates the
manufacturing technology, provenance or symbolic value of its bronze findings and their implications on inner social configurations
as well as inter-regional interactions. And a further systematic examination of the correlation among major element concentrations
and artifact types in a diachronic frame combines the traditional typological and burial analyses. The preliminary results help us to
better perceive the spread of esoteric knowledge, the mobility of symbolic objects and the role of crafts and materials in fortifying
intangible boundaries in the frontier.
Xiuhtecutli, Nezahualcoyotl (Tulane University)
[118]
Moderator
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                   614
Yaeger, Jason (University of Texas, San Antonio), Bernadette Cap (University of Texas, San Antonio) and M. Kathryn
Brown (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[185]
A Maya Pyrite Mosaic Mirror from a Royal Tomb at Buenavista del Cayo, Belize
Maya rulers were often buried with pyrite mosaic mirrors. Mirrors were important components of a ritual divinatory-scrying complex
in Classic Maya civilization. They were also prized objects, made by highly skilled artisans using rare and imported materials that
appear on painted scenes of courtly life. This poster presents the excavation and conservation of a complex pyrite mosaic mirror
recovered in a Classic-period royal tomb at Buenavista del Cayo, Belize. It describes how this composite object was crafted,
assembling pyrite plaques, a slate mosaic core, and a complex mosaic and painted-stucco frame and back. The poster also
describes the object’s iconography and presents a broader interpretation of the object’s significance for the Buenavista royal house
and their political relationships to foreign powers, particularly Tikal.
Yaeger, Jason [178] see Friedel, Rebecca
Yakabowskas, Dana, Amanda Samuels (University at Albany) and Christopher Wolff (University at Albany)
[72]
Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer Research: A Bibliometric Analysis of Trends in Hunter-Gatherer Research within American Antiquity
Hunter-gatherer/forager research in the field of archaeology has waxed and waned since American Antiquity published its first
issues in the 1930s. We wanted to test our idea that hunter-gatherer research has been declining in North America and try to
identify causal elements in shifts in hunter-gatherer research. Were they related to changes in social contexts, fluctuations in funding
decisions, popular media trends, or strengths and weaknesses in academic institutions? We were also interested in changes in the
demographic composition of hunter-gatherer researchers throughout the twentieth and twenty-first century. Using published papers
from American Antiquity as a proxy, we compiled bibliometric data on several variables, including sex and academic institution of the
first authors, journal editor, study topic, study area, culture studied, and date of publication. We used these data to conduct an, albeit
limited, historical analysis of hunter-gatherer research and were able to identify clear trends in who conducts hunter-gatherer
research and where (academically and regionally). We provide a few preliminary interpretations for these trends and suggest areas
where we think this research can be used to address current gaps in the discipline and address larger concerns about diversity and
the future of hunter-gatherer research.
Yamamoto, Atsushi, Juan Pablo Vargas and Oscar Arias
[257]
Investigations in the Valley of Cañar, Ecuador: Preliminary Results at Cerro Narrio and Loma de Pinshul
The Cañar Valley, located in the southern part of Ecuador, is one of the most important though unknown regions concerning the
early cultural history in this country. Based on a short survey, we decided to carry out archaeological investigations at two important
sites in this region, Cerro Narrio and Loma de Pinshul. These are located on top of natural hills in the Cañar drainage, and both sites
are situated confronting in each other, possibly suggesting their unique relationships. In this session, we will present the preliminary
results of our first field season and provide a new dataset focusing on the site chronologies through pilot studies of architectural and
material styles. These new data allow us to compare the site history of both Cerro Narrio and Loma de Pinshul for the purpose of
understanding the diachronic process between the two sites during the Formative Period (1500–500 BC). In addition, we will
consider the implications of these new datasets from Ecuador in relation to the early frontier process between Peruvian North
Highlands and Southern Ecuador.
Yamano, Hiroya [100] see Weisler, Marshall
Yann, Jessica
[267]
Resource Dependency Theory: A New Approach for Examining Trade Relationships
Eighteenth century trade and exchange in the Midwest has been characterized by give and take relationships (such as Richard
White’s middle ground) between Native American groups and Euro-American traders. Looking for new ways to think about the
nature of these relationships, and borrowing from business and organizational studies, Resource Dependency Theory (RDT) has
provided a better understanding of the power dynamics implicit in these economic exchanges. In this paper, several case studies
are presented that show the efficacy of applying this framework, including both its capability for quantifying these relationships as
well as providing more nuanced interpretations of the interactions occurring between these groups.
[267]
Chair
Yaworsky, Peter (University of Utah)
[15]
The Interactive Effects of Risk and Climatic Variation on Food Storage Behavior
Risk, or variation in outcomes, is an inherent part of the human condition and can result in the adoption of complex behavioral
patterns that seemingly contradict expectations of human rationality. Thus, considering how risk constrains or encourages decisions
is necessary to understand complex patterns of behavioral adaptation. However, to date, there are few broadly applicable formal
models of risk from which researchers can derive testable hypotheses and predictions. To overcome this limitation, we use a formal
model of risk developed by integrating components of behavioral ecology and utility theory. Using this formal model, we then derive
predictions to explain the diverse food storage strategies undertaken by Formative Period (2100–500 BP) agriculturalists on the
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                     615
West Tavaputs Plateau in central Utah, known as the Fremont. The Fremont employed an expensive strategy of storing agricultural
products in constructed features high on the canyon walls, often placed in difficult and dangerous to access locations. Current
explanations often rely on normative differences resulting from regional variation. Using the formal model, we derive predictions
about how Formative Period agriculturalists should respond when facing risk and will test our predictions using temporal data, a
paleoclimatic reconstruction, and high-precision locational data of storage features.
Yebra, Lucía [243] see Carline, Kristin
Yellowhorn, Eldon
[87]
Discussant
Yerka, Stephen (Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, THPO)
[208]
Moderator
Yerkes, Richard [199] see Gyucha, Attila
Young, D. Craig [8] see Rice, Sarah
Young, D. Craig [195] see Vernon, Kenneth
Young, Danielle (University of Central Florida), Neil Duncan (University of Central Florida) and John Walker (University of
Central Florida)
[4]
Diet and Agriculture in the Bolivian Amazon
Recent palynological research in the Llanos de Mojos (Mojos), a seasonally inundated tropical savanna in the Amazonian lowlands
of Bolivia, has shown that Pre-Columbian peoples altered their environment by clearing forests to construct raised fields for
agriculture since at least 310 CE. However, our understanding of what crops people in communities cultivated on raised fields,
consumed, and processed is still tenuous. This paper presents the results of microremain analyses of ceramic residues from four
forest island communities in Mojos that provide direct evidence of people-plant interrelationships. Additionally, starch grain evidence
for maize, manioc, and other root crops in ceramic residues provides indirect evidence that these plants were grown on the raised
fields. Finally, through comparing assemblages of ceramic residues from several forest island communities, the results inform the
broader discourse on social identity in Mojos, as meals and cuisine have often been a venue for the creation and reaffirmation of
shared identity between community members.
Young, Kenneth (University of Texas at Austin)
[226]
Discussant
Young, Michelle (Yale University)
[182]
“International” before Nations: Ceramics and Supra-regional Identity Formation within the Chavín Sphere of Interaction
The introduction of novel ceramic styles into multiple sites or areas can be attributed to a wide range of social processes, including
intensive trade, emulation, migration, and/or conquest. During the Early Horizon (800–400 BC), the adoption of so-called
“Chavinoid” ceramics across distant regions of the Peruvian Andes has been interpreted as a symptom of widespread influence of
the Chavín religious cult. Expanding upon prior work, I use the results from a detailed study of Early Horizon ceramics from the
region of Huancavelica to propose that “Chavinoid” ceramics can be fruitfully understood as an “international style.” This term, which
has already gained traction within archaeological and art historical discourses, refers to the fluidity of material and/or visual culture
across sociocultural boundaries with symbolic and stylistic conventions determined through the interaction between several groups.
Finally, I explore how “international” ceramic visual culture was used to construct and maintain supra-regional communities rooted in
shared values and religious practices. This research offers a nuanced perspective on the recursive relationship between material
culture and communal identity.
Young, Michelle [61] see Weber, Sadie
Younie, Angela [82] see Gillispie, Thomas
Yu, Chong (Sun Yat-sen University)
[45]
Fishing in Neolithic South China: The Case Study of Guye, Guangdong
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    616
Based on the fish remains from Guye site in Guangdong province, this research aims to establish the pattern of fish resource
exploitation in the Pearl River Delta area dating from 6,000 to 5,000 years ago. Both qualitative and quantitative analysis were
applied on fish remains in the studied region. It will be one of the very few such studies in the whole country. The result of this study
reveals at least 17 species of fish were exploited by the inhabitants. The details of past environment and ancient subsistence of
Pearl River Delta during middle Neolithic were discussed by reconstructing the body length of several key species.
Yu, Pei-Lin (Boise State University)
[199]
Neolithic Gardening: Spatial Frames of Reference for the Quiet Revolution
Gardening was, and is, revolutionary. The unique resiliency of gardens stems from diverse cultivars, small scale, beneficial wild and
commensal species, positioning near dwellings, and a household unit of production with much of the labor contributed by women,
children, and the elderly using hand-cultivation techniques, embedded with other tasks. These properties distinguish gardening as
an evolutionary strategy distinctive from foraging and farming, and sometimes essential to their success. I argue that in Neolithic
transitions gardening will take root before farming in the sub-tropics, endure alongside farming, offer a backstop when the fields fail,
and play an important role during oceanic and other diasporas. However, the properties that make gardening resilient also make
them challenging to perceive in the archaeological record. This paper uses the strength of ethnoarchaeological approach to describe
spatial context and configuration of sub-tropical gardens using original ethnoarchaeological data from eastern Taiwan, and discuss
implications for Neolithic gardening in an evolutionary perspective.
Yue, Hongbin [205] see Ledin, Lauren
Yue, Zhanwei [94] see Liu, Yu
Zaneri, Taylor (University of Amsterdam)
[143]
Enacting Health in the Medieval City: A Geospatial Analysis of Waste and Water in Bologna
What was a healthy and clean city in medieval Europe and how was this achieved? How did medieval cities handle critical public
health issues such as the disposal of domestic and industrial waste, and the preservation of clean water? This paper examines how
refuse management was handled by households, workshops, and neighborhoods from AD 1200 to 1500 in the city of Bologna.
Using archaeological data from twelve published excavations from across Bologna, along with historical population data in GIS, this
paper examines how waste management spatially varied across the medieval city. How were different types of refuse (household,
industrial, sewage, and animal) managed? This information is correlated with the medieval canal system in Bologna, which was
used for both industrial production and waste removal purposes. Were their areas or zones within the city that bore a greater burden
of material waste or polluted water? How were cleanliness and “public health” differentially experienced in the medieval city? In sum,
this paper investigates the connections medieval people made between human behaviors and urban health, how health was
enacted through the management of waste and access to clean water, and how this differed spatially among the citizens of Bologna.
[143]
Chair
Zaneri, Taylor [22] see Crabtree, Pam
Zant, Caitlin [192] see Galloway, Tori
Zapata, Josefina [162] see Cabanes, Dan
Zaragosa, Gabriella, Robert Hard (University of Texas, San Antonio), John Roney (Colinas Cultural Resource Consulting),
Arthur MacWilliams (Independent Scholar) and Mary Whisenhunt (University of Texas, San Antonio)
[156]
The Plaza at the Sanchez Site: Communal Architecture at an Early Cerro de Trincheras in the Safford Basin
The Sanchez Site (AZ:CC:2:452 [ASM]) is a massive cerro de trincheras constructed on a steep, 200 m high hill overlooking the
upper Gila River east of Safford, Arizona. Radiocarbon dating and widely distributed brownware sherds place the site in the Early
Agricultural and Early Pithouse periods. The site contains at least 143 rock ring structures and 1.5 km of walls and terraces as well
as a constructed communal space. The plaza was constructed by clearing a 27 × 31 m area and bounding it by a low perimeter wall.
This feature lies athwart a ridgetop saddle 30 m north of the primary concentration of rock ring foundations. Systematic collections
from the plaza surface produced brownware sherds, two Mimbres Black-on-white sherds, and chipped stone. Test excavations
within the plaza in 2018 documented a potential thermal feature and stratigraphic profiles. A radiocarbon date from the feature
yielded a date of cal AD 1018–1155. The significance of the Sanchez plaza, including its construction, use, and apparent Classic
period reuse, are considered.
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                        617
Zaro, Gregory (University of Maine), Martina Celhar (University of Zadar), Igor Borzic (University of Zadar) and Dario
Vujevic (University of Zadar)
[85]
Town Planning through the Ages: Millennial-scale Continuity and Discontinuity at the Nadin-Gradina Archaeological Site in Northern
Dalmatia, Croatia
The Ravni Kotari region of northern Dalmatia is home to a number of archaeological sites that reflect a long record of urbanization. At
Nadin-Gradina, a hillfort settlement centrally positioned in Ravni Kotari, collaborative work over the past five years has begun to reveal
components of an Iron Age Liburnian occupation beginning as early as the eight century BCE or so, its evolution into a Roman
municipium in the late first century BCE or early first century CE, and its apparent abandonment in the sixth century. Its reemergence in
the Late Middle Ages and Early Modern Era is also evident and caps this millennial-scale process of change. The long-term record at
Nadin provides an opportunity to evaluate principles of urban planning through time, and its evolution within the context of broader
cultural changes evident in the archaeological record. In this paper, we rely primarily upon remnants of streets, edifices, town walls, and
other elements of urban infrastructure to evaluate millennial-scale continuity and discontinuity evident in its urban plan.
[85]
Chair
Zarzycka, Sandra (University of North Texas)
[149]
Geospatial Relationships between Ancestral Puebloan Community Centers and Landscape
Past research on Ancestral Puebloan settlement patterns indicates a relationship between the location of community centers and
their surrounding landscape throughout time. Beginning in the Pueblo I period, settlement in the central Mesa Verde Region was
characterized by aggregation into large community centers. By the late Pueblo II, settlements shifted from large settlements on
mesas surrounded by dispersed, associated hamlets to very large community centers located along canyon heads. The location of
the later centers is thought to be related to sociopolitical shifts or environmental stress. Whatever the reason for this change in
settlement location, resource access changed. This study aims to evaluate whether the change in community center location
impacted the quality of the landscape immediately available to inhabitants. Specifically, variables related to farming and hydrologic
potential, including soil type, soil moisture, elevation, land cover type, geomorphologic description, distance to water sources, and
geologic units are evaluated. Seven community centers within the McElmo drainage area in southwestern Colorado from the Pueblo
I to Pueblo III periods are included in this study. Because community centers often contain satellite communities within 2 km of the
city center, a 2 km buffer will be used to define each site’s area.
Zavala Moynahan, Bridget (Universidad Juarez del Estado de Durango)
[121]
The View from Above: Landscape and Dwelling in the Sextin Valley, Durango, Mexico
Over the past 10 years, the Proyecto Arqueológico Sextín, has recorded a series of sites in northern Durango, Mexico. Here, our
team, has recorded considerable variability in the artifacts, settings and individual site configurations in the valley. In this poster, I
show how the inhabitants of the prehispanic sites of the Sextin, chose land forms, built spaces, and incorporated materials in order
to create significant places for their everyday lives. My landscape analysis takes in the account the embodied nature of place
making in the archaeological past that serves to highlight special aspects of “dwelling” in this northern Mexican land revealed by
surface data from our 2008 pedestrian survey in the Sextin valley and excavation results from two of the largest sites: Corral de
Piedra (PAS017) and Los Berros (PAS023).
[121]
Chair
Zavodny, Emily (University of Florida), Dalibor Šušnjic (Ministry of Culture, Croatia), Tatjana Kolak (Muzej Like Gospic) and
John Krigbaum (University of Florida)
[35]
Risk and Reward in the Late Bronze Age: Preliminary Faunal and Isotopic Results from Excavations at the Piplica Hillfort in Lika,
Croatia
Risk-adverse behaviors have long interested archaeologists and anthropologists, but understanding how humans navigated difficult
environments in the past can also inform present day conversations about resilience and sustainability. Today the Lika region of
central Croatia is considered an unpredictable and resource-poor environment. Though this characterization is assumed to have
held true in prehistoric times as well, the Late Bronze Age (1200–800 BC) is characterized by the seemingly rapid emergence of
economic and sociopolitical complexity throughout the area. Results from summer 2019 excavations at one Late Bronze Age hillfort
site in this region, Piplica, provide an opportunity to identify and characterize site-specific economic activities. Here we integrate
faunal analysis with light isotope ratios derived from bone and teeth (carbon, oxygen, nitrogen) to help understand changing animal
management strategies as a proxy for economic specialization and centralization. We also present a preliminary site chronology
with new AMS radiocarbon dates in order to reconstruct the timing and tempo of these processes at Piplica and contextualize these
changes in broader regional context
Zborover, Danny (Institute for Field Research), Alex Badillo (Indiana State University) and Willy Huashuayo Chávez (Museo
Escolar Lumbreras Salcedo, Iquipi)
[268]
The Petroglyphs of Chillihuay: Context and Meaning
Located only a few miles from Corral Redondo, the adjacent sites of Chillihuay 1 and Chillihuay 2 jointly consist among the largest
and most impressive concentration of petroglyphs in southern Peru. Etched, carved, and pecked on geologically distinct rock
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    618
outcrops and boulders high above the Chorunga Valley, these geometrical, anthropomorphic, and zoomorphic designs were
purposely distributed along narrow trails and hard-to-reach canyons throughout several centuries. Although Chillihuay was known to
archaeologists since at least the 1990s, little systematic work has been conducted on the function and meaning of this enigmatic
site. The Corral Redondo archaeological project is the first to study the site in its broader chronological and cultural context, by using
field methods ranging from pedestrian survey, photographic documentation, and drone photogrammetry. In this presentation we
discuss the spatial patterns, iconography, and possible meaning(s) of Chillihuay. We further comment on the site’s alarming state of
preservation, brought by natural and human-made factors.
[268]
Chair
Zborover, Danny [268] see Lozada, Maria
Zeanah, David [15] see Codding, Brian
Zeanah, David [195] see Vernon, Kenneth
Zedaker, Dylan (University of Cincinnati), Kenneth Tankersley (University of Cincinnati), Louis Herzner (University of
Cincinnati) and Harrison Stanley (University of Cincinnati)
[63]
Evidence of a Cosmic Airburst Event at the Miami Fort Village Site
The Miami Fort Village site (33Ha62A) is a stratified multi-component habitation located within the eastern margin of the Miami
Enclosure (33Ha4), a Middle Woodland hilltop earthwork complex. The site is situated along the extreme margins of a high Illinoisan
terrace overlooking the confluence of the Great Miami and Ohio River. Geologically, the terrace is composed of a complex suite of
outwash and lacustrine deposits, underlain by upper Ordovician fossiliferous limestone and shale. The site was recently excavated
as part of the 2019 University of Cincinnati, Department of Anthropology Archaeological Field School, which exposed the remains of
a large burned structure, Hopewell pottery and flaked-stone artifacts. Positive platinum (Pt) and iridium (Ir) anomalies and a plethora
of micro-meteorites and micro-tektites were found on the burned surface of the dwelling. Some of the micro-tektites were fused to
fine-grained sandstone. A suite of radiocarbon dates and typologically distinctive artifacts suggest a cosmic airburst event occurred
during the Middle Woodland cultural period.
Zedaker, Dylan [63] see Herzner, Louis
Zedeño, María Nieves (University of Arizona), François Lanoë and Danielle Soza
[23]
Reimagining the Plains Archaic
A few decades ago, Plains archaeologists debated whether to retain or reject the term “Archaic” in their typologies. At issue was the
dearth of evidence of broad-spectrum adaptations and decreased mobility seen in other regions. Yet, what evidence was available
was unevenly distributed from south to north. Today, two archaic typologies exist: one which retains the original term (e.g., Frison et
al. 2010) and one which uses the nondescript “Middle” term (e.g., Peck 2011). We argue that Plains societies, including mobile
hunters of the northwestern Plains, should rightfully be termed “Archaic” given their socioreligious developments, horizontal
monumentality in particular, that parallel those of mound-building societies to the east. In turn, such developments point to
ethnogenetic processes that eventually gave rise to societies such as the Blackfoot as early as 5,000 years ago.
Zeidler, James (Colorado State University)
[157]
New Perspectives on Holocene Ecuadorian Volcanism and Its Impacts on a Distal Prehispanic Landscape in Late Jama-Coaque II
Times
Long-term archaeological field research in the Jama Valley of coastal Ecuador has documented the presence of three tephra layers
representing large-scale volcanic eruptions (VEI=4–5) emanating from the northern highlands, all of which had dramatic impacts on
several prehispanic cultures resulting in valley abandonment and depopulation for several centuries in each case. These were
cultural occupations of Terminal Valdivia, Chorrera, and Jama-Coaque I peoples extending from ca. 2000 BCE to 90 CE. More
recent tephrochronological investigation has documented the presence of at least four additional Holocene volcanic events in this
distal landscape some 200 km west of the source eruptions but without archaeological associations. While the latter events
apparently had lighter cultural impacts, they still merit detailed archaeological attention as case studies in volcanic hazards, cultural
effects, and differential response, recovery, and resilience. Special emphasis is placed on the 800 BP eruption of Quilotoa volcano
(VEI=6), not generally observable in the archaeological stratigraphy but possibly correlated to a major phase break in the
archaeological sequence (between Muchique Phases 3 and 4) and a locational shift in sociopolitical power and chiefly dominance
from the middle valley site of San Isidro to the lower valley mound center of Santa Rosa.
Zeidler, James [24] see Buck, Caitlin
Zejdlik, Katie [169] see Bews, Elizabeth
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                    619
Zender, Marc (Tulane University)
[223]
The Snake Dynasty: What We Know and What We Don’t
Epigraphic discoveries of the last few years now make possible a fresh engagement with questions about the origins and
development of the Snake dynasty, of its external political influences during both the Early and Late Classic periods, and of the
multiple physical centers from which the dynasty held sway. On present evidence, the Snake dynasty seems to have emerged at or
near Dzibanché in the late first or early second century AD, and during the next 600 years it would experience a dramatic series of
successes and reversals including a dramatic sixth-century expansion, a disastrous seventh-century civil war, and a relocation of its
capital to Calakmul during the long reign of Yuhknoom Ch’een (AD 635–685) and two successors. Perhaps of equal importance with
its political influence were the unique cultural elements either introduced or disseminated by the Snake dynasty during its
ascendance: market economies, public sports, increased prominence of women in public art, and increased visibility of non-royal
nobility. Several of these features seem to have survived the early ninth century collapse, influencing later Maya civilization of the
northern lowlands and southern highlands.
Zhai, Shaodong (Institute of Archaeology, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences), Guitao Tang (Xiamen University), Wei Ge
(Xiamen University), Wanfa Gu (Zhengzhou Institute of Cultural Relics and Archaeo) and Qian Wu (Zhengzhou Institute of
Cultural Relics and Archaeo)
[45]
Economic Practices Reflected from the Unearthed Lithic Objects at the Huadizui Site, Central China
There were 163 pieces of lithic objects unearthed from Huadizui, which could be dated back to ca. 1850–1750 BC in Central China. A
series of analyses were conducted including raw material investigation, replication experiments, use-wear study and residue analysis.
The results showed that no raw material was available for Huadizui to make lithic objects within an area with a radius of 10km and the
production of lithic objects at Huadizui might only meet the demand of itself. The research on the residue of the knives showed that
Hadizui cultivated Triticum aestivum, Setaria italic, Panicum miliaceum, Vigna unguiculata, and might forage Coix lacryma-jobi,
Sorghum bicolor, Quercus, Dioscorea opposite. The arrowheads found at the site might be used for hunting rather than fighting. Some
axes and adzes reflected the existing frequent wood-working activities. The cinnabar found on a stone pestle indicated the activity of
grinding cinnabar ever existed at the site. The grooved ground stones showed that the bone-making activities existed. The unearthed
lithic objects from the Huadizui site showed a complex economic practices model existed at the site, including developed agriculture,
hunting and gathering activities, wood-working, bone-making, grinding cinnarbar activities and so on.
Zhang, Peiqi (University of California, Davis), Meredith Carlson (University of California, Davis), Caleb Chen (University of
California, Davis), Christopher Beckham (University of California, Davis) and Tammy Buonasera (University of California,
Davis)
[83]
The Steep Costs of Manufacturing Long Pestles in Late Period Central California: Results from Replicative Experiments
The appearance mortars and pestles are associated with the acorn-based resource intensification in central California, which is also
linked with decreased mobility and changes in social organization. Many long (> 35 cm) and completely shaped pestles are
associated with Late Period California (AD 1265- 1770 cal) contexts, particularly burials, and also appear in a number of
ethnohistoric photos of women pounding acorn. Given the central role these tools played in daily life, and the personal connection
they seem to have had with individuals, we sought to learn more about their manufacturing costs and sequence of manufacture. Our
initial attempts to manufacture pestles met with a very high failure rate (75%); suitable raw materials were also difficult to find. Here
we present the results of a subsequent series of manufacturing experiments designed to understand how much various factors,
such as raw material selection and operator skill, may significantly impact manufacturing success. We also explore the sequence of
pestle manufacture with respect to specific debris that may be left behind in the archaeological record.
Zhang, Peiqi [83] see Carlson, Meredith
Zhang, Ren [19] see Esker, Donald
Zhang, Tingliang [111] see Zhang, Yasha
Zhang, Wenjie
[45]
The Music of the Zeng State based on New Archaeological Findings
Based on the new archaeological findings in the cemeteries of Zeng (including the Yejiashan, Guojiamiao, Wenfengta, Zaoshulin,
Leigudun etc.), we can get a better understanding of the development of the music system of Zeng state. This research will mainly
focus on exploring how this system changed from the Zhou-style music to the Zeng-style music, mainly by looking at the use of
Chime bells among different nobles of Zeng at different time period. Accordingly finally we hope to give a new explanation of how
the chime bells of Zenghou Yi were created and why they were suspended at such a special form.
Zhang, Yasha (Rock Art Research Association of China [RARAC] in Minzu University of China) and Tingliang Zhang
(Cultral relics management centre of Jiangjin, Chon)
[111]
Discovery and Research of Chinese Paleolithic Rock Art
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                      620
In the mid-1970s, cave handprints were found in Inner Mongolia, China. Some archaeologists thought it was related to the late
paleolithic age. Later, a little analogous sites were also found in Xinjiang and Qinghai, but these had litte impact. After the twenty-
first century, several large animal sites were found in southwest China. Among them, The Jinshajiang river rock art in Yunnan were
dated from 4000 to 14,000 years ago, and it is basically confirmed that some of the images belong to the late paleolithic. Some
researchers thought it resembles magdalenian art in Europe. Recently, we have found the Huiqianyan site in Chongqing, whose
animal style is obviously older than the age of those in Jinshajiang River. It is difficult to use carbon-14 or uranium method for dating
due to that these figures were chiseled on the cliffs. From the perspective of theme and style, we believe that this rock painting
should be a rock art site whose image and style are closest to the late paleolithic age in China. The animal patterns here are mainly
buffalo and wild horses, and there were thousands of large and small patterns overlaped tier upon tier on nearly 80 m2 of cliff.
Zhao, Chao, Qingchuan Bao (Inner Mongolia Institution of Archaeology and Cult) and Xiaonong Hu (Ulanqab Museum)
[199]
The Early Neolithic Human Adaptation to the Steppe Environment: Implications of the New Discoveries in Ulanqab Region at the
Southeastern Edge of Eurasian Steppe
How human beings organized themselves to make a living on the steppe before the adoption of pastoralism has largely gone
unexplored. Recent excavation of two residential sites, as well as discoveries of numerous other sites during survey in Huade
county, Ulanqab, Inner Mongolia, China provide rich information about the land-use strategy employed by prehistoric communities
during the Holocene climate optimum. A synthetic analysis of material remains, structures, site distributions, and intersite variability
indicate that people took advantage of climatic amelioration to make intensive use of the surrounding environment by decreasing
mobility. They lived a semi-sedentary lifestyle, with seasonal shifts of more permanent residential sites accompanied by the
temporary use of certain locations for specific subsistence activities. This subsistence-settlement pattern was based on the broad
exploitation of wild plant and animal resources, and, to a much lesser extent, millet cultivation as an auxiliary food resource.
Zhao, Jian-xin [100] see Weisler, Marshall
Zhao, Yu-chao (University of Michigan Museum of Anthropological Archaeology), Justin Elliot Jones (Department of
Sociology and Anthropology) and Thomas Schloeman (Department of Sociology and Anthropology)
[37]
Global Comparison of High-Quality Stone Tools in Historic Time Periods: Examples from Texas and Tibet
Stone tools span 3.3 million years of human history. Lithic artifacts are the most conspicuous and sometimes the only trace of
ancient lifeways in Paleolithic sites. However, stone tool use continues as a tradition and common practice among hunter-gatherers,
pastoralists, and agriculturalists. Why did this technology continue long after the introduction of metal tools and other technologies?
To address these questions, we present comparative analyses of cases from the historic period where stone tools have been
excavated by archaeologists or studied ethnographically. Examples from Way Ranch, Texas, as well as a cave site in Tibet that is
4,600 m above sea level excavated by Yuchao Zhao will be presented. We will compare these archaeological materials to studies
from Australia, Europe, and Africa. This poster presents our preliminary results, which demonstrate the persistence and diversity of
lithic technologies during historic periods across the globe in different economies; and provides broader implications concerning
functionality, familiarity, identity, and gender.
Zhao, Zhijun [35] see Sun, Yufeng
Zhu, Sihong (Emperor Qin Shihuang’s Mausoleum Site Museum, Xi’an, China)
[42]
Study on Adhesive Material Used for Restoration of the Qin Terracotta Warriors
In the 1980s, epoxy resin was used as an adhesive for the restoration of more than 1,000 terracotta figures in pit no. 1. According to
the material characteristics, this kind of adhesive will age and lose effectiveness after about 50 years. It has been 40 years since the
restoration of the terracotta figures, and it is urgent to assess the safety status of the restored terracotta figures and take measures
to protect them. According to the principle of conservation of cultural relics, if an appropriate isolation layer is added to the bonding
surface of ceramic tiles, the reversible bonding process can be achieved. The strength of the adhesive should be slightly lower than
that of the clay figures themselves. High-strength binder will form a big gap with the strength of cultural relics (terracotta figures),
resulting in a serious mismatch between the two and potential to cause secondary damage to cultural relics. Therefore, it is urgent
and necessary to systematically study and select bonding repair materials and their implementation techniques.
Zilhão, João [162] see Cabanes, Dan
Zimmer-Dauphinee, James (Vanderbilt University), Gabriela Ore (Vanderbilt University) and Steven Wernke (Vanderbilt
University)
[175]
Archaeology at Scale: Toward Automated Imagery Survey in the Andes Using Convolutional Neural Networks
In recent years it has become common practice to use satellite imagery for archaeological prospection. However, nearly all of this
work has been done using brute force manual methods, and often unsystematically. As a result, areal coverage is often both limited
and biased in unspecified ways. Such data are of limited utility for addressing regional scale anthropological problems. Machine
learning poses potential solutions to these problems by enabling systematic survey of much larger areas than is otherwise practical,
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                 621
and development of measures of expected bias in the resulting data. This research implements a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) to autonomously detect relict architectural features visible in high resolution satellite imagery of over 1,000 km2 in the
Southern Peruvian highlands. It also examines known biases in the results and discusses the utility of the resulting database to
address questions settlement patterns, economic, and social networks on a truly regional scale. We discuss the importance and
structure of training data, as well as overall system design. Results of the CNN-based survey are promising for its adaptation to
even larger areas.
Zipkin, Andrew [38] see Murray, John
Zoeller, Gretchen (Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis)
[167]
Diseases and the Darker Histories of Bethel Cemetery: A Case Study of Treponemal Disease
The Bethel Cemetery was excavated in the summer of 2018, as part of a basin development project at the Indianapolis International
Airport, yielding 543 individuals who were interred between 1827 and 1935. Close to 80% of these individuals originated from
unmarked graves, rendering personal identification and corroboration with headstones and other cemetery records problematic at
best. As a result, bioarchaeological analyses became one of the primary means to learn and develop histories about life in rural
central Indiana during the nineteenth century. The case study presented here examines Burial 505, an unidentified young adult
female with pathological markers indicative of treponemal (syphilitic) infection. Interesting for both the biological and social
implications, this analysis combines biological, spatial, and historical clues to identify Burial 505 and unearth her story. This
examination simultaneously illustrates how, what originated as a paleopathological case study, provided an unanticipated window
into the experiences of these early Indiana settlers and argues for the relevance and necessity of an interdisciplinary archaeology to
inform our research directions and interpretations of the past.
Zori, Colleen (Baylor University)
[51]
Life and Death in Medieval San Giuliano (Lazio, Italy)
The medieval period in northern Lazio saw significant restructuring of social and economic relationships through incastellamento,
the process by which people chose or were forced to move onto fortified hilltops. I here present results from four seasons of
mapping, drone photogrammetry, excavations and analysis of a castle complex located atop the San Giuliano plateau. New
radiocarbon dates, combined with artifact and architectural analysis, establish the sequence of occupation of a hall and a semi-
subterranean mortuary structure thought to have been attached to an as-yet unexcavated chapel. Economic activities, including
trade and feasting, were carried out by the living and indicate a growing degree of wealth and prestige of those using the hall.
Meanwhile, the dead were interred in slot graves and in architectural support trenches in a narrow rectangular structure at the
eastern end of probable chapel. Preliminary analyses of mortuary behavior and the demographics of the medieval burial population
are compared to other sites in medieval Italy, demonstrating that although interments followed broadly Christian patterning across
the region, there was considerable diversity in the details of practice at each site.
[51]
Chair
Zori, Colleen [51] see Grimes, Vaughan
Zori, Colleen [51] see Jones, Lauren
Zori, Davide (Baylor University)
[51]
The San Giuliano Archaeological Research Project: New Interdisciplinary Archaeology in Central Italy
This paper introduces the San Giuliano Archaeological Research Project, the focus of this symposium. Our on-going surveys and
excavations at the multicomponent site of San Giuliano (Lazio, Italy) have uncovered a dynamic landscape of interlocking settlement
and burial that span the advent of Etruscan civilization to the zenith of the High Middle Ages. We have documented over 500
previously unmapped Etruscan tombs, conducted salvage excavations of four previously-looted chamber tombs, and discovered
four transitional Villanovan-Etruscan trench tombs dating to around AD 700. Excavations on the plateau have revealed a medieval
castle complex, including a feasting hall, a defensive tower, and a crypt with dozens of burials associated with a private chapel. An
urban center developed atop the San Giuliano plateau in the seventh century BC, and flourished in the sixth and fifth centuries. After
Roman Conquest in the third century, people chose to leave the site in favor of dispersed lowland habitation. In the Middle Ages—
sometime between AD 800 and 1200—the local population reoccupied and refortified the earlier Etruscan acropolis. Our project
seeks to understand the nature and motivations of these settlement shifts.
Zori, Davide [51] see Jones, Lauren
Zralka, Jaroslaw (Institute of Archaeology, Jagiellonian University), Bernard Hermes (Nakum Archaeological Project),
Carmen Ting (Nakum Archaeological Project), Ronald Bishop (Smithsonian Institution) and Wieslaw Koszkul (Nakum
Archaeological Project)
[128]
Dynamics of Growth of Nakum during the Protoclassic: Ceramic Evidence
Recent research at the Maya site of Nakum, located in northeastern Guatemala, has revealed evidence of intensive Protoclassic
(ca. 100 BC–AD 300) occupation. Architectural constructions, burials, and offerings documented at Nakum indicate that this center
, Individual Abstracts of the SAA 85th Annual Meeting                                                                                  622
experienced major growth and important transformations during the turbulent transition between the Preclassic and Classic periods.
In this paper, we present the dynamics of growth of Nakum during this timeframe by focusing mainly on ceramics. Stylistic,
petrographic and physio-chemical analyses of Protoclassic ceramics from Nakum show that some older, local ceramic traditions
persisted at the same time that new elements more characteristic of Protoclassic ceramics at other Maya sites appeared. We use
compositional and stylistic analysis of ceramics as well as results of studies of other artifacts made from raw materials in an attempt
to trace trade and economic networks across the Maya lowlands.
Zuckerman, Molly [131] see Turner, Bethany
Zúñiga, Belem [10] see Velazquez, Adrian
Zwyns, Nicolas [175] see Gillam, J. Christopher
Zych, Thomas (University of Toledo)
[78]
Comparing Approaches to Geometric Morphometric Analyses: A Ground Stone Discoidal Case Study
The burgeoning popularity of innovative methods like 3D morphometric analysis allows archaeologists to address specific questions
pertaining to artifact shape and form that contribute to explorations of human cultural identity, technological developments, and
expressions of style. This poster explores the utility of these methods as they pertain to prehistoric gaming pieces from the North
American midcontinent known as Chunkey stones or discoidals. These ground stone objects were made popular starting in the tenth
century, simultaneous with the coalescence and spread of Mississippian practices and materials in the Midwest, though game
pieces are found at sites well beyond the range of direct cultural contact between Mississippian and non-Mississippian peoples. A
geometric morphometric analytical approach is employed to explore variation in the shape of game pieces beyond the typological
categories they are often attributed, e.g., Cahokian, Bradley, or Jersey styles. This analysis compares results from hand-drawn, 2D
profiles of game pieces and profiles derived from 3D laser scanning to explore (1) the utility of geometric morphometrics in the
analysis of spherical-to-discoidal ground stone objects; and (2) if the 3D laser-scanned dataset provides notable benefit to the
analytical process of this class of objects when considering expenditure resources in the analytical pursuit.

